Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, City of Guntersville, Alabama," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt code of ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-7.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, provided, these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Code or any ordinance which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content of such section may be repugnant thereto. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Acts by agents: When any provision requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
Bond: When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing is sufficient. 
City, this city, in the city: The term "the city," "this city" or "in the city" shall mean the City of Guntersville, Alabama; and shall include any duly authorized officer or employee if the context so admits. Every section contained in this Code, whether expressed to apply "in the city" or not so expressed, shall apply, and have full force and effect within the corporate limits of the city and within the police jurisdiction thereof and within the territorial limits of any property or right-of-way owned by the city, wherever situated; provided, any such section shall not apply within the police jurisdiction if expressed to apply within the corporate limits of the city, or if the same cannot legally be made to apply in the police jurisdiction, or if the same, otherwise than by use of such term as "in the city" or "within the city," contains clear inherent evidence of intent that it shall not apply in the police jurisdiction. 
City officials, officers, employees, etc.: Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, officers or employees by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of Guntersville, Alabama," and shall be taken to mean the official, board, commission, department, officer or employee of this city having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated; and powers and authority granted to them shall be deemed to be grants of such powers and authority to their respective duly designated subordinates. 
Code of Alabama: Whenever reference is made to the "Code of Alabama" or the "Alabama Code" it shall mean the Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, or any subsequent code of this state. 
Computation of time: The time in which an act is to be done must be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is a Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
State Law reference— Legal holidays, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-3-8. 
Council, city council, governing body: The terms "council," "city council" and "governing body" shall mean the city council of the City of Guntersville, Alabama. 
County, this county: The term "county" or "this county" shall mean Marshall County, Alabama. 
Gender: A word importing one (1) gender only shall extend and be applied to the other genders. 
Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of any provision, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, or another ordinance, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be controlling. 
Joint authority: All words giving joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers, shall be construed to give such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Jurisdiction: All provisions of this Code and other laws and ordinances of the city prescribing police or sanitary regulations and prescribing penalties for violations thereof, shall have force and effect within the corporate limits of the city and in the police jurisdiction thereof outside of the city and on any property or rights-of-way belonging to the city, except those provisions, laws and ordinances which specifically limit their force and effect to the corporate limits, or which, for any reason mentioned under the definition of "city" in this section, cannot legally apply in any such area outside of the corporate limits. 
State Law reference— City planning commission jurisdiction over the subdivision of land extends five miles from the city, with exceptions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-30. 
Month: The word "month" means a calendar month, unless otherwise expressed. 
Number: Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
Oath: The word "oath" includes an affirmation. 
Or, and: The word "or" may be read "and" and the word "and" may be read "or," where the sense requires it. 
Owner: The word "owner" shall include not only the owner of the whole, but the owner of any part of the property, any tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of the property. 
Person: The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, corporations, associations, organizations, trustees, agents and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Personal property: The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined herein. 
Police jurisdiction: The words "police jurisdiction" shall mean the territory outside the corporate limits of the city within three (3) miles thereof, or as otherwise permitted by statute, but not including territory within the corporate limits of any other incorporated municipality. The police jurisdiction shall not overlap the police jurisdiction of a neighboring municipality, but shall extend to the median line of such police jurisdiction lines, or as otherwise provided by laws of the state and the decisions of its courts. 
State Law reference— Police jurisdiction determined by population, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-10. 
Preceding, following: The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property: The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property: The term "real property" includes land, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time: In all cases where any provision shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or compliance with such notice. 
Shall: The word "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk: The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription: The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State: The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Alabama. 
Street: The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city, and shall embrace all parts thereof within the designated right-of-way. In those instances where the context requires, the word shall embrace only the area between the opposite curbs or curblines designated for vehicular traffic. 
Tense: Words used in the present, future or past tense shall include each of the other tenses. 
Wholesaler, wholesale dealer: In all cases where the term "wholesaler" or "wholesale dealer" is used in this Code or any ordinance, unless otherwise specifically defined, it shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells directly to the consumer. 
Writing or in writing: The term "writing" or "in writing" may be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference— Proof of mark in conveyancing, Code of Ala. 1975, § 35-4-20. 
Year: The word "year" means a calendar year.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of an ordinance. 
(a)  No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether or not such former ordinance is expressly repealed, as to any offense committed under such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment issued after the new ordinance takes effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(c)  This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or by implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provision upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or any provision thereof in force at the time of adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all ordinances are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code or any ordinance shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment or decree shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code or any ordinance.  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contractor or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful to change or amend by addition or deletion any part of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby.  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; violations of Code, ordinance, or state law. 
(a)  Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is in violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city, now existing or hereafter enacted, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to labor for the city for a period not exceeding six (6) months, at the discretion of the court trying the case; provided, however, no penalty shall consist of a fine or sentence of imprisonment exceeding the maximum fine or sentence of imprisonment established under state law for the commission of a substantially similar offense. 
(b)  Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted, to be a misdemeanor, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to labor for the city for a period not exceeding six (6) months for a class A or class B misdemeanor, and not exceeding three (3) months for a class C misdemeanor, at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(c)  Any person found to be driving under the influence, in violation of Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191, as amended, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first offense, not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the second offense, and not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the third or subsequent offense, as provided in the statute, in the discretion of the court trying the case. Imprisonment and labor shall be as provided by statute. 
(d)  Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted, to be an offense as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2, which is not declared by a law of the state to be a felony, misdemeanor or violation, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to labor for the city for a period not exceeding six (6) months, at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(e)  Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted, to be a violation, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to labor for the city for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or double the pecuniary gain to the defendant or loss to the victim as authorized in Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-5-12, at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(f)  Any corporation found to be in violation shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(g)  In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code or of an ordinance, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, the revocation of a license or permit, or the abatement of a nuisance and the assessment of the cost thereof shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar the enforcement of any other penalty. 
(h)  Whenever a minimum, but not a maximum, fine or penalty is imposed, the court may in its discretion fine the offender the minimum or any sum exceeding the minimum fine or penalty so imposed, but not exceeding the maximum provided in this section. 
(i)  No provision of this Code or any ordinance designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 4, 8-15-83) 
Cross reference— Powers of municipal court, § 7-9; court costs, § 7-9(d); adoption of state misdemeanors, etc., § 13-1; punishment for certain traffic violations, § 17-1(c); settlement amounts for violating fire prevention regulations, § 10-1. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to enforce obedience to ordinances by fine not exceeding $500.00 and by imprisonment or hard labor not exceeding six months, or both, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-45-1, 11-45-9; punishment for DUI up to $5,000.00 and one year in jail, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-9; authority to abate nuisances, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-117, 11-47-118; municipal courts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1 et seq.; punishment, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-5-1 et seq.  
Sec. 1-9. - Violation of orders, rules and regulations adopted. 
Any person who shall violate, or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any lawful order of any lawful officer of the city made in pursuance of and under such officer's authority as such officer, or who shall violate, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the codes, rules, regulations or laws adopted in this Code, shall be guilty of an offense; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to violations of official duty imposed by this Code upon officers or employees of the city as such, unless the provision imposing the duty also expressly makes the violation thereof unlawful or punishable.  
Sec. 1-10. - Imprisonment in default of payment of fine. 
If a fine is assessed against any party by the judge, upon conviction under this Code or any of the ordinances of the city, and in the event the fines and costs are not then paid, the judge shall sentence the party so in default to work out the fine and costs under the direction of the city authorities, allowing not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each day's service, within the limit prescribed by Rule 10(g) of the Rules of Criminal Procedure for the courts of the state. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-12.  
Sec. 1-11. - Payment of costs by city. 
No part of the costs or any of the fees due any officer in any case or proceeding for a violation of the city laws shall be taxed against or be paid by the city.  
Sec. 1-12. - Conflicts with technical codes. 
In case of conflict between this Code of Ordinances and any technical code adopted herein by reference, the more restrictive provision shall apply.  
Sec. 1-13. - Ordinances, resolutions and activities not affected by Code. 
The adoption of this Code shall not repeal or otherwise affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any resolution not mentioned in the Code and not inconsistent with it; 
(4)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance prescribing zoning or subdivision regulations, or zoning particular property, or accepting any plat or subdivision; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(9)  Any administrative or personnel ordinance not mentioned in the Code and not inconsistent with it; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution not in conflict with such Code regulating traffic on specific streets or portions thereof or in specific areas of the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance levying any tax; or any ordinance levying any assessment; 
(12)  Any ordinance establishing any board, commission or authority, not mentioned in the Code and not inconsistent with it; 
(13)  Any ordinance enacted after January 7, 1991.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Design commission, § 5-21 et seq.; city cemetery advisory board, § 6.3-21 et seq.; department, § 14-20 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Single-member council districts—Established. 
Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-63, there is hereby established seven (7) single-member districts for the election of councilmembers within the city. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 1, 4-18-88)  
Sec. 2-2. - Same—Numbered and described. 
The districts herein established are designated as districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. The description of each numbered district is set out in Exhibits A—G of Ordinance No. 1018 and are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 2, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 675, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 1018, § 1(Exhs. A—G), 3-19-12)  
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Residence therein by candidates and members. 
Candidates for election in each respective district (described in section 2-2) in which such person seeks election shall reside in such district for a period of ninety (90) days immediately preceding the date of the election and shall continue to reside within the district such person represents so long as such person remains a member of the council. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 2, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 675, § 1, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 2-4. - Same—Residence therein by electors. 
Only electors residing within each numbered district shall be entitled to vote for candidates seeking election for that district. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 3, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 675, § 2, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 2-5. - Same—Polling places; hours of operation. 
(a)  All electors shall cast their votes at 1500 Sunset Drive. 
(b)  Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-28, the city council hereby ordains that the polls during all future municipal elections shall be open at 7:00 a.m. and remain open continuously until 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 4, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 675, § 4, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 739, § 1, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 2-6. - Mayor and councilmember compensation. 
(a)  The salary of the mayor of the city shall be and the same is hereby fixed at the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per year, an automobile, phone and health and life insurance not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month and be included in the yearly cost of living raises given to other employees. 
(b)  Each councilmember shall be compensated at the sum of five hundred twenty-five dollars ($525.00) per month and health and life insurance not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month. 
(c)  This section shall become effective on the first Monday in November 2008 and shall continue in force and effect until repealed by action of the council. 
(Ord. No. 619, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 682, §§ 1, 2, 2-20-92; Ord. No. 733, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 958, §§ 1—3, 2-18-08)  
Sec. 2-7. - City attorney—Election by council; term. 
A competent attorney shall be elected by the council as city attorney, who shall hold office for four (4) years from appointment, which shall be concurrent with the term of the mayor and council. Vacancies occurring during a term shall be filled for the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 1, 6-17-22; Ord. No. 944, 9-24-07)  
Sec. 2-8. - Same—Rendering advice. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to advise the mayor and council of the legal duties and rights of the different officers and employees of the city; of the validity, purpose and effect of existing laws of the state and city; and of proposed legislation of the city. The city attorney shall attend council meetings when requested by the mayor or council on reasonable notice. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 2, 6-17-22; Ord. No. 944, 9-24-07)  
Sec. 2-9. - Same—Prosecuting and defending actions. 
The city attorney shall prosecute and defend all actions at law and suits in equity wherein the city is a party, and shall prosecute all criminal causes appealed from the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 3, 6-17-22; Ord. No. 944, 9-24-07)  
Sec. 2-10. - Same—Compensation. 
The city attorney shall receive as compensation money at such hourly rate as is approved by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 4, 6-17-22; Ord. No. 47, § 1, 8-7-22; Ord. No. 944, 9-24-07)  
Sec. 2-10.1. - Special counsel. 
The Mayor of the City of Guntersville is hereby authorized to contract for the services and payment of legal counsel other than the named city attorney (hereinafter referred to as "special counsel") in the following instances and with the following limitations: 
(1)  When the named city attorney gives notice orally or in writing that a conflict exists such that the named city attorney is unable to provide advice or representation regarding a specific issue or case. 
(2)  When the named city attorney gives notice orally or in writing that a specific issue or case requires specialized legal advice and/or representation which the named city attorney cannot provide without the assistance of additional legal counsel. 
(3)  The rate of pay for special counsel retained due to the need for specialized expert advice and/or representation shall be no more than a total fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per case without resolution by the city council. 
(4)  Special counsel shall be retained on a case by case basis as needed in the discretion of the mayor with the advice of the named city attorney. 
(5)  An attorney retained as special counsel shall not be actively retained on more than fifteen (15) pending cases and/or issues at any given time. 
(6)  Special counsel shall be a licensed practicing attorney in good standing with the Alabama State Bar. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 2-11. - Library board—Created. 
There is hereby created a library board of the city. 
(Ord. No. 394, § 1, 2-23-65; Ord. No. 927, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 2-12. - Same—Composition; appointments, filling vacancies, compensation. 
(a)  The library board shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be appointed by the city council. The terms of membership on the library board as first appointed for one member shall be for one year; for second member shall be for two (2) years; for the third member shall be for three (3) years; for the fourth member shall be four (4) years; for the fifth member shall be for five (5) years. All appointments shall be five (5) years and the city council shall fill all vacancies including expired and unexpired terms. 
(b)  Terms expire December 31 of each year. 
(c)  The members of the library board shall receive no compensation for their services. 
(Ord. No. 394, §§ 2, 3, 2-23-65; Ord. No. 927, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 2-13. - Same—Power and authority. 
The library board shall have full power and authority to control the expenditure of all funds received or appropriated for such libraries; to erect or rent buildings, to cost not in excess of the funds available to it; to purchase books and equipment; to provide a system of library services; to be made easily available to all citizens of the county or municipality through central library, branches, stations, book truck service, or other appropriate means, to elect a librarian and other employees, and otherwise to have full authority and power to manage and control the said library in order to carry out the full intent and purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 394, § 4, 2-23-65; Ord. No. 927, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 2-14. - Same—Record and books. 
A careful and complete record and set of books shall be kept by the library board, showing the proceedings of their several meetings and the receipts and disbursements in detail of all funds, and shall submit to the city council report or accounting of its receipts and disbursements annually. 
(Ord. No. 394, § 5, 2-23-65; Ord. No. 927, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 2-15. - Tree commission—Findings of fact. 
The city council finds and determines that trees are recognized as a valid asset, providing a more healthful and beautiful environment in which to live; they provide oxygen, shade, esthetics and a priceless psychological counterpoint to the manmade urban setting; and they are economically beneficial in attracting new industry, residents and visitors; when the proper varieties are grown in the right places, they enhance the value and marketability of property and promote the stability of desirable neighborhoods; and that valuable advice and guidance to the mayor and city council will result from the appointment of a tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 616, § 1, 11-16-87)  
Sec. 2-16. - Same—Established; members. 
There is hereby established in the city a tree commission. The mayor and the members of the city council shall serve as ex-officio members of the commission. In addition, seven (7) additional members shall be appointed. Three (3) shall be appointed for one (1) year; three (3) shall be appointed for two (2) years; and one (1) shall be appointed for three (3) years. Following the initial appointments, members shall be appointed annually to serve for three (3) years. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 616, § 2, 11-16-87; Ord. No. 648, 1-22-90)  
Sec. 2-17. - Same—Meetings. 
The tree commission shall provide in its minutes for regular, periodic meetings. Meetings shall also be called by the mayor or by any of the councilmembers, or by any three (3) members of the commission, after giving not less than three (3) days' notice of the date, time and place of the special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 616, § 3, 11-16-87)  
Sec. 2-18. - Same—Functions. 
The tree commission shall make recommendations to the mayor and council on the needs of the municipality in connection with its tree planting program; shall recommend the types and kinds of trees to be planted upon municipal streets, parks and other public places within the municipality; shall assist the mayor and council in providing information regarding the protection, maintenance, removal and planting of trees on public property, and, where requested by the owner, on private property; shall meet with the city planning commission and assist in making a master street plan by recommending the use and species of trees; shall recommend to the mayor and council which trees are considered unwanted trees, and identify and recommend removal of dead, dying, diseased or insect-infested trees; and shall make studies and report to the mayor and council with recommendations on matters concerning trees in the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 616, § 4, 11-16-87)  
Sec. 2-19. - Same—Review; appeal. 
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the tree commission. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the tree commission to the city council, which may hear the dispute and make a final decision thereon. 
(Ord. No. 616, § 5, 11-16-87)  
Sec. 2-20. - Waterfront development advisory board—Authority. 
The waterfront development advisory board shall consist of seven (7) at-large members. Additionally, two (2) members of the city council, the building inspector and the director of economic development are appointed as ex-officio members. 
Three (3) of the initial at-large members shall serve a one-year term, two (2) of the initial at-large members shall serve two-year terms and two (2) of the initial at-large members shall serve three-year terms. At the expiration of each term of an initial at-large member, the appointment for all following terms shall be three (3) years. The building inspector will serve as a recording secretary. The board will meet quarterly or as needed. Members shall not be required to be residents of the city. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 954, art. I, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 2-21. - Same—Voting. 
Only the at-large members shall be entitled to vote. A quorum shall consist of four (4) at-large members and a quorum must be present in order for a vote to occur. Any recommendation to be made by the advisory board to the city council shall require a majority vote of those present who are entitled to vote. 
(Ord. No. 954, art. I, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 2-22. - Same—Selection of members. 
The mayor shall nominate the at-large members at the beginning of each term and the members shall be approved by majority vote of the city council members present at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. The mayor shall designate the two (2) members of the city council to serve. 
(Ord. No. 954, art. I, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 2-23. - Same—Duties. 
The board is advisory only and provides recommendations to the city council on matters concerning long range planning, land use, and improvements for Guntersville Landing and its surrounding properties, current city-wide waterfront use and/or any new waterfront development projects. Duties of the waterfront development advisory board include: 
(1)  Reviewing and recommending a long-range master plan and financing of Guntersville Landing; 
(2)  Reviewing and recommending actions concerning leases, fees, and annual budgets; developing and recommending annual goals and objectives for operation, development, and the marketing plan of Guntersville Landing and/or other projects(s) affecting waterfront development; 
(3)  Presenting an annual report concerning the status of Guntersville Landing and/or other project(s) affecting waterfront development; 
(4)  Promoting awareness, development and utilization of Guntersville Landing and its surrounding properties, current citywide waterfront use and/or any new waterfront development project(s) pursuant to the adopted goals and objectives and master plan. 
(Ord. No. 954, art. I, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 2-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1037, § 8, adopted Apr. 1, 2013, repealed § 2-24, which pertained to farmer's market advisory board and derived from Ord. No. 1020, 5-7-12. For current provisions, see § 6-192.  
Sec. 2-25. - Qualification fee for candidates seeking election. 
(a)  A qualification fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as Mayor of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(b)  A qualification fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as councilmember of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(c)  Such qualification fee shall be paid to the city clerk and deposited to the general fund of the city at or prior to the time of taking out qualification papers by any such candidate. 
(d)  Any person desiring to qualify who is not financially able to pay the required fee may qualify provided such prospective candidate furnishes the clerk with an affidavit stating that he is financially unable to pay the required fee fixed by this section. 
(e)  This section is adopted pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-2 and shall be effective in all elections, both general and special, for aforesaid offices from and after the date of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1026, §§ 1—5, 6-18-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1026, §§ 1—5, adopted June 18, 2012, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 2-25.  
Sec. 2-26. - Absentee election officials. 
Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-46-27 requires a minimum of three (3) absentee election officials with one (1) being designated as inspector. A city may appoint more than three (3) if needed. 
(Ord. No. 1071, §§ 1—5, 2-1-16)  
Secs. 2-27—2-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL MEETINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1038, §§ 1—26, adopted May 6, 2013, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 2-30—2-54, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1032, §§ 1—25, 11-26-12. 
 
Sec. 2-30. - [Applicability of rules.] 
The rules or order of procedure herein contained shall govern deliberations and meetings of the Council of Guntersville, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-31. - [Regular meeting days.] 
Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the following dates: The first and third Mondays of each month. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 2, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-32. - [Special meetings.] 
Special meetings may be held at the call of the mayor by serving notice on each member of the council not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the time set for such special meetings; or special meetings may be held as provided by Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-43-50, whenever two (2) council members making the request in writing shall have the right to call such meeting. Notice of all special meetings and committees meetings shall be posted on a bulletin board accessible to the public at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 3, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-33. - [Quorum.] 
A quorum shall be determined as provided by Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-43-48. The number of members required to make a quorum does not change when a council has vacancies. Council members who are present at a council meeting that have a conflict of interest on a particular issue can be counted for purposes of making a quorum even though they cannot vote on a particular issue. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 4, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-34. - [Time and place of regular meetings; all meetings open.] 
All regular meetings shall convene at 6:00 p.m. at the town hall and all meetings, regular and special, shall be open to the public. All items to be placed on the agenda must be delivered to the mayor's office by the close of business (4:30 p.m.) on the Thursday preceding the council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 5, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-35. - [Order of business.] 
The order of business shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order; 
(2)  Announcement of quorum present; 
(3)  Approval of minutes of previous meeting; 
(4)  Reports; 
(5)  Public hearings; 
(6)  Resolutions, ordinances, orders and other business; 
(7)  Public comments. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 6, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-36. - [Speaking more than twice on same subject matter.] 
No member shall speak more than twice on the same subject without permission of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 7, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-37. - [Addressing council by nonmember.] 
No person, not a member of the council, shall be allowed to address the same while in session without permission of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 8, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-38. - [Officers' reports.] 
Every officer, whose duty it is to report at the regular meetings of the council, who shall be in default thereof, may be fined at the discretion of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 9, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-39. - [Motions.] 
Motions shall be reduced to writing when required by the presiding officer of the council or any member of the council. All resolutions and ordinances and any amendments thereto shall be in writing at the time of introduction. The oral reading of ordinances, resolutions and any amendments thereto prior to any vote shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 10, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-40. - [Motions to reconsider.] 
Motions to reconsider must be by a member who voted with a prevailing side and at the same or next succeeding meeting of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 11, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-41. - [Recording vote; division on question.] 
Whenever it shall be required by one (1) or more members, the "yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded and any member may call for a division on any questions. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 12, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-42. - [Deciding questions of order.] 
All questions of order shall be decided by the presiding officer of the council with the right of appeal to the council by any member. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 13, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-43. - [Calling member to take chair.] 
The presiding officer of the council may, at his or her discretion, call any member to take the chair, allow him or her to address the council, make a motion, or discuss any other matter at issue. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 14, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-44. - [Priority of motions and questions.] 
Motions to lay any matter on the table shall be first in order; and on all questions, the last amendment, the most distant day and the largest sum shall be first put. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 15, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-45. - [Executive sessions closed to the public.] 
All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except when the council meets in executive session as authorized by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 16, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-46. - [Executive sessions.] 
The council may meet in executive session only for those purposes authorized by state law. When a council member makes a motion to go into executive session for an enumerated purpose, the presiding officer shall put the motion to a vote. If the majority of the council shall vote in favor of the motion to go into executive session, the body shall then move into executive session to discuss the matter for which the executive session was called. No action may be taken in an executive session. When the discussion has been completed, the council shall resume its deliberations in public. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 17, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-47. - [Motion to adjourn.] 
A motion for adjournment shall always be in order. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 18, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-48. - [Use of depositories.] 
The City of Guntersville hereby ratifies the use of present depositories for all Guntersville funds (public funds). 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 19, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-49. - [Amending rules.] 
The rules of the council may be amended in the same manner as any other ordinance of general and permanent operation. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 20, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-50. - [Suspension of rules.] 
The rules of the council may be temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members present. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 21, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-51. - [Committee reports.] 
The chairman of each respective committee, or the council member acting for him or her, shall submit or make all reports to the council when so requested by the presiding officer or any member of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 22, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-52. - [Record of proceedings.] 
A record of the proceedings of every meeting of the council shall be taken and prepared by the clerk and the record of the proceedings of the meeting shall, when approved by the council, be signed by the clerk and entered in the journal. The record of the proceedings shall be known as the minutes and shall be provided to the council members prior to approval. The council may approve the minutes of prior meetings without the necessity of an oral reading of the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 23, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-53. - [Attendance of officers or employees of the city.] 
The clerk, engineer, building official, attorney, chief of police and such other officers or employees of the City of Guntersville shall, when requested, attend all meetings of the council and shall remain in the council room for such length of time as the council may direct. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 24, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-54. - [Motions, orders and resolutions—Lying over of ordinances and resolutions.] 
No ordinance or resolution of a permanent nature shall be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced unless unanimous consent be obtained for the immediate consideration of such ordinance or resolution, such consent shall be by roll call and the vote thereon spread on the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 25, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 2-55. - [Robert's Rules of Order.] 
Robert's Rules of Order is hereby adopted as the rules of procedure for this council in those situations which cannot be resolved by the rules set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 26, 5-6-13)  
Secs. 2-56—2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GUNTERSVILLE MUNICIPAL-JOE STARNES FIELD AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 942, art. I, adopted June 18, 2007, has been included as §§ 2-71—2-74 at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Authority for board. 
The airport advisory board shall consist of eight (8) at large members. Additionally, one member of the city council, the airport manager and the director of economic development are appointed as ex-officio members. 
Two (2) of the initial at large members shall serve one-year terms, two (2) of the initial at large members shall serve two-year terms and four (4) of the initial at large members shall serve three-year terms. At the expiration of each term of an initial at large member, the appointment for all following terms shall be three (3) years. The airport manager will serve as a recording secretary. The board will meet quarterly or as needed. Members shall not be required to be residents of the city. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 942, art. I, 6-18-07; Ord. No. 1006, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 2-72. - Voting. 
Only the at large members shall be entitled to vote. A quorum shall consist of four (4) at large members and a quorum must be present in order for a vote to occur. Any recommendation to be made by the advisory board to the city council shall require a majority vote of those present who are entitled to vote. Ex-officio members shall not be entitled to vote. 
(Ord. No. 942, art. I, 6-18-07; Ord. No. 1006, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 2-73. - Section of members. 
The mayor shall nominate the eight (8) at large members at the beginning of each term and the members shall be approved by majority vote of the city council members present at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. The mayor shall designate the member of the city council to serve. 
(Ord. No. 942, art. I, 6-18-07; Ord. No. 1006, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 2-74. - Duties. 
The board is advisory only and provides recommendation to the city council on matters concerning long range planning, land use and improvements for the Guntersville Municipal-Joe Starnes Field Airport. Duties of the airport advisory board include the following: 
•  Reviewing and recommending a long-range master plan and financing of the airport; 
•  Reviewing and recommending actions concerning leases, fees and annual budgets for the airport; 
•  Developing and recommending annual goals and objectives for operations, development and the marketing plan of the airport; 
•  Reviewing and recommending actions concerning the airport rules; 
•  Presenting an annual report concerning the status of the airport; promoting the development and utilization of the airport pursuant to the adopted master plan and airport rules; and 
•  Promoting awareness, utilization and development of the airport pursuant to and consistent with the council's adopted goals and objectives and master plan. 
(Ord. No. 942, art. I, 6-18-07)  
Secs. 2-75—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 982, §§ I—IX, adopted Sept. 10, 2009, have been included as §§ 2-91—2-99 at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Guntersville is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The city council of the City of Guntersville hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of the ordinance from which this article was derived to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(Ord. No. 982, § I, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-92. - Definitions. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Certificate of economic hardship means a document evidencing approval of an owner's application for relief from the application of this chapter as provided in section 2-95. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area designated by the city council as a historic district. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location or advertising visible from the public right of way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements or other appurtenant features. 
(Ord. No. 982, § II, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-93. - Creation of commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "City of Guntersville Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission members: number, appointment, terms, compensation and rules and standards. The commission shall consist of seven (7) members nominated by the mayor and ratified by the city council. To the extent possible, all members shall be residents within the city limits or police jurisdiction of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated training or experience in history, architecture, architectural history, American studies, cultural geography, cultural anthropology, planning, archaeology, law, or other related historic preservation field or who shall be residents of a historic district. 
Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may be reappointed. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: Two (2) members for one year; two (2) members for two (2) years; and three (3) members for three (3) years. Members shall not receive compensation, although they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred on behalf of the commission. 
Members of the commission may be removed for cause by the city council. 
Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by persons nominated by the mayor and appointed by the city council. Such appointments shall be for the unexpired term of the member replaced. 
Members of the commission shall elect a chairman and a vice chairman and such other officer as the members deem necessary. The commission shall adopt rules of procedure and bylaws to govern its operations and shall communicate those rules of procedure and bylaws to the city council. The rules of procedure and bylaws of the commission shall specify what number of members of the commission constitutes a quorum. 
The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(c)  Commission meetings, minutes and public participation. 
(1)  All meetings of the commission must be publicly announced and be open to the public. Commission meetings must occur at regular intervals. Public notice must be provided prior to any special meetings. 
(2)  Minutes of all decisions and actions of the commission including the reasons for making these decisions must be kept on file and available for public inspection. 
(3)  All decisions of the commission shall be made in a public forum and applicants must be given written notification of the commission's decision. 
(4)  The rules of procedure adopted by the commission must be available for public inspection. 
(5)  During the process of reviewing properties for nomination to the National Register, the commission must provide opportunity for public comments. 
(d)  Statement of the commission's power. The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore and preserve any historic properties acquired by the city or acquired by the commission; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements; 
(7)  Develop and conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation and employment of historic preservation experts the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses as approved by the city council of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; 
(11)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(12)  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property; as approved by the city council; 
(13)  Purchase, sell, contract to purchase, contract to sell, own, encumber, lease, mortgage and insure real and personal property in carrying out the purposes and responsibilities of the commission. The commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; and approval; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the Alabama Historical Commission concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic places; 
(15)  Investigate, survey and process nominations of properties to the National Register of Historic Places; 
(16)  Investigate, survey and process applications for certification of historic properties for tax credits for preservation expenditures; 
(17)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council and, enter into agreements with the same to perform historic preservation related functions. 
(e)  Annual reports of the commission's activities. The commission shall prepare and file with the city council and with the Alabama Historical Commission, an annual report of its activities as required by the city council and the Alabama Historical Commission. The annual report shall cover the period from October 1st to September 30th and shall be submitted in October of each year. The report shall include such items as the number of cases reviewed, historic district and property designations made, revised resumes of commission members/staff, appointments to the commission, attendance records and all minutes relating to the review of National Register nominations. The report shall document attendance at the orientation/training session as specified in subsections (h) and (i) of this section. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(g)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(h)  Responsibilities of commission members. Each commission member and anyone serving the commission in a technical/professional staff capacity must be represented at the annual Alabama CLG Workshop or other SHPO approved educational session each year. Such meetings may include those sponsored by the Alabama Historical Commission, Board of Advisors, the National Trust for Historic Preservation or a local preservation organization. Reasonable expenses of the commission will be paid by the city. 
(i)  Liaison between the commission and the State Historic Preservation Office (Alabama Historical Commission). Should the city council elect to become a certified local government, the city council shall designate a paid member to the city's staff or a person working under contract as a source of technical/administrative/professional assistance to be responsible for the operations of the commission in keeping with the requirements of certification for participation in the certified local government program. At least one member of the commission and/or the person serving as the commission's technical staff, and/or a representative appointed by the mayor who has an ongoing relationship with the commission, will attend the Alabama Certified Local Government orientation/training session sponsored by the Alabama Historical Commission each year. 
(Ord. No. 982, § III, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-94. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., historic, non-historic) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; 
e.  Design standards for development in the historic district; and 
f.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; 
b.  Represents a significant aspect of the cultural, political, economic, military or social history of the locality, region, state or nation; 
c.  Has had a significant relationship with the life of a historic person or event, representing a major aspect of the history of the locality, region, state or nation; 
d.  Is a part of the historic, architectural, archaeological or aesthetic heritage of the locality, region, state or nation; 
e.  Contains vernacular structures, which contribute to an overall character and sense of place, which is representative of the city. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be shown on the official zoning map, or, in the absence of such a map, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties with historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, object, work of art; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event of persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, State of Alabama of the region; 
d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region; or 
e.  The building or structure is an example of an architectural style, or combination of architectural styles, which is representative of the city or which is unique to the city. 
(2)  Boundary description. Boundaries shall be shown on the zoning map, or, in the absence of such a map, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts—a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties—a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the zoning map, or other designated map in the absence of such a map and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Required public hearings. The commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three (3) consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of the local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the county tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant under the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(4)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(5)  City council action on commission recommendation. Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(6)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within thirty (30) days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the county tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(7)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all municipal agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(8)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission or the city shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 982, § IV, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-95. - Application to historic preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of alterations, demolitions or new construction in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no historic property may be demolished, no building or structure in a historic district may be erected or demolished and no material change in the exterior appearance of such historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. 
(b)  Approval of new construction within designated districts. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the commission. 
(c)  Approval of signs within designated districts. Signs shall be considered as structures and no sign on a historic property or in a historic district shall be changed, erected or demolished unless and until a certificate of appropriateness is approved by the commission. 
(d)  Demolitions within designated districts. 
(1)  Required findings—Demolition/relocation. The commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for the demolition or relocation of any property within a historic district unless the commission finds that the removal or relocation of such building will not be detrimental to the historical or architectural character of the district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider: 
a.  The historic or architectural significance of the structure; 
b.  The importance of the structure to the integrity of the historic district, the immediate vicinity, an area, or relationships to other structures; 
c.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing the structure because of its design, texture, material, detail or unique location; 
d.  Whether the structure is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood, the county, or the region or is a good example of its type, or is part of an ensemble of historic buildings creating a neighborhood; 
e.  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what effect such plans will have on the architectural, cultural, historical, archaeological, social, aesthetic, or environmental character of the surrounding area. 
(2)  Content of applications. All applications to demolish or remove a structure in a historic district shall contain the following minimum information: 
a.  The date the owner acquired the property, purchase price, and condition on date of acquisition; 
b.  The number and types of adaptive uses of the property considered by the owner; 
c.  Whether the property has been listed for sale, prices asked and offers received, if any; 
d.  Description of the options currently held for the purchase of such property, including the price received for such option, the conditions placed upon such option and the date of expirations of such option; 
e.  Replacement construction plans for the property in question and amounts expended upon such plans, and the dates of such expenditures; 
f.  Financial proof of the ability to complete the replacement project, which may include but not be limited to a performance bond, a letter of credit, a trust for completion of improvements, or a letter of commitment from a financial institution; and 
g.  Such other information as may reasonably be required by the commission. 
(3)  Post demolition or relocation plans required. In no event shall the commission entertain any application for the demolition or relocation of any historic property unless the applicant also presents at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
(e)  Approval of alterations or demolitions of public property within historic districts or public property which has been designated as a historic property. The requirement of a certificate of appropriateness shall apply to public property which has been designated as a historic property or which is contained in a historic district, and shall apply to all actions by public authorities which involve historic properties and properties within historic districts. 
(f)  Approval of painting originally unpainted surfaces. The painting of originally unpainted surfaces shall require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(g)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(h)  Failure to maintain a historic property . Demolition by neglect and the failure to maintain a historic property or a structure in a historic district shall constitute a change for which a certificate of appropriateness is necessary. 
(i)  Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations setting forth the procedure for submission and consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness. The commission shall also adopt general design standards, which shall apply in considering the granting and denial of certificates of appropriateness. Design standards shall be in compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" including the Secretary's "Standards for Rehabilitation." 
(j)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
(k)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(2)  The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. The commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
(l)  Public meetings and hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notice and right to be heard. Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be considered by the commission at public meetings, held at such time, dates and places designated by the commission in its rules of procedure and bylaws. At least seven (7) days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
(m)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a historic structure, site, object or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial or a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(n)  Necessary actions to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such cases, no building permit shall be issued. 
(o)  Appeals. Any person having a request for a certificate of appropriateness denied by the commission, or architectural review board as hereinafter provided, may appeal such denial to the circuit court within forty-five (45) days of the commission decision. 
(p)  Certificate of economic hardship. 
(1)  Substantial economic hardship. If the commission denies an application for a certificate of appropriateness, a property owner may apply for a certificate of economic hardship. The purpose of the certificate of economic hardship is to provide relief where the application of this chapter would otherwise impose a substantial economic hardship. 
(2)  Burden of proof. The burden of proof rests on the applicant to show that the denial of the certificate of appropriateness will result in a substantial economic hardship. 
(3)  Applications . The applicant shall provide such information as may reasonably be required by the commission to establish the owner's claim of substantial economic hardship. The data provided by the applicant must be substantiated by either professionals in an applicable field or by thorough documentation of how the information was obtained. The commission may request additional information from the applicant as necessary to make informed decisions. Certificates of economic hardship are granted only to the applicant and are not transferable. 
(4)  Standards for consideration. In making its determination, the commission may consider, but is not limited to the following described factors, evidence, and testimony: 
a.  Date property was acquired and status of the property under the ordinance from which this article was derived at the time of acquisition, e.g., whether property was protected by this chapter, condition, etc.; 
b.  The structural soundness of the building, or any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation; 
c.  The current level of economic return on the property; 
d.  The economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing property; 
e.  The marketability of the property for sale or lease, considered in relation to any listing of the property for sale or lease, and the price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two (2) years. This determination can include testimony and relevant documents regarding: (1) Any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the property; (2) reasonableness of the price or rent sought by the applicant; and (3) any advertisements placed for the sale or rent of the property by the owner or applicant; 
f.  Comments and/or reports from any community organizations, preservation groups, other associations and private citizens that wish to comment on a submission made under the financial hardship provision; and 
g.  The extent to which the owner is responsible for his or her own economic hardship, if any, such as the owner's failure to: 
1.  Perform normal maintenance and repairs; 
2.  The failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants; 
3.  The failure to prescribe a rental amount, which is reasonable; 
4.  The failure to provide normal tenant improvements; and 
5.  The owner's purchase of the subject property after the enactment of the relevant provisions of this chapter without making said purchase contingent upon the owner's first obtaining the approvals required by this chapter. 
(5)  Hearing . The commission shall hold a public hearing as soon as practical but not longer than forty-five (45) days of receipt of a completed application for a certificate of economic hardship. Notice shall be provided in the same manner the commission uses for hearings on certificates of appropriateness. At the hearing, the commission shall take testimony presented by the owner and any other interested parties on the standards set forth above. The commission shall issue its decision within forty-five (45) days of the hearing. 
a.  If the commission fails to timely hold a public hearing, or having conducted a hearing fails to render a decision within forty-five (45) days, the applications for a certificate of economic hardship shall be deemed granted. 
(6)  Denial . If the commission determines to deny the application for a certificate of economic hardship, the applicant shall be notified in writing and shall be provided a copy of the commission final order. 
(7)  Appeal . Any person having a request for a certificate of economic hardship denied by the commission may appeal such denial to the circuit court within forty-five (45) days of the commission decision. 
(8)  Initial determination. If the commission makes an initial determination that the applicant has presented a case which may establish substantial economic hardship, but finds that reasonable alternatives may exist which should be addressed by the applicant, the commission may delay its final order for a period of no more than six (6) months. The applicant shall be notified of the initial determination and shall be provided a copy of the commission's findings and reasons for the postponement. 
(9)  Postponement . Within the period of postponement, the commission, in cooperation with the city and the owner, may explore alternatives that will assure reasonable use of the property including, but not limited to loans or grants from public or private sources, acquisition by purchase or eminent domain, building and safety code modifications to reduce cost of maintenance, restoration, rehabilitation or renovation, changes in applicable zoning regulations, or relaxation of the provisions of this chapter sufficient to allow reasonable use of the property. 
(10)  Issuance of certificate. Upon the expiration of the period of postponement, the commission shall issue a ruling on the application for certificate of economic hardship. The certificate may be subject to conditions including design guidelines for subsequent construction not inconsistent with the standards set forth in this chapter and the commission's design guidelines. The certificate of economic hardship shall be valid for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days from approval by the commission. 
(q)  Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(r)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six (6) months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are renewable. 
(s)  Requirements of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission or the city shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The city council or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(t)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(Ord. No. 982, § V, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-96. - Maintenance of historic properties. 
(a)  Expedited review procedures for approval of routine maintenance. The commission may adopt expedited review procedures for approval of routine maintenance to historic properties or to buildings or structures in historic districts. Routine maintenance to historic properties includes ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance. Expedited review procedures shall waive the requirements for submission of an application for a certificate of appropriateness and for consideration at a public meeting. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps, which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have thirty (30) days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not met in thirty (30) days, the owners shall be punished as provided in section 2-99 of this article and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 982, § VI, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-97. - Creation of an architectural review board. 
(a)  Creation of the board. The city council may elect to create an architectural review board, hereinafter called the board, to perform the duties and responsibilities of the commission in accepting, considering and approving or rejecting applications for certificates of appropriateness, as set out in sections 2-95 and 2-96 of this article. 
(b)  Board members: number, appointment, terms, compensation, officers, rules, and regulation. 
(1)  If such board is created, it shall be composed of not less than five (5) members who shall have demonstrated training or experience in the fields of history, architecture, architectural history, urban planning, archaeology or law. Members of the board need not be residents of the city. No member of the city council or the mayor shall serve as members of the board. Members of the board shall be nominated by the mayor of (jurisdiction) and appointed by the city council. Except for the original members of the board, members of the board shall serve three-year terms and shall be appointed in such manner as to serve overlapping terms. Two (2) of the original members of the board shall be appointed to serve one-year terms and the remainder of the original members of the board shall be appointed to serve three-year terms. Members of the board may be reappointed. 
(2)  Members of the board may be removed for cause by the city council. 
(3)  Vacancies on the board shall be filled by persons nominated by the mayor and appointed by the city council. Such appointments shall be for the unexpired term of the member replaced. 
(4)  Members of the board shall elect a chairman and vice chairman and such other officers as the members deem necessary. The board shall adopt rules of procedure and shall communicate those rules of procedure to the city council and mayor. The rules of procedure of the board shall specify what number of members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(5)  Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred on behalf of the board, in accordance with the rules and regulations for the reimbursement of expenses adopted by the board. 
(6)  The board may employ such professional, technical, office and other personnel, as may be necessary, to carry out the purposes and responsibilities of the board. 
(7)  Meetings of the board shall be public meetings and shall be held at designated times and places as are specified in the commission's resolution creating the board. 
(8)  If, in the opinion of the city council, the workload of the board is, or is contemplated to be excessive, the city council may create more than one board, and designate the historic properties and historic districts with which each board will be concerned. Each historic property and each historic district designated by the city council shall be subject to the control of only one board. Each such board created shall have all of the powers and authority set forth in the ordinance from which this article was derived with respect to the historic properties and historic districts with which it is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 982, § VII, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-98. - Building and zoning code provisions. 
Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 982, § VIII, 9-10-09)  
Sec. 2-99. - Penalty provisions. 
For any and every violation of the provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived, and for each and every day that such violation continues, said violation(s) shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Persons charged with such violation(s) may include: 
(1)  The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, or any other person using the land, building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist; 
(2)  Any person who knowingly commits takes part or assists in such violation; or 
(3)  Any person who maintains any land, building or premises in which such violation shall exist. 
(Ord. No. 982, § IX, 9-10-09)  
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1068, §§ I—VI, adopted Sept. 28, 2015, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 3-1—3-30, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
Whenever used herein, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein specifically ascribed to them: 
Alcoholic beverages means any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic beverages or combination of liquors and mixed liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, fermented otherwise alcoholic, and all drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations of mixtures intended for beverage purposes which contain one-half (½) of one (1) percent of alcohol by volume and shall include liquor, beer, and wine, both fortified and table wine. 
Association means a partnership, limited partnership, or any form of unincorporated enterprise owned by two (2) or more persons. 
Beer means any beer, lager beer, ale, porter, malt or brewed beverage, or similar fermented malt liquor, by whatever name the same may be called. The term beer as used herein shall include draft or keg beer. 
Board means the alcoholic beverage control board. 
Brewpub means an establishment licensed and meeting the qualifications of a brewpub under the state alcoholic beverage control laws, as stated in Code of Ala. 1975, title 28, chapter 4A, as now existing or hereafter enacted, and which meets the following additional requirements: 
(1)  The serving of food or meals must constitute the principal business of such establishment, with the serving of liquor, malt or brewed beverages, wines and other alcoholic beverages being only an incidental part of the business. During any ninety-day period, the gross receipts from the serving of meals and food shall constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts of the business. 
City means the City of Guntersville, Alabama, a municipal corporation of the State of Alabama located in Marshall County. 
Church means a building erected for the purpose of conducting religious services and so consecrated and being used for religious purposes. 
Code means Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Licensing Code, set out in Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 28, ch. 3A. 
Container means the single bottle, can, keg, bag or other receptacle, not a carton, in which alcoholic beverages are packaged for the market by the manufacturer, importer, brewer, or retailer and from which the alcoholic beverage is consumed by or dispensed to the public. 
Corporate limits means the corporate limits of the City of Guntersville, Alabama. 
Corporation means a corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of this state, the United States or any other state, territory or foreign country or dependency. 
Country club/golf course means a club, public or private, with a minimum of nine (9) holes, operated to provide golf club facilities including the sale of food and alcoholic beverages either in a club building or on the golf course with no minimum meal per day requirements. 
Draft or keg beer means beer or malt beverages served from a cask or keg rather than a bottle or can. 
Engaged in business means a person shall be deemed engaged in business within the corporate limits if that person has a fixed place of business within said corporate limits, or if, pursuant to agreement of sale, express or implied, that person delivers any alcoholic beverage, beer or wine within said corporate limits, if that person performs, within said corporate limits, any act authorized to be done only by the holder of any license issued by the board. 
Fixed place of business means any place where any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer is brewed, kept or stored for sale or delivery. 
Licensee means any person licensed by the Guntersville City Council to sell liquor, wines or malt and brewed beverages under the terms of this article. 
Liquor means any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic beverage or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, fermented or otherwise alcoholic and all drinks or drinkable liquids preparations or mixtures, intended for beverage purposes which contain more than one-half (½) of one (1) percent of alcohol by volume except malt or brewed beverages as defined herein. 
Lounge means any place or premise operated by a responsible person of good reputation in which alcoholic beverages of all types may be offered for sale for on premises consumption but does not meet the requirement for a restaurant-lounge, restaurant-pub or private club lounge as these establishments are defined in this article and which meets the following additional requirements: 
(1)  A lounge area of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet on one (1) floor in one (1) room, said area to be equipped with tables and chairs and capable of seating at least fifty (50) persons. 
(2)  A minimum of one and one-half (1½) off-street parking spaces for each one hundred (100) square feet of lounge area, provided that this requirement shall be in addition to the parking requirements for any other uses in the same building. 
Malt or brewed beverages means any beer, lager beer, ale, porter or similar fermented malt liquor containing one-half (½) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume and not in excess of four (4) percent alcohol by weight and five (5) percent by volume, by whatever name the same may be called. 
Manufacturer means any person licensed by the alcoholic beverage control board to produce, manufacture, brew, distill or ferment alcoholic beverages of any nature or description pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, title 28, chapter 3A as now existing or hereafter enacted. Manufacturers shall be classified as either micro-brewery or micro-distillery defined as follows: 
Micro-distillery means an establishment for the manufacture, blending, fermentation, processing and packaging of alcoholic beverages, except beer and wine, with a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less which takes place wholly inside a building and produces no more than seventy-five thousand (75,000) proof gallons of alcoholic beverages annually. The planning commission may consider a conditional use permit via a separate application to increase by no more than twenty (20) percent for a maximum of ninety thousand (90,000) proof gallons. A tasting room is permitted within the micro-distillery. The micro-distillery must be properly licensed by any state or federal regulatory agency with jurisdiction over the facility, including the Alabama Beverage Control Board. All activities must occur within the building and outdoor storage is prohibited. The manufacture, processing and packing of beer and wine by the micro-distillery is prohibited. 
Micro-brewery means an establishment for the manufacturing, blending, fermentation, processing and packaging of beer which is actively and continuously brewed for consumption on the premises where manufactured, with a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) feet or less which takes place wholly inside a building and produces no more than ten thousand (10,000) barrels of beer in one (1) year. A tasting room is permitted within the micro-brewery. All activities must occur within the building and outdoor storage is prohibited. The micro-brewery must be properly licensed by any federal or state regulatory agency with jurisdiction over the facility, including the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. The manufacturing, processing and packaging of wine and other alcoholic beverages, except beer, by the micro-brewery is prohibited. 
Meal means a diversified selection of food some of which is not susceptible of being consumed in the absence of at least some articles of tableware and which cannot be conveniently consumed while one is standing or walking about. 
Person means a natural person, association or corporation. Whenever used in a clause prescribing or imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, such terms as applied to "association" shall mean the partners or members thereof and as applied to "corporation" shall mean the officers thereof, except as to private clubs, the term "person" shall mean such individual or individuals who, under the bylaws of such club shall have jurisdiction over the possession and sale of liquor therein. 
Private clubs . 
(1)  Class I. A corporation or association organized or formed in good faith by authority of law and which must have at least one hundred fifty (150) paid up members. It must be the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for the objects of a national, social, patriotic, political or athletic nature or the like, but not for pecuniary gain and the property as well as the advantages of which belong to all the members and which maintains an establishment provided with special space and accommodations where, in consideration of payment, food, with or without lodging, is habitually served. The club shall hold regular meetings, continue its business through officers regularly elected, admit members by written application, investigation and ballot and charge and collect dues from elected members. 
(2)  Class II. A corporation or association organized or formed in good faith by authority of law and which must have at least one hundred (100) paid up members. It must be the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for the objects of a national, social, patriotic, political or athletic business through officers regularly elected, admit members by written application, investigation and ballot and charge and collect dues from elected members. 
Restaurant-lounge means any place or premises in which foods, refreshments, liquor, beer and wine are offered for consumption on the premises in which the establishment is located, which is operated by a responsible person of good reputation and which meets the following additional requirements: 
(1)  A dining area of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet on one (1) floor in one (1) room, such dining room to be equipped with tables and chairs accommodating at least fifty (50) persons at one (1) time; 
(2)  A kitchen separate and apart from such dining area, but adjoining the same, in which food is prepared for consumption by the public and in which the food or meals served in such dining area are prepared; 
(3)  A bar area is allowable if located in the same building as the main restaurant. The bar area shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the gross area of the main restaurant, and shall be owned and operated by the owners of the main restaurant; 
(4)  At least one (1) meal per day shall be served at least six (6) days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating; 
(5)  Such place shall be duly licensed by the board for the sale of liquor for on-premises consumption; and 
(6)  The serving of such food or meals shall constitute the principal business of such establishment, with the serving of liquor, malt or brewed beverages, wines, or other alcoholic beverages being only an incidental part of such business. During any ninety-day period, the gross receipts from the serving of meals and food shall constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts of the business. 
Restaurant-pub means any place or premises in which foods, refreshments, and malt or brewed beverages and/or table wines (but not liquor) are offered for sale for consumption on premises in which the establishment is located, which is operated by a person of good reputation and which meets the following additional requirements: 
(1)  A kitchen separate and apart from such dining area, but adjoining the same in which food is prepared for consumption by the public and in which the food or meals served in such dining area are prepared; 
(2)  At least one (1) meal per day shall be served at least six (6) days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating; 
(3)  Such place shall be duly licensed by the board for the sale of malt or brewed beverages and/or table wines for on-premises consumption; and 
(4)  The serving of such foods or meals shall constitute the principal business of such establishment, with the serving of malt or brewed beverages and/or table wines being only an incidental part of such business. During any ninety-day period, the gross receipts from the serving of meals and food shall constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts of the business. 
Retailer means any person licensed by the board to engage in the retail sale of any beverage to the consumer. 
Sale or sell means any transfer of liquor, wine or beer, or alcoholic beverages for a consideration and any gift in connection with, or as a part of, a transfer of property other than liquor, wine or beer, or alcoholic beverages for a consideration. 
School means a building erected for the purpose of conducting educational activities and financed in whole or in part by public revenues of the City of Guntersville, Alabama or other governmental entities. 
Special events means an athletic, sporting or entertainment activity planned in advance by responsible person or organizations of good reputation for a period not to exceed seven (7) days' duration. 
Tavern means any place or premise operated by a responsible person of good reputation in which malt or brewed beverages and/or table wines (but not liquor) are offered for sale for on-premises consumption, but which does not meet the requirements for a restaurant-lounge, restaurant-pub, or private club-lounge, as these establishments are defined in this article. 
Unopened container means a container containing alcoholic beverages, which has not been opened or unsealed subsequent to filling and sealing by the manufacturer, importer or retailer. 
Wholesaler means any person licensed by the board to engage in the sale and distribution of table wine and beer, or either of them, within this state at wholesale only, to be sold by export or retail license or other wholesale licensees, or others within this state lawfully authorized to sell table wine and beer, or either of them, for the purpose of resale only. 
Wine means all beverages made from the fermentation of fruits, berries or grapes, with or without added spirits and produced in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume and shall include all sparkling wines, vermouths, vinous beverages, vinous liquors and like products. 
(1)  Fortified wine. Any wine containing more than sixteen and one-half (16.5) percent alcohol by volume but not more than twenty-four (24) percent. 
(2)  Table wine. Any wine containing not more than sixteen and one-half (16.5) percent alcohol by volume. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § I, 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-2. - Scope of article. 
The provision of this article shall apply to the retail and wholesale sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption, on-premises consumption and to the retail sales of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption by on-premises licensees and to the use, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § II, 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-3. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any alcoholic beverages, within the City of Guntersville, Alabama for the purpose of sale, or to sell, or keep for sale, or offer for sale, without first having procured from the city a license therefore. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(1)(a), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-4. - Application form, contents, filing, oath. 
The application of any person for any license issued under this article shall be made upon such forms as the city clerk, or his duly authorized representative may prescribe. Every private club applicant shall also file with or as a part of its application, a true and correct list of all of its members, officers and directors, a certificate of incorporation or documentation relating to its form of organization and for such other information as the city clerk, or his duly authorized representative, shall require. A nonrefundable money order or cashier check in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable to the city must accompany any application or request for transfer. All such applications shall be in writing and shall be properly verified by oath of the applicant or its agent. 
If for any reason the application for a license is denied by the city council, the city council shall not reconsider another request for licensing by the applicant for a period of six (6) months from the date the request for licensing is denied. In the event the application is denied the second time, the city council shall not reconsider another request for licensing by the applicant for a period of twelve (12) months from the date the second request is denied. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(1)(b), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-5. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon application for a license for sale of alcoholic beverages, the city shall conduct its own investigation in all matters contained in the application. Upon completion of the investigation, the application, along with the results of the investigation, shall then be delivered to the city council, which may deny the application for good and sufficient reasons and report such denial and the reasons for such denial to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(1)(c), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-6. - Notice of hearing. 
If the application is not denied, the applicant must publish notice of the filing of the application and of the time set for a hearing once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. The notice shall be published at no cost to the city and the applicant shall submit a publisher's affidavit to the city council of his compliance with the publication notice. Said notice shall be substantially as follows: 
Notice is hereby given that ___________ doing business as ___________ located at ___________ has made an application for the City of Guntersville City Council to approve the issuance of a ___________ License by the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board and that the ________ day of ___________, 20________ at 6:00 p.m. has been set for the hearing thereof at the Guntersville City Council meeting. Any interested persons may appear at said time and place and be heard for or against the granting of such approval. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(1)(d), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-7. - Applicant qualifications. 
Licenses shall be granted and issued by the city only to reputable individuals who are citizens of the United States or associations whose members are reputable individuals who are citizens of the United States or to reputable corporations organized under the laws of the State of Alabama or duly qualified thereunder to do business in Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(1)(e), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-8. - Posting of licenses. 
Every license issued under this article shall be conspicuously and constantly posted visibly under a transparent substance on the licensed premise. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(1)(f), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-9. - Suspension of license; assignability. 
The city shall have the right to suspend any license issued to any person for any violation of any city ordinance and/or the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Licensing Code. Licenses issued under this article may not be assigned or transferred. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(1)(g), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-10. - Annual and additional fees, allowable locations, and hours. 
Each person licensed by the board, who shall engage in the alcoholic beverage liquor, beer or wine business within the corporate limits, shall, prior to engaging in such business in addition to any other privilege licenses required, pay to the city for the privilege of engaging in the sale of alcoholic beverages, an annual fee and further license fees as established below: 
(1)  Beer wholesale license. 
a.  Each person licensed as a beer wholesaler under Code of Alabama 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., of the shall pay to the city an annual license fee of fifty (50) percent of the amount charged for state beer license by the Code of Alabama 1975, § 28-3A-21. 
b.  In addition, each licensee will remit to the city clerk, on forms provided by the city clerk, each month, the privilege or excise tax levied on the sales of beer by the "Uniform Beer Tax Act," Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 28-3-190—28-3-199. Licensee dealers and distributors shall not sell to any retail outlet that does not have a current city beer license. Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sell beer to retail license holders within the City of Guntersville. Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sell wholesale at any time on any given day. Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain a delivery license through the City of Guntersville. 
(2)  Wine wholesale license. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board as a wine wholesaler under Code of Alabama 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of fifty (50) percent of the amount charged for state beer license by the Code of Alabama 1975, § 28-3A-21. 
b.  In addition, each licensee will remit to the city clerk, on forms provided by the city clerk, each month, the privilege or excise tax levied on the sale of table wine by the Alabama Table Wine Act, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 28-7-1—28-7-24. 
c.  Licensee dealers and distributors shall not sell to any retail outlet that does not have a current city license. Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale beer & wine to retail license holders within the City of Guntersville. Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale wholesale at any time on any given day. Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain a delivery license through the City of Guntersville. 
(3)  Beer and wine wholesale license. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board as a beer and wine wholesaler under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of fifty (50) percent of the amount charged for state beer license by the Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-21.b. In addition, each licensee will remit to the city clerk of Guntersville on forms provided by said clerk, each month, the privilege or excise tax levied on the sales of beer by the Uniform Beer Tax Act, Acts 1982, No. 82-344. 
b.  Each licensee will remit to the city clerk of Guntersville on forms provided by said clerk, each month, the privilege or excise tax levied on the sales of table wine by the Alabama Table Wine Act, Acts 1980, No. 80-382. 
c.  Licensee dealers and distributors shall not sell to any retail outlet that does not have a current city license. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sell beer and wine to retail license holders within the City of Guntersville. 
e.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale wholesale at any time on any given day. 
f.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain a delivery license through the City of Guntersville. 
(4)  Lounge retail liquor license. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board to operate a lounge under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
b.  Every licensee authorized to sell liquor shall pay an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of gross receipts on the sale of liquor for on premises consumption which privilege or license tax is hereby expressly levied. The payment shall be made on the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding the calendar month for the gross sales made by the licensee during such preceding calendar month. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages on premise only. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
e.  No person under the legal drinking age, as established by the state shall be admitted on the premises of any lounge, liquor licensee as a patron or employee, and it shall be unlawful for any such licensee to admit any minor to the premises as a patron or employee. 
f.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license or a restaurant license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(5)  Tavern license. 
a.  Each person licensed by the city to operate a tavern license under this article shall pay to the city an annual license fee of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
b.  Licensees hereunder shall not be allowed to serve liquor. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption only. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
e.  No person under the legal drinking age, as established by the state shall be admitted on the premises of any lounge, liquor licensee as a patron or employee, and it shall be unlawful for any such licensee to admit any minor to the premises as a patron or employee. 
f.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license or a restaurant license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(6)  Restaurant lounge liquor license. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board to sell alcoholic beverages in connection with the operation of a restaurant under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
b.  Every licensee authorized to sell liquor shall pay an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of gross receipts on the sale of liquor for either on premises consumption which privilege or license tax is hereby expressly levied. The payment shall be made on the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding the calendar month for the gross sales made by the licensee during such preceding calendar month. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption only. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
e.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license or a restaurant license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(7)  Restaurant pub license. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board to sell alcoholic beverages in connection with the operation of a restaurant under the terms of this article shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
b.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption only. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license or a restaurant license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(8)  Private club liquor license. 
a.  Class I or II generally. 
1.  Each person licensed by the board to operate a club, class I, under this article, shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
2.  Every licensee authorized to sell liquor shall pay an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of gross receipts on the sale of liquor for on premises consumption which privilege or license tax is hereby expressly levied. The payment shall be made on the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding the calendar month for the gross sales made by the licensee during such preceding calendar month. 
b.  Class II-private club liquor license only. 
1.  Each person licensed by the board to operate a club, class II under this article, shall pay to the city an annual license fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
2.  Every licensee authorized to sell liquor shall pay an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of gross receipts on the sale of liquor for on premises consumption which privilege or license tax is hereby expressly levied. The payment shall be made on the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding the calendar month for the gross sales made by the licensee during such preceding calendar month. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption only. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
e.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license or a restaurant license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(9)  Retail table wine license for off-premises consumption. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board to sell table wine at retail for off-premises consumption shall pay to the city an annual license fee of fifty (50) percent of the amount charged for state wine license charged by the State of Alabama pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-21. 
b.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale table wine for off premise consumption only. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale table wine at any time on any day. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(10)  Retail table wine license for on- and off-premises consumption. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board to sell retail table wine for on- and off-premises consumption under this article shall pay an annual privilege or license tax of fifty (50) percent of the amount charged for state wine license charged by the State of Alabama pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-21. 
b.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve table wine for on and off premise consumption. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(11)  Retail beer license for off-premises consumption. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board to sell beer for off-premises consumption shall pay to the city an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
b.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale beer for off-premise consumption only. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale beer at any time on any day. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(12)  Retail beer license for on and off premises consumption. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board to sell beer for on- and off-premises consumption under this article shall pay an annual privilege or license tax of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
b.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages for on and off premise consumption. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license or other license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(13)  Retail liquor, wine and beer license for off-premises consumption. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board to sell liquor, table wine and beer at retail for off-premises consumption under this article shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
b.  Every licensee authorized to sell liquor shall pay an additional license tax of eight (8) percent of gross receipts on the sale of liquor for off premises consumption which privilege or license tax is hereby expressly levied. The payment shall be made on the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding the calendar month for the gross sales made by the licensee during such preceding calendar month. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale alcoholic beverages for off premise consumption only. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale alcoholic beverages at any time on any day. 
e.  Licensees hereunder shall be required to acquire and maintain either a retail merchant license issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(14)  Special events retail license. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board for a special events retail license under this article, (which is valid for seven (7) days or less), shall pay to the city a privilege or license tax as follows: 
1.  Fifty dollars ($50.00) per day if such special event is conducted by a nonprofit organization; or 
2.  One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day if such special event is conducted by a for-profit organization. 
b.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption of any alcoholic beverage. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time on any given day in which the special event license is valid with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday; 
2.  Any additional hours restricted by state law pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-20. 
(15)  Country club/golf course license. 
a.  Each club or course licensed by the board to sell alcoholic beverages in connection with the operation of a country club/golf course, shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
b.  Every licensee authorized to sell liquor shall pay an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of gross receipts on the sale of liquor for either on premises or off premises consumption which privilege or license tax is hereby expressly levied. The payment shall be made on the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding the calendar month for the gross sales made by the licensee during such preceding calendar month. 
c.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption only. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time on any given day. 
(16)  Special retail license. 
a.  Each person licensed by the board pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-19, to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to this section shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Licenses under this provision may be issued to any state park, airport authority, civic center authority or the franchises or the concessionaire of such park or authority or any other valid responsible organization of good reputation. 
b.  The cost of the license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year. 
c.  The licensee shall be allowed to sale alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption only. 
d.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time on any given day with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any weekday which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
2.  Any additional times restricted by Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-19. 
e.  Every licensee authorized to sell liquor shall pay an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of gross receipt on the sale of liquor for on premises consumption which privilege or license tax is hereby expressly levied. The payment shall be made on the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding the calendar month for the gross sales made by the licensee during such preceding calendar month. 
(17)  Brewpub . 
a.  Each person licensed by the board to operate a brewpub shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
b.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time with the exception of the following hours: 
1.  between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
(18)  Manufacturer . 
a.  Micro-brewery. 
1.  Each person who has obtained a manufacturer license from the board under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
2.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time on any given day as allowed by state law with the following exceptions: 
i.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
b.  Micro-distillery . 
1.  Each person who has obtained a manufacturer license from the board under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
2.  Licensees hereunder shall be allowed to sale/serve alcoholic beverages at any time on any given day as allowed by state law with the following exceptions: 
i.  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day which shall include Saturday and Sunday. 
(19)  Alabama Responsible Vendor Act. 
a.  Each person requesting to sell alcoholic beverages within the City of Guntersville must obtain business certification through the Alabama Responsible Vendor Program within sixty (60) days of license approved by the board. 
b.  Upon a licensee becoming de-certified from the Alabama Responsible Vendor Program, the city privilege license shall be automatically suspended until the licensee is recertified. At the time of renewal of the license, a new license will not be issued until the former licensee is recertified through the Alabama Responsible Vendor Program. 
c.  All licensees at the time of the effective date of this amendment shall have sixty (60) days from the effective date of this amendment to obtain business certification through the Alabama Vendor Program. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(2)(a)(1)—(19), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-11. - Bonds. 
If the city council decides to approve an alcohol license either retail or wholesale whether for on premise or off premise consumption (other than a store operated by the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board), the city council shall approve the same only upon condition that the applicant for a liquor license shall deliver to and maintain with the city a bond executed by the licensee and by a qualified surety company authorized to do business in the city, payable to the city, the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) as liquidated damages and conditioned that the licensee will comply with the laws of the State of Alabama, including but not limited to, this article relating to a retail liquor license. 
Said bond shall be a forfeiture or liquidated damages bond and not an indemnity bond. Such bond shall include an endorsement to the effect that it shall not be cancelled without the consent of the city council. The city may declare said bond forfeited as liquidated damages in its full amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) upon the breach of any one (1) or more of said conditions. In lieu of said bond, such applicant for a retail liquor license, may deposit with the city clerk of the city cash in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) upon the same conditions and subject to forfeiture, as set forth above. Failure by the city to declare said bond or deposit forfeited in the case of a breach of any one (1) or more of said conditions, shall not operate as a waiver of the right to do so in the event of any subsequent breach of any one (1) or more said conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(2)(a)(20), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-12. - Records to be kept; availability for inspection. 
It shall be the duty of each person subject to the license tax imposed by this article to keep full and complete records of all purchases, sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages, from which records there can be readily obtained information as to the correct amount of license tax due to the city. As a part of such records, each wholesaler shall keep an individual ledger or card account for each of his customers, and said ledger or card account shall show the correct name and address of each person to whom any alcoholic beverages are delivered, together with the dates thereof and the number of cases sold or delivered, and each wholesaler shall also keep, as evidence of the foregoing, a receipted delivery ticket signed by each purchaser or by his authorized agent. Each retailer shall keen an individual ledger or card record showing the correct and name and address of each person from whom he purchased alcoholic beverages, a delivery ticket showing each such purchase, the date thereof, and the number of cases or bottles purchased. The aforesaid records shall be kept posted currently and shall be preserved for not less than two (2) years succeeding said calendar month. All of such records shall be open for inspection and checking during such regular business hours as the city clerk, or his duly authorized representative may request. Failure to keep any of the records required by this division, or elsewhere in this article, or by any amendment thereto, or refusal to make the same available to the city clerk, or his duly authorized representative, shall constitute grounds for revocation of any license issued under this article. In addition thereto, an annual report, under oath, shall be filed with the city clerk or his duly authorized representative in January of each year showing the purchases of the entire year, next preceding. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(2)(a)(21), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-13. - Filing of reports. 
The person liable for any license tax imposed by this article shall file with the city clerk on or before the final date on which the license tax may be paid without a penalty, such report in such form as the city clerk may prescribe, evidencing the amount of business done and the amount of license due thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(2)(a)(22), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-14. - Due dates; delinquent dates; penalties. 
(a)  The stated annual license fees levied by the schedule shall initially be due on the date the initial license is issued by the city and thereafter shall be due on January second of each year and shall be delinquent after January 31 of the year for which such license is due, and a penalty of fifteen (15) percent per month shall be collected on each delinquent license collected on or after January 31 of such year. The city may revoke a license if not paid by January 31. All additional license taxes levied by the schedule shall be due the fifteenth day of the calendar month specified in each levy and shall be delinquent if not paid by such date, and a penalty of fifteen (15) percent shall be collected after such day of each month. There shall be no proration of any license fee because of having operated only a part of a calendar year, except as required by state law. 
(b)  Once the city council approves an application for a liquor license of any kind the applicant has thirty (30) days to apply for his license to be issued or the approval of the council will expire. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(2)(a)(23), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-15. - Compliance with fire prevention and building code. 
(a)  No license under this article shall be issued to any person to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption until the applicant shall comply with the fire-prevention code and the various building codes of the city in effect at the time of such application. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this article unless the city building inspector certifies that the premises to be licensed are in substantial compliance with the objectives of the requirements contained in Ordinance No. 560. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(3), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-16. - Compliance with zoning regulations, type of licenses. 
No license for on-premises or off-premises sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person unless the proposed location of such business shall be in one (1) of the following zones according to the current zoning ordinance and map in effect for the city at the time of such application: 
(1)  Wholesale distribution of alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages wholesale distribution shall be considered as the same as any other products distributed at wholesale. 
(2)  Beer and wine for off-premises consumption. Beer and wine shall be permitted to be sold in a B-1, B-2, B-3, BG-1, BG-1A, BG-2, BG-2A, BG-1B, BG-1R, BC, BW zone and an M-1 zone on appeal, which said appeal shall be to the board of zoning adjustment of the city. 
(3)  Package liquor sales for off-premises consumption. A package liquor store shall be permitted in a B-2 and B-3, BG-1, BG-1A, BG-2, BG-2A, BG-1B, BG-1R, BC, BW zone. 
(4)  Restaurant serving alcoholic beverages. A restaurant retail liquor license shall be granted in a B-2 and B-3, BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-2A, BC, BG-1R zone and an M-1 zone on appeal, which said appeal shall be to the board of zoning adjustment of the city. 
(5)  Lounge retail liquor license. A lounge retail liquor license shall be granted in a B-2 and B-3, BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-2A, BC zone. 
(6)  Private club—Class I. A class I club shall be permitted in a B-1, B-2 and B-3 BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-2A, BC zone. 
(7)  Private club—Class II. A class II club shall be permitted in a B-2 and B-3 BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-2A, BC zone. 
(8)  Retail table wine or retail beer for on-premises consumption. On-premises consumption of beer and wine shall be permitted in a B-2 and B-3 BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-2A, BC zone. 
(9)  Brewpub . On-premises and off-premises sale of beer shall be permitted in B-2 and B-3, BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-2A, BC, BG-1R zone and an M-1 zone on appeal, which said appeal shall be to the board of zoning adjustment of the city. 
(10)  Manufacturer . 
a.  Micro-brewery. B-2 and B-3, BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-2A, BC, BG-1R zone and an M-1 zone on appeal, which said appeal shall be to the board of zoning adjustment of the city. 
b.  Micro-distillery. B-2 and B-3, BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-2A, BC, BG-1R zone and an M-1 zone on appeal, which said appeal shall be to the board of zoning adjustment of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(a)(1)—(10), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-17. - Distances required between retail lounge liquor licensees. 
No lounge retail liquor license shall be issued for a location within three hundred (300) feet of another existing lounge retail liquor licensees, except in the case of a hotel or motel having a minimum of forty (40) guest rooms available for rent. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(a)(11), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-18. - Distances required between schools and churches regarding sale of alcoholic beverages. 
No sales of alcoholic beverages will be permitted in any zoning classification of the City of Guntersville, Alabama within two hundred (200) feet of any church sanctuary building or school building, which existed within the corporate limits of Guntersville, Alabama on July 16, 1984 and which is currently operating as a school or church. No new building constructed or built after August 6, 1984 in any zoning classification, for the purpose of selling alcoholic beverages shall be constructed within three hundred (300) feet of any church sanctuary building or school building located within the corporate limits of Guntersville, Alabama. The method for measuring the distance from churches and schools shall be from the main entrance (front door) of a church sanctuary and the main entrance (front door) of a school building measured by the most direct route (a straight line) to the nearest point of the building occupied by the proposed licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § III(a)(12), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-19. - Sales to certain person prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to sell within the city limits any alcoholic or intoxicating liquors of any kind to any minor, person of known intemperate habits or to any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor, as the term "under the influence" is defined by the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(a), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-20. - Minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(b), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-21. - Misrepresentation of age of minor. 
(a)  By adult. It shall be unlawful for any adult to make to any liquor dealer, agent or employee, any false pretense, statement or representation as to the age of a minor, with the intent or purpose to induce such liquor dealer, agent or employee, to give, deliver or sell any alcoholic beverage to any minor. 
(b)  By minor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to obtain, or attempt to obtain, any alcoholic beverage from any liquor dealer, agent or employee by means of any false representation, pretense or statement, to such liquor dealer, agent or employee, that such minor has attained majority, or is over the legal drinking age, as established by the state. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(c), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-22. - Delivery of beverages in properly marked vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer, wholesaler or distributor to deliver any vinous, malt or brewed beverages except in vehicles bearing the name, address and license number of such distributor, wholesaler or manufacturer, painted or affixed plainly on each side of such vehicle in letters no smaller than four (4) inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(d), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-23. - Electric, painted signs advertising alcoholic beverages prohibited outside places of business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display any signs including but not limited to electric, painted or printed signs outside any place of business advertising alcoholic beverages as enumerated and defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(e), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-24. - Possession, use at parks, playgrounds, school premises, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or use any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic beverage at any open park area, municipal park, municipal playground, municipal pool, municipal recreational facility, school, school playground, school stadium, or school recreational facility within the corporate limits of the city, with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Any park owned and or operated by the State of Alabama. 
(2)  Any municipal facility when authorized by rental agreement, special event license or when served by any other allowed licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(f), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-25. - Alcoholic beverages on city streets, in automobiles or motor vehicles, prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, sell, serve, display, dispense or give away, or attempt to drink, sell, serve, display, dispense or give away, any alcoholic beverage while upon any street or while in any motor vehicle in the city; and, further, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink, sell, serve, display, dispense or give away, or attempt to drink, sell, serve, display, dispense or give away, any alcoholic beverage while upon any sidewalk within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(g), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-26. - Authorization to sell. 
Unless otherwise stated herein, all licensees are authorized to sale alcoholic beverages as permitted by their license at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(h), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-27. - Consuming alcoholic beverages at state liquor store or off-premise establishment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of any state liquor store or any off-premise only licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(i), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-28. - Sale at unlicensed premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, give away, or consume any alcoholic beverages at any business, which is not licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, sell, barter, give away, consume, or possess any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any alcoholic beverage licensee for which the licensee is not authorized to sell or during hours for which the licensee is not authorized to sell. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(j), 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 3-29. - Compliance with state alcoholic beverage control laws. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to do anything or commit any act or omission constituting a misdemeanor under the state alcoholic beverage control laws, which includes rules or regulations promulgated by the ABC board the violation of which have been denominated by the Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3-20 as constituting a misdemeanor; which laws are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth. 
(b)  Where the state alcoholic beverage control laws described in subsection (a) of this section refer to a state license, class of license, licensee, or licensed premises, the terms shall also mean and include a city license, class of license, licensee, or licensed premises. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of this article governing hours of operation, where the aforementioned state alcoholic beverage control laws, which includes the Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-25, establish unlawful acts or offenses relative to state licensees, their servants, agents, or employees, or to state licensed premises, in such case city licensees, their servants, agents, or employees, and city licensed premises, shall be subject to the same requirements, and failure to comply with same shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § IV(k), 9-28-15)  
Sec. 3-30. - Duty to maintain order on premises; reports of assaults, affrays, etc., and certain conduct prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each owner and of each manger or supervisor at any time charged with the management and supervision of any retail liquor, retail table wine or retail malt or brewed beverage licensed premises, while the same is open to the public, to maintain order upon the premises and to exclude from the premises any person who is drunk and disorderly or who commits any breach of the peace, or who uses offensive, disorderly threatening, abusive or insulting language, conduct or behavior with the intent to provoke a breach of the peace, or whereby a breach of the peace might be occasioned. It shall be the duty of each officer, owner, manager or person in charge of any retail liquor, retail table wine or retail malt or brewed beverage licensed premises within the city, immediately to make an appropriate report to the police department of the city of each assault, assault and battery, or affray, occurring on the licensed premises while said premises are open for business. It shall further be the duty of said person to make a written report of each said incidents to the police department of the city and to the local field office of the alcoholic beverage control board within thirty-six (36) hours thereof. 
(b)  No on-premises licensee shall conduct or allow to be conducted on the licensed premises any form of lewd or indecent entertainment, including but not limited to, male or female strippers, mud wrestling, topless or bottomless dancers or waitresses, lewd or indecent dancing, wet "T" shirt contests or any other sensual or erotic contest or activities of any kind. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make or allow to be made, any noise or sounds of such volume of such nature as to cause annoyance to the residents of the city or to disturb the peace by the making of unnecessary noise. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § V, 9-28-15)  
Sec. 3-31. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated by the alcoholic beverage control board relating to the sale of beer, alcoholic beverages, liquor or wine, malt or brewed beverages, or any provision of law contained in the ABC Licensing Code of the State of Alabama, as amended, shall be punished, upon conviction, by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment at hard labor for the city for not more than six (6) months, either or both, at the discretion of the municipal judge trying the case and the license of any such person shall, upon conviction, be subject to revocation by the city council of the City of Guntersville. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § VI, 9-28-15)  
Secs. 3-32—3-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ART AND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 3-51. - Creation and establishment of districts. 
Under the authority granted in Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-17.1, the city does hereby create and establish an art and entertainment district in downtown Guntersville with the areas and boundaries as set forth and designated on the map which is attached as Exhibit 1 to the ordinance from which this article was derived, and is incorporated herein by reference. The designation of any street or portion of a street within the art and entertainment district shall include sidewalks, which run parallel with and immediately adjacent to each side of that street or portion of that street within the art and entertainment district. 
After ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived, the city council shall review this article to determine if changes to the arts and entertainment district and the regulations for that district should be made. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 11-4-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1069, adopted Nov. 2, 2015, deleted Exhibit 1 of Ord. No. 1047, which exhibit was incorporated in this section by reference, and inserted a new exhibit in its place.  
Sec. 3-52. - Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted; conditions. 
Any on-premise retail alcohol beverage license, herein license, who satisfies all requirements of the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board to operate as an entertainment district licensee shall comply with all laws, rules and regulations which govern its license type, except that a patron, guest or member of that licensee may exit the licensed premises between the hours of noon and 10:00 p.m. on Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each week with no more than one (1) open container of alcoholic beverage and consume that alcoholic beverage anywhere within the confines of the art and entertainment district in which the alcoholic beverage was obtained subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  A person may not enter another premises licensed to sell alcohol with an open container or closed container of alcoholic beverage acquired elsewhere. 
(2)  A licensee who receives an art and entertainment district designation shall allow alcoholic beverages to be removed from the licensed premises only in a recyclable paper or plastic cup that bears the commercially printed name and/or logo of the designated licensee. Any alcoholic beverage removed from a licensed premise pursuant to this article must remain in the paper or plastic cup with the commercially printed name and/or logo of the licensee who sold the alcoholic beverage for consumption purposes. No such alcoholic beverages shall be removed from the licensed premises in a can, bottle or glass container except that glass containers shall be allowed in a licensee's outdoor sit-down dining areas that are situated on the licensee's property or on a sidewalk or other right-of-way where the licensee has a right-of-way use agreement with the City of Guntersville. 
(3)  No licensee shall allow a patron, guest or member to exit its licensed premises with more than one (1) open container of alcoholic beverages, and it shall be unlawful for any person to exit such licensed premises with more than one (1) such open container. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle or glass container or to possess any open can, bottle or glass container of alcoholic beverages on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way and parking lots located within an art and entertainment district; except, that glass containers shall be allowed in a licensee's outdoor sit-down dining areas that are situated on the licensee's property or on a sidewalk or other right-of-way where the licensee has a right-of-way use agreement with the City of Guntersville. 
(5)  No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed sixteen (16) fluid ounces in size. 
(6)  No person shall possess on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, parking lots or outdoor public areas or any other public area located within the art and entertainment district any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds sixteen (16) fluid ounces in size. 
(7)  No person shall possess on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, parking lots or outdoor public areas or any other area located within the art and entertainment district any open alcoholic beverage which was not purchased from an on-premise retail alcohol beverage licensee lawfully doing business within the art and entertainment district who has met all requirements of the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board and the city to be designated as an entertainment district licensee. 
(8)  The city shall have the right to extend or reduce the dates and the hours during which a patron, guest or member of a licensee may exit the licensed premises, which extension or reduction shall be determined by resolution for a specific event or date. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 2, 11-4-13; Ord. No. 1082, § 1, 2-6-17)  
Sec. 3-53. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in a motor vehicle prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages while in the confines of a motor vehicle while the motor vehicle is located upon any public street, parking lot or other place to which the public has or is permitted to have access within an art and entertainment district. 
(1)  Exceptions . 
a.  A passenger in a motor vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid license for the operation of a vehicle for hire; 
b.  A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid operator's license. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 3, 11-4-13)  
Sec. 3-54. - Alcoholic beverages purchased outside art and entertainment district not allowed in open containers in district. 
No alcoholic beverages purchased at any location other than a licensee in the art and entertainment district who has met the requirements of the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board and the city which allows a person to exit the licensed premises with an open container of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open containers in the art and entertainment district. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 4, 11-4-13)  
Sec. 3-55. - Drinking in public places. 
To the extent this article conflicts with prior ordinances of the City of the Guntersville prohibiting drinking in public places, the authority allowing conduct as prescribed by this article shall supersede any prior city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 5, 11-4-13)  
Sec. 3-56. - Modification or elimination of article. 
Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, at any time and from time to time, the art and entertainment districts established by this article may be enlarged, reduced, modified or eliminated, in whole or part, and the regulations set forth in this article are subject to amendment or elimination at any time and from time to time. No vested rights shall be acquired by or be conferred upon any person or business entity as a result of the establishment of an art and entertainment district or permitting under this section or by the State of Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 6, 11-4-13)  
Sec. 3-57. - Possession and consumption of alcohol in excluded places. 
The consumption and possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed in any public building, facility, garage or parking lot within an art and entertainment district that is posted with signage at each entrance or in conspicuous places that no alcoholic beverages are allowed on the premises. No open containers shall be allowed on property privately owned or controlled that is posted with signage at each entrance or in conspicuous places that no alcoholic beverages are allowed on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 7, 11-4-13)  
Sec. 3-58. - Permitting. 
(a)  Qualifications . In order to qualify for an art and entertainment district permit, an applicant shall meet each of the following: 
(1)  The applicant shall be a city licensee authorized to do business within the designated arts and entertainment district and authorized by the city to sell alcoholic beverages at retail for on-premises consumption; and 
(2)  No adverse criminal, quasi-criminal or administrative action shall be pending or shall have been taken place in the immediately preceding twelve-month period against the city license or its owner related to the retail license or the operation of the city licensed premises. 
(b)  Application process; permit duration. A city licensee that meets the qualification of subsection (a) above may apply with the city clerk's office to become an art and entertainment district permittee by filling out a form provided by the city which shall include a copy of the commercially printed name and/or logo to be used on the cups that the licensee shall provide for off premise consumption. The city clerk may deny a permit if the applicant does not meet the qualifications stated in subsection (a) above. The applicant may appeal the denial of the application for a permit to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the denial. A permit shall be valid for a license year at the end of which a renewal application must be made. 
(c)  Action against permit . A permit may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the city clerk if the permittee or applicant for renewal no longer meets the qualifications stated in subsection (a) above. The permittee or applicant for renewal may appeal the adverse decision of the city clerk to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the adverse action. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 8, 11-4-13)  
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 816, adopted October 18, 1999, amended chapter 4 entirety. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 3-5-14, 3-7-13, 11-47-110; cruelty to animals, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS; AUTHORITY; PENALTIES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Animal shall mean any organism of the kingdom Animalia other that a human being; especially a mammal, fish, bird or reptile. 
Animal control center shall mean the place or places designated or used as such by the city for a place of confinement for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Animal control officers shall mean the director and all enforcement officers assigned to the animal control department. 
At large shall mean any animal off the property of its owner or person-in-charge and not carried by such person, or kept in an effective enclosure, or under control by means of a leash, cord, chain, or otherwise. 
Bitten Seized with the teeth or claws, so that the skin of the person or animal seized has been nipped or gripped, or has been wounded or pierced and includes suspected or confirmed contact of saliva with a break or abrasion of the skin or with any mucous membrane, as determined by a licensed physician. 
Cage shall mean an enclosed humane structure that confines animal(s) and restricts access of other animals. 
Caged shall mean confined in a cage which may include a vehicle, in such a way that the free movement of an animal is restricted so that the caged animal is prevented from biting or attacking a person or animal. 
Canine corps dogs shall mean those members of the canine family maintained by governmental agencies for exclusive use in official duties assigned to those agencies. Seeing eye dogs shall be included within the meaning of this definition. 
Cat shall mean any member of the domestic feline family, three (3) months of age or older. 
Cattery shall mean a duly licensed establishment or structure used for harboring more than four (4) cats that are more than six (6) months old. 
Dog shall mean any member of the domestic canine family, three (3) months of age or older. 
Dog presumed to be vicious shall mean any dog that has bitten or attacked another person or animal. 
Exotic shall mean an exotic or wild animal shall be defined as one which would ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or one which would ordinarily be found in a wilderness of this or any other country; or a species of animal not indigenous to the United States or to North America or which causes zoonotic diseases or one which otherwise causes a reasonable person to be fearful of significant destruction of property or of bodily harm, the latter including, but not limited to, raccoons, bobcats, coyotes, wolves, and other such animals. Wild or exotic animals specifically do not include animals of a species customarily used in Alabama as domestic farm animals, fish confined in an aquarium, birds or insects. 
Has been exposed. Seized with the teeth or claws, so that the skin of the person or animal seized has been nipped or gripped, or has been wounded or pierced and includes suspected or confirmed contact of salvia with a break or abrasion of the skin or with an mucous membrane, as determined by a licensed physician. 
Humane. Characterized by tenderness, compassion and sympathy for animals. 
Humane trap or cage shall mean an enclosure in which an animal can be caught or restrained without causing injury, pain or undue suffering to the animal. 
Immunization against rabies means the injection, in a manner approved by the state health officer and the state veterinarian, of antirabies vaccine to species other than those for which reliable immunization data is available shall be a violation of Act Ala 90-530 of the Legislature of Alabama. 
Keep shall mean confine, harbor and allow to remain. 
Kennel shall mean a duly licensed establishment or structure used for harboring, raising, training or boarding more than four (4) dogs that are more than six (6) months old. 
Kitten shall mean any member of the domestic feline family less than three (3) months of age. 
Nuisance animal means an animal that threatens the safety of or damages a member of the general public or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of other's property. 
Owner shall mean any person having a right of property in the animal, or who keeps or harbors the animal, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who permits the animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
Pen shall mean an enclosure for housing and feeding small animals. 
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, company, corporation or other legal entity. When appropriate, these terms shall mean the singular, plural, masculine, feminine, and neuter. 
Person-in-charge shall mean any person in whose charge the animal is being kept, and all the responsible adult members of the household in which an animal is kept or allowed or suffered to remain. 
Prima facie evidence means at first view or sight. 
Public nuisance shall mean any animal, or any condition resulting from an animal, that unreasonably annoys human beings, endangers the life or health of other animals or persons, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than its owner, to enjoyment of life or property. 
Puppy shall mean any member of the domestic canine family less than three (3) months of age. 
Quarantine for rabies observation shall mean confinement under the direct care, custody, control and supervision of a licensed veterinarian chosen by the owner or person-in-charge for a period of ten (10) days subsequent to the date of the exposure, or as otherwise directed by the health officer. 
Rabies officer shall mean a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer appointed by the county board of health and approved by the state health officer and state veterinarian. 
Restraint on premises means an animal is considered to be under restraint if it is confined within the property limits of its owner or person-in-charge. 
Run shall mean enclosed structure that confines animals and restricts access to or from other animals. 
Shelter for outdoor dog shall mean a shelter with a roof, enclosed sides, a doorway and a solid floor that provides protection from the elements. 
Stray animal shall mean any animal running at large, the owner or person-in-charge of which is unknown. 
Vicious animal shall mean any animal that is known to have bitten or attacked a person or other animal without provocation or cause. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-1, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-2. - Office of director of the animal control department established. 
(a)  The office of director of the animal control department is hereby established. The director of the animal control department shall be an officer of the city and shall have the responsibility for the day-to-day supervision of the animal control division of the department of public services. The director of the animal control department shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council as provided by law. The director of the animal control department shall hold office for the term of the mayor making the appointment . The director of the animal control department shall be under the direct supervision and control of the director of the police department. Generally, the director of the animal control department shall be available to council members to respond to requests for information or questions related to matters under the general control of the director of the animal control department which are pertinent to the performance of the council members' duties. 
(b)  Any provisions of this chapter referring to the director shall also mean and include any authorized employee acting in his stead and under his supervision. 
(c)  All law enforcement officers assigned to the Guntersville Police Department shall hereinafter assist the animal control director and officers in the enforcement in any provisions in this ordinance. Any provisions of this chapter referring to the director or animal control officers shall also mean and include any authorized law enforcement officer acting or assisting in his stead and under his supervision. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and willfully to oppose or resist the Director, any Assistant Director, or Animal Control Officer, in executing or discharging any regular duty, or in any way to interfere with, hinder, or prevent any such officer from discharging his duty. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-2, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-3. - Disposition of fees. 
All monies collected, as provided for in this chapter, shall be turned over and delivered forthwith to the city clerk-treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-3, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-4. - Citations and warrants. 
(1)  Citations 
(a)  When any animal is found by the director or by an animal control officer to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, and the person or persons responsible become known to the director or to an animal control officer, he may issue a citation to the owner or person-in-charge for said violation directing him to appear in the municipal court at a time and a date stated therein to answer to charges of violations of this chapter, and said charges shall be stated in said citation. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to appear in the municipal court at the time and place stated in a citation issued by the director or an animal control officer. 
(2)  Warrants 
(b)  Violations of any provisions of any chapter of this ordinance requiring affidavit made before, and warrant issued by a municipal judge or magistrate of the city shall be serviced by a duly sworn officer of the Guntersville Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 813, § 5-4, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-5. - Minimum penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in the general penalty provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City, provided, however, that when any person is found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter for which a fine is provided and imposed, in addition to such other punishment as may be provided by the court, the minimum fines shall apply as follows: 
ANIMAL FINE SCHEDULE 
VIOLATION 
CODE 	OFFENSE 	1st 
OFFENSE 	2nd 
OFFENSE 	3rd 
OFFENSE 
199 	Abandonment of animals 	$50.00 	$100.00 	$200.00 
200 	Allowing an animal to 
be at large 	$20.00 	$25.00 	$50.00 
201 	Failure to register 
obtain license/permit 
for animal 	$15.00 	$25.00 	$50.00 
202 	Failure to confine a 
female dog or cat in 
estrus (season/heat) 	$25.00 	$50.00 	$100.00 
203 	Failure to attach 
current license tag 
to animal 	$15.00 	$25.00 	$50.00 
204 	Failure to attach 
current rabies tag 
to animal 	$15.00 	$25.00 	$50.00 
205 	Containment in pen 
less than minimum area 
improper distance from 
occupied dwelling 	$15.00 	$25.00 	$50.00 
206 	Harboring vicious or 
dangerous animals 	$50.00 	$100.00 	$200.00 
207 	Cruelty to animals 	$200.00 	$500.00 	court only 
208 	Maintaining a 
nuisance animal 	$25.00 	$50.00 	$100.00 
209 	Allowing an animal known 
or presumed to be vicious to be at large 	$200.00 	$500.00 	court only 
210 	Failure to obtain rabies vaccination 	$20.00 	$25.00 	$50.00 
211 	Misuse of animal trap 	$50.00 	$100.00 	$200.00 
212 	Failure to remove garbage 
scattered by animals 	$25.00 	$50.00 	$100.00 
213 	Failure to remove animal feces 	$25.00 	$50.00 	$100.00 
214 	Failure to make reasonable 
restitution for property 
damaged by animals 	$25.00 	$50.00 	$100.00 
 
The fines listed above are in addition to all applicable court cost. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-5, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-6. - Habitual offender. 
Any owner or person-in-charge who repeatedly and habitually allows, suffers or permits any animal to unlawfully violate any provision of this article shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to any current charges or fines. Proof of three (3) violations by the same owner or person-in-charge within a twelve (12) month period shall be prima facie evidence that said owner or person-in-charge is an habitual offender, and the burden of proof shall be upon said owner or person-in charge to prove otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-6, 10-18-99)  
Secs. 4-7—4-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS, CATS, AND OTHER ANIMALS IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-11. - Cruelty to animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful if a person: 
(a)  Fails to provide adequate food and water for any animal; or 
(b)  Overworks any animal causing physical pain or suffering; or 
(c)  Beats, tortures, injures, torments, poisons, deprives of necessary sustenance or mutilates any animal, causing physical pain, suffering, or death; or 
(d)  Fails to provide medical treatment for any sick, diseased or injured animal; or 
(e)  Keeps any animal under unsanitary or inhumane conditions which are detrimental to the animal's health and general welfare, or fails to maintain the animal in a condition of good order or cleanliness which increases the probability of transmission of disease; or 
(f)  Teases, molests, baits or harasses any animal; or 
(g)  Sets any rabbit, raccoon, fox or other such animal loose for the purpose of chasing or hunting the animal or conducting a race using such animal; or 
(h)  Promotes, permits, stages, holds, manages, conducts, carries on, or attends any game, exhibition, contest, fight or combat involving one or more animals or involving animals and humans; or 
(i)  Fails to provide adequate shelter for an animal wherein the animal can be protected from the extremes of weather (heat, cold, rain, wind, sun, etc.), provided such person is the owner or person-in-charge of such animal; or 
(j)  Transports or carries any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle or protected by a cab or container, cage, cross-teter, or other devise to prevent the animal from falling out of, or being thrown from vehicle; or 
(k)  Places or confines an animal or allows an animal to be placed or confined in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such a period of time as to endanger the health or welfare of the animal because of temperature, lack of food or water, or such other conditions as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death; or 
(l)  Restrains an animal with a leash or humane restraining device that is less than 8 feet long, unless walking or training such animal; 
(m)  Any person who unlawfully or maliciously kills, disables, disfigures or injures any animal, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Any owner or person-in-charge violating this section shall be guilty of cruelty to animals. Provided, however, that no prosecution shall be commenced and no arrest made pursuant to this section, except upon affidavit made before, and warrant issued by a municipal judge or magistrate of the city. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-11, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-12. - Abandoning animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any animal into the city and subsequently abandon or set loose said animal with the intent of avoiding the responsibility for its custody and care. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to transport any animal out of the city limits and subsequently abandon or set loose said animal with intent of avoiding the responsibility for its custody and care. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-12, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-13. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain an animal in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. By way of example and not of limitation, the following acts or actions by an owner or person-in-charge of an animal are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and are therefore unlawful: 
(1)  Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property of anyone other than its owner, including but not limited to, getting into or turning over garbage containers, or damaging gardens, flowers and vegetables, or defecating upon the property of another. 
(2)  Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, attacks, or barks at pedestrians, joggers, bicycles or other vehicles, or animals being walked on leash. 
(b)  Any owner or person-in-charge violating this section shall be guilty of public nuisance animals. Provided, however, that no prosecution shall be commenced and no arrest made pursuant to this section, except upon affidavit made before, and warrant issued by a municipal judge or magistrate of the City. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-13, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-14. - Noisy animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to keep on a residential lot or premises within the city any animal or group of animals, known to said person, to habitually, continuously or intermittently to make or emit sounds or noises of such volume and nature as unreasonably to interfere with or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of a person or ordinary sensibilities within the neighborhood in the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to keep on any tract, lot or premises within the City any animal or group of animals, whether the same is housed in a cattery, kennel, building or other structure(s), under such circumstances that the sounds or noises emitted by said animals are of such volume and nature as unreasonable to interfere with or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in the reasonable use and enjoyment of any adjacent property used for residential purposes. 
Any owner or person-in-charge violating this section shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. Provided, however, that no prosecution shall be commenced and no arrest make pursuant to this section, except upon affidavit made before, and warrant issued by a municipal judge or magistrate of the City. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-14, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-15. - Odor from animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to keep on a residential lot or premises within the City any animal or group of animals, known to said person, to habitually, continuously or intermittently to create offensive odors so as to interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property or neighboring premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to keep on any tract, lot or premises within the City any animal or group of animals, whether the same is housed in a cattery, pen, kennel, building or other structure(s), under such circumstances that the odor from same interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property or neighboring premises. 
Any owner or person-in-charge violating this section shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. Provided, however, that no prosecution shall be commenced and no arrest make pursuant to this section, except upon affidavit make before, and warrant issued by a municipal judge or magistrate of the city. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-15, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-16. - Sanitation of premises in which animals are kept. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person-in-charge to keep or maintain a yard, run, pen or any enclosure in which animals are kept in such an unsanitary condition that the lives, or health of the public generally, of the owner, person-in-charge, his family or the animals contained shall be endangered. This condition will be deemed to exist when the yard, pen or enclosure shows evidence of not being cleaned weekly. The presence in or about such yard, pen, or enclosure of flies, the live larvae of flies, roaches, rats or other vermin or conditions that permit or favor the growth, existence or development of such shall be prima facie evidence of failure to comply with this section. All debris and residue shall be removed weekly and disposed of in a proper and sanitary manner. 
(b)  Any owner or person-in-charge of a pen or enclosure wherein animals are kept shall be required to contain and treat all stormwater runoff from such pen or enclosure so as to meet the pollutant limitations included in the City of Guntersville National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater permit issued by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management. A retention pond shall be required at such places if containment and treatment of stormwater runoff without a retention pond will result in stormwater discharge that is not within effluent discharge limitations as provided in the city's NPDES permit. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person-in-charge to keep any animal in the city in any pen any part of which is within twenty (20) feet of a dwelling occupied by a person other than the owner or person-in-charge of said animal. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to enclosures in which animals kept in publicly owned facilities, not otherwise creating any nuisance and kept under the sanitary conditions of this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal in any pen in the city, unless such pen has a minimum area of fifty (50) square feet for one animal and an additional twenty (20) square feet for each additional animal kept, to every portion of which each an every animal shall have free and unrestricted access. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to enclosures in which animals kept in publicly owned facilities, not otherwise creating any nuisance and kept under the sanitary conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-16, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-17. - Duty to restrain dogs and cats. 
(a)  Dogs . It shall be the duty of every owner or person in charge of a dog to keep said animal on a leash at all times when said animal is present in a public place, including, but not limited to all city parks, with the exception of any specified dog park established by the City of Guntersville and designated as same. Any person who violates any provision herein shall be subject to a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day occurring. 
(b)  Cats. It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person having custody or control of any cat within the city to allow such cat to be a nuisance, cause destruction or damage to the property of another, or to run at large. Provided, however, that no prosecution shall be commenced and no arrest made pursuant to this section except upon affidavit made before and warrant issued by a judge or magistrate of municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-17, 10-18-99; Ord. No. 1054, § 1, 7-21-14)  
Sec. 4-18. - Humane traps. 
(a)  The director or any animal control officer is hereby authorized, in order to apprehend animals in violation of this chapter, which are otherwise difficult to apprehend, to use traps humanely designed to capture said animals by placing the same upon any private property or public property of any person granting permission therefore. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the director or an animal control officer to check such traps daily and remove captured animals therefrom to an animal control center where they shall be disposed of as otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to molest or tamper with any such trap, or to remove any animal captured in any such trap, or to interfere with the director or animal control officer insetting or servicing any such trap. 
(b)  Any owner or person-in-charge of any premises within the city may set an approved humane trap on such premises for the purpose of trapping and removing any animals, except songbirds, which have entered the premises. The owner or person-in-charge must notify the director or an animal control officer prior to setting the trap. Use of any trap pursuant to this section shall be coordinated with the director or an animal control officer to make sure such trapping is conducted at times consistent with the operating hours of an animal control department, it being the intent of this section that no captured animal remain trapped for more than twelve (12) hours. It shall be the duty of the director or animal control officer to check such traps daily and remove captured animals therefrom to the animal control center where they shall be disposed of as otherwise provided herein. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any owner or person-in-charge of any premises to do any of the following: 
(1)  Use any trap to capture or remove songbirds; 
(2)  Use any trap on any premises not his own or not under his charge; 
(3)  Fail to inspect any trap at least every twelve (12) hours; 
(4)  Fail to deliver any animal captured therein to the city animal control department or to the animal's owner, if known, within twelve (12) hours of its entrapment; and if animal's owner is unknown fail to notify the city animal control department within twelve (12) hours of its entrapment; 
(5)  Fail to exercise reasonable care and diligence to avoid injury to the trapped animal; 
(6)  Use, or permit to be used, any leg hold trap or snare. 
Before any person shall be permitted to obtain a humane trap from the Animal Control Department for use on his own premises or over which he is in charge, such person shall sign an agreement that he has been advised that the hereinabove enumerated acts or failures to act constitute a violation of this ordinance. Said agreement shall contain a statement that the owner or person-in-charge of the trap shall hold the City of Guntersville and all employees harmless for any damages or actions that may result from said entrapment. 
(c)  Any owner or person-in-charge of any dog or cat captured in a humane trap that is off the premises of the owner or person-in-charge thereof shall be prima facie presumed to have allowed, suffered or permitted such animal to be or run at large. If, at any time, a dog or cat is captured by use of such trap, and the owner or person-in-charge is known or becomes known to the director or an animal control officer, such owner or person-in-charge shall be given a citation to appear in the municipal court as provided in section 4-5 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-18, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-19. - Chaining of dogs or cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tie or chain an animal in a manner that presents a hazard to themselves, the animal or to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-19, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-20. - Duty of owner to remove overturned or scattered garbage. 
It shall be the duty and unlawful for the owner or person-in-charge of any dog or cat which has been allowed or suffered by said person to run at large, to fail to pick up and remove to the landfill, or to a secure authorized container, any garbage or refuse which said animal has caused to be overturned, spilled or scattered upon any residential lot occupied or unoccupied for human habitation, or upon any right-of-way adjacent thereto, upon demand from the owner or occupant thereof, or upon demand of the director or any animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-20, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-21. - Duty of owner for removal of feces. 
It shall be the duty and unlawful for the owner or person-in-charge of any dog or any cat to fail to remove and dispose of any feces deposited by said animal upon the grounds of any public park or public place; upon any residential lot of another occupied for human habitation, or upon any right-of-way adjacent thereto, and will be done on demand by the owner or occupant thereof or the director or any animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-21, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-22. - Duty of owner to make restitution. 
It shall be the duty and unlawful for any owner or person-in-charge of any dog or any cat to fail to make reasonable restitution for damages to private or public property caused by said animal. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-22, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-23. - Companion dog accompanying disabled person (blind, deaf, etc). 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent or employee of any place of public accommodation, amusement or recreation, to refuse to permit a companion dog to accompany a disabled person entering such place or making use of the accommodations available when such person is being accompanied by a companion dog; provided, that such companion dog is wearing a harness; and provided further, that such disabled person shall present for inspection credentials issued by an accredited school for training companion animals. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-23, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-24. - Transporting animals into city for purpose of impounding. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or bring, or attempt to drive or bring, any animal into the City for the purpose of having the same impounded. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-24, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-25. - Kennels and catteries. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning more than the number of specified cats or dogs to fail to purchase a kennel or cattery license as outlined under provisions of ordinance number 472. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-25, 10-18-99)  
Secs. 4-26—4-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE REQUIRED 
 
Sec. 4-31. - License required for dogs and cats over three (3) months of age. 
The owner or person-in-charge of every dog and cat in the city more than three (3) months of age shall annually register the same as to sex, breed, description, name and address of the owner or person-in-charge, and name of the dog or cat if any. At the time of such registration, such owner or person-in-charge shall, upon providing proof of a valid rabies vaccination, obtain a license for such a dog or cat and shall pay a license tax or fee as follows: 
SPAYED OR NEUTERED 	$2.50 CATS 	$5.00 DOGS 
UNSPAYED OR UNNEUTERED 	$5.00 CATS 	$10.00 DOGS 
 
Provided, however, that when a license is issued for a dog or cat too young to be subjected to alteration because it is less that six (6) months old at the time said license is issued, and said dog or cat is altered subsequent to the beginning of the next license year, upon proof of said alteration the director may issue said license at no charge for the following license-year period only. 
Upon the written recommendation of a licensed veterinarian, a waiver may be granted to the spay or neuter requirement when it is determined that age or health reasons may be reason for exemption. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-31, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-32. - Issuance of license. 
At the time of such registration, such owner or person-in-charge shall obtain a license for such dog or cat issued by the Director or his agent and shall be issued a metal tag or decal suitable for affixing to the license tag as evidence of such license, effective for one (1) year from the date of issue. The license must be renewed each year on or before the anniversary date of issue. Each person renewing a license more that thirty (30) days after the anniversary date shall be charged a $5.00 late fee. No valid license tag of valid decal shall be issued for any dog or cat until such dog or cat has been inoculated against rabies in accordance with state law. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats whose owners are nonresidents, temporarily within the City for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
The owner or person-in-charge shall, at all times, keep the tag affixed to said dog or cat. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person-in-charge to fail to comply fully with all requirements of this section by failing to obtain a license or otherwise. It shall also be unlawful for any person, except the owner or person-in-charge, or his agent, except for purposes of grooming or bathing, to remove a tag from a dog or cat tagged under the provisions of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to place an unissued tag upon any dog or cat, to procure a tag from the city or its agent by fraud or misrepresentation, or to disfigure or alter the words or figures upon a tag. 
The mayor, upon recommendation of the director and of the city clerk-treasurer, may authorize any licensed veterinarian to accept applications for issuance of, on behalf of the city, the license herein required. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-32, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-33. - Harboring dogs or cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep custody or take care of more than four (4) dogs or four (4) cats, six (6) months or older who are frequently outside the residence and on the premises. Provided, however, that any owner of more than four (4) cats or four (4) dogs licensed by the city at the time of the effective date of this ordinance, which cats or dogs are frequently outside the residence and on the premises, shall be allowed to keep such cats or dogs, so long as properly licensed by the city, until the cats or dogs are no longer living, or until ownership of such cats or dogs is transferred to a person residing at another premises who is in compliance with this article. The city shall not license additional cats or dogs for such owner until the number of licensed cats or dogs which are frequently outside the residence and on the premises is less than four (4). Licensed kennels and catteries shall be exempt from these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-33, 10-18-99)  
ARTICLE IV. - CONFINEMENT AND ADOPTION 
 
Sec. 4-34. - Confinement of dogs or cats running at large; confinement of dogs or cats turned in by owner or person-in-charge; disposition of dogs or cats confined. 
(a)  Any licensed or tagged dog or cat found running at large within the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be seized by the director or an animal control officer and confined at an animal control center and cared for in a humane manner for a period of not less than three (3) days; provided, however, that the director may dispose of any dog or cat so confined, failing to have a name plate, license or current rabies tag affixed thereto in accordance with section 4-31 after only three (3) days confinement. 
(b)  Immediately upon confinement of a licensed or tagged dog or cat the director shall make reasonable effort to ascertain the identity of and notify the owner or person-in-charge of such dog or cat of its confinement and of the conditions under which possession of such animal may be regained. 
(c)  If not claimed by the owner or person-in-charge within the required period, the city may transfer ownership of any dog or cat held at a City Animal Control Center after the expiration of the legal detention period, to any animal agency approved by resolution of city council. An approved animal agency, upon obtaining possession of each such dog or cat, shall agree not to release said animal to any person other than the owner or person-in-charge until the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  Dogs and cats three (3) months of age or older have received a rabies inoculation; 
(2)  Male dogs and male cats one (1) year of age or older have been neutered; 
(3)  Female dogs and female cats six (6) months of age or older have been spayed; 
(4)  Male dogs and male cats less than one (1) year of age and female dogs and female cats less than six (6) months of age shall be adopted with the provision in the certificate of adoption requiring neutering or spaying at the proper age with the provision being accepted and signed by the adopter. 
(d)  The city shall not transfer ownership under paragraph (c) of any dog or cat known to have bitten a person or animal without justifiable provocation. 
(e)  The city shall not transfer ownership under paragraph (c) of any dog or cat that is maimed or diseased and, in the opinion of the director, not suitable for adoption. 
(f)  If the owner of an injured animal is unknown and the animal has been hospitalized by a licensed veterinarian for a period of three (3) days, said animal may be released to a veterinarian upon his/her request. 
(g)  Any dog or cat turned in by the owner or person-in-charge shall be available for immediate adoption in accordance with section 4-35, or for transfer in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-34, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-35. - Redemption and adoption of dogs and cats. 
(a)  The owner or person-in-charge, entitled to possession of any dog or cat confined under the provisions of this chapter, may recover possession of such dog or cat upon payment of the charges set forth in the following section to an animal control center. 
If the owner or person-in-charge entitled to possession of any dog or cat so confined is unable to produce a certificate or satisfactory evidence of inoculation for rabies and of proper licensing of said dog or cat before the director shall release the dog or cat, fees must be paid for the inoculation and city license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to secure any dog or cat from the animal control center without authority to do so. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of an animal control center to redeem any dog or cat or become directly or indirectly interested in the redemption of any dog or cat not owned by such employee of an animal control center prior to its impoundment. 
(d)  Prior to the adoption of an animal from an Animal Control Center, the adoption application must be completed. Based on the information provided on the application, the Director or his representative has the right to deny the request to adopt an animal if he feels that the person is unable to provide a suitable home to care for the animal properly and prevent it from being a nuisance. 
(e)  Upon approval to adopt an animal from an Animal Control Center, the adoption agreement must be signed. Failure to agree to the terms shall be grounds for disqualification. 
(f)  Upon the adoption of any animal from an animal control center, the adopter shall deposit the amount of money required for a rabies vaccination, a city license, and a deposit for sterilization (spaying or neutering), if applicable as established by the director. 
(g)  Animals must be sterilized in accordance with the adoption agreement. Failure to do so will void the adoption agreement and the animal will be apprehended. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-35, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-36. - Charges for confinement for dogs and cats. 
(a)  The city shall charge and collect fees from owners who redeem their animals. The Mayor and City Council shall establish a fee schedule for an animal control center for the following categories: 
(1)  Impounding: dog or cat 
(2)  Boarding: dog and cat per day 
(3)  Adoption: dog or cat 
(4)  Special Fees: pickup, replacement tags, dead animal pickup, disposal, etc. 
(b)  The fee schedule may be reviewed and any recommended changes shall be made by Mayor and City Council. 
(c)  Animals may not be adopted by original owners or their immediate family members so as to avoid paying a violation fine or redemption fee. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-36, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-37. - When disposal of dogs or cats may take place. 
(a)  After a dog or cat has been confined for the period of time provided by section 4-34 of this article, and if the owner or person-in-charge entitled to possession fails to make application for the release of such dog or cat, as herein provided, or fails to pay the charges as herein provided, or fails to pay for the proper inoculation for rabies, or if such satisfactory evidence as required by section 4-35 was not provided, or if ownership is not transferred by the city in accordance with section 4-34, as provided herein, then such dog or cat is hereby declared a nuisance and a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the city and the manager or authorized animal control officer shall cause such dog or cat humanely to be destroyed as herein provided; however, any puppy or kitten under two (2) weeks old or whose eyes have not opened may be humanely disposed of immediately upon being impounded when found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Any confined dog or cat that is injured or diseased will, as an act of mercy, be humanely destroyed immediately after inspection by a veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-37, 10-18-99)  
Secs. 4-38—4-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RABIES CONTROL 
 
Sec. 4-41. - Rabies vaccination required generally. 
Every owner or person-in-charge of a dog or cat required to be immunized for rabies as defined in this act, shall cause said dog or cat to be immunized by the rabies officer, his authorized representative, or any duly licensed veterinarian, when said animal reaches three months of age and annually thereafter. Evidence of such immunization shall consist of a printed certificate furnished in triplicate by the Alabama Department of Public Health, upon which shall be legibly inscribed: a description of the dog or cat; its age, color, sex, breed, and tattoo identification, if any; the name and address of the owner; the lot number and type of vaccine used (modified live virus, inactivated virus); the name of the manufacturer and amount of vaccine injected; and a serially numbered tag bearing the same number and year as that of the certificate. 
The certificate shall be dated and signed by the person authorized to administer the vaccine. Certificates not in compliance with the provisions of this section, or certificates issued by those persons unauthorized to administer rabies vaccine, shall not be valid. The original copy of the certificate prescribed herein shall be delivered to the owner of the dog or cat immunized, one copy to the local health department, and one copy is to be retained by the rabies officer. The certificate of immunization shall be valid for a period of one year for all dogs and cats required to be immunized under this article. Immunization certificates may be destroyed three years after date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-41, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-42. - Tag to be issued at time of inoculation. 
The serially numbered tag bearing the same number and year as that of the certificate and issued coincident with the certificate of immunization shall at all times be attached to a collar or harness worn by the dog or cat for which the certificate and tag have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-42, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-43. - Lost tag; duplicate certificate. 
In the event a tag is lost when the same has been legally issued, every replacement thereof shall be upon such terms as may be agreed upon with the rabies officer or veterinarian by whom the animal has been immunized. In such instance, a new certificate marked "duplicate" may be issued setting forth the number of the new tag and the tag and the certificate issued and distributed according to section 4-41 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-43, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-44. - Attaching rabies tag to collar/harness of dogs and cats. 
The owner or person-in-charge of any dog or cat found not wearing the evidence of current immunization as provided herein or for which no certificate of current immunization can be produced, and which is apprehended by an animal control officer or other person charged with the enforcement of this act, shall forthwith be subject to a penalty to be imposed by this chapter under section 4-5. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-44, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-45. - Period of vaccination. 
The vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-45, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-46. - Authority of health officer. 
The health officer or his authorized agent shall have the authority to quarantine or require confinement of any or all animals for such period of time and in such manner as he may determine whenever he considers such quarantine or confinement necessary for the control of rabies. The health officer or his authorized agent shall have the right at any time to move or cause to be moved to the Animal Control Center or place designated by him for observation or examination, any animal which is reasonably suspected to be afflicted with rabies, or which has bitten or otherwise injured a human being in such manner as would permit or favor the transmission of the virus of rabies, in the event such animal should be afflicted with rabies, or which has been, or is reasonably suspected of being afflicted with rabies, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or interfere with the health officer or his authorized agent or deputy in the exercise of the authority herein conferred upon him. It shall be the duty of the health officer to destroy, or cause to be destroyed, any animal found to be afflicted with rabies. It shall be the responsible of the owner or person-in-charge, when confined for observation or examination, to pay reasonable charges for impoundment and boarding. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-46, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-47. - Quarantine of animals bitten by suspected animals. 
Those domesticated species, for which antirabies vaccine is recognized and recommended, upon exposure or potential exposure to a known rabid animal, shall be humanely destroyed or slaughtered immediately. Provided, however, the owner may have the option of quarantining said animals based on the recommendations of the Alabama Department of Public Health upon consultation with the U.S. Public Health Service, and further provided said owner shall agree to pay all charges for boarding of said animal. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-47, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-48. - Quarantine following biting of human beings; canine corps/seeing eye dog exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner or person-in-charge of any dog or cat required to be immunized against rabies and by which a human being has been bitten or exposed to notify the health officer or his authorized agent. The health officer or his authorized agent shall cause said dog or cat to be placed in quarantine under the direct supervision of a duly licensed veterinarian, chosen by owner or person-in-charge, for rabies observation for a period of ten (10) days subsequent to the date of the exposure or as otherwise directed by the health officer. The owner or person-in-charge shall be responsible for any boarding charges for said animal. It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge that a human being has been bitten or exposed by a dog or cat to fail to notify the rabies officer or the health officer or his authorized agent. 
(b)  When said dog or cat is unowned, as determined by the rabies officer or the health officer after reasonable investigation, or where the owner of a dog or cat agrees in writing, or when ordered by the health officer, the animal shall be humanely destroyed immediately after exposure, and the head shall be submitted for rabies examination to the state health department laboratory. 
(c)  The period of quarantine for animals other than domesticated dogs and cats which have bitten or exposed a human being shall be determined by the Alabama Department of Public Health upon consultation with the U.S. Public Health Services. Provided, however, for those animal where reliable epidemiologic data are lacking regarding duration of rabies virus secretion from the salivary glands, said animals shall be humanely destroyed and the head submitted for rabies examination to the state health department laboratory. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this article for the owner or person-in-charge of such animal to refuse to comply with the lawful order or the health officer in any particular case. It is unlawful for the owner or person-in-charge to sell, give away, transfer to another location or otherwise dispose of any such animal that is known to have bitten or exposed a human being until it is released from quarantine by the rabies officer, duly licensed veterinarian or by the appropriate health officer. 
(e)  Instructions for the quarantine of the offending animal shall be delivered in person or by telephone to the owner or person-in-charge by the health officer or his authorized agent. If such instructions cannot be delivered in such manner, they shall be mailed by regular mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the owner or person-in-charge of the animal. The affidavit or testimony of the health officer or his authorized agent, who delivers or mails such instructions, shall be prima facie evidence of the receipt of such instructions by the owner or person-in-charge of the animal. Any expenses incurred in the quarantine of the offending animal under this and the preceding section shall be borne by the owner of person-in-charge. 
(f)  The veterinarian under whose care the offending animal has been committed for quarantine shall promptly report the results of his observation of said animal to the attending physician of the human being bitten or exposed and to the appropriate health officer. 
(g)  Canine Corps dogs and Seeing Eye dogs shall be exempt from the quarantine period where such exposure occurs in the line of duty and evidence of proper immunization against rabies is presented, but shall be examined immediately at the end of 10 days by a licensed veterinarian, who shall report the result of his examination to the appropriate health officer as previously authorized. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-48, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-49. - Violations of this article. 
Any person violating or aiding or abetting the violation of any provision of this article, or counterfeiting of any certificate or tag, or making any misrepresentation in regard to any matter prescribed by this article or rule promulgated hereunder or except as otherwise provided, or resisting, obstructing or impeding any authorized officer in enforcing the provisions of this article, or refusing to produce for immunization any animal in his possession for which antirabies vaccine is recognized and recommended, or for failing to report an animal bite, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and for the purpose of enforcing this article, shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-49, 10-18-99)  
Secs. 4-50—4-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DEAD ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Disposal of dead animals unlawful except as provided. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any dead animal except as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-61, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-62. - Disposal generally. 
(a)  The owner of person-in-charge of animals that die or are killed in their possession or custody within twenty-four (24) hours, shall notify the appropriate city official, as set forth in section 4-63 of this article, of such dead animal and request its removal as provided in section 4-64 of this article, or shall cause the remains of such animals to be buried at least two (2) feet below the surface of the ground in accordance with this article. Animals dying from any communicable disease whatsoever shall be reported to the city in accordance with section 4-63. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-62, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 4-63. - Appropriate city official notification. 
(a)  A small dead animal such as a dog or cat shall be reported to the director or an animal control officer. 
(b)  Animals dying from any communicable disease shall be reported to the health department in addition to being reported to the appropriate official for removal. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-65, 10-18-00)  
Sec. 4-64. - Removal by the city. 
When a request is made to the director or an animal control officer for removal of a small dead animal, it shall thereupon be the duty of the official receiving the request to demand of such person his name and address, including street and house number, and a description of the dead animal. Immediately upon receipt of the information demanded, the official receiving the request shall cause the remains of such dead animal to be removed and buried at least two (2) feet below the surface of the ground or to be burned. If the death is due to a communicable disease, the remains shall be burned. However, the director or an animal control officer may require that the requesting party place said small dead animal in a securely fastened plastic bag or similar container and make the same accessible at the curb or at such other place upon the property as he may direct. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-64, 10-18-00)  
Secs. 4-65—4-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - EDUCATIONAL 
 
Sec. 4-71. - Authority to promote. 
(a)  The Mayor of the City of Guntersville or his duly authorized representative is hereby authorized to promote the provisions of this ordinance through educational efforts and programs designed to acquaint the general public as to the requirements, stimulations and penalties of this ordinance. 
(b)  The Mayor is hereby authorized to advertise any provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate certain periods of time wherein owners or persons-in-charge of dogs and cats may qualify for spaying and neutering services for such animals from local veterinarians at discounted rates. The Mayor is further authorized to advertise such events. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-71, 10-18-00)  
Sec. 4-72. - Violations and penalties. 
That the violation, other than provided for under section 4-5 (animal fine schedule) and section 4-50 (rabies), of the provisions, of this chapter and regulations promulgated under the authority of this ordinance by the City of Guntersville, Alabama, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of such misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than One hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 5-72, 10-18-00)  
Secs. 4-73—4-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LIVESTOCK STABLES AND ENCLOSURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 816, adopted Oct. 18, 1999 amended ch. 4 in its entirety, in order keep the alpha-numeric sequence, §§ 40—48 are herein renumbered as §§ 81—89, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 4-81. - Livestock at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has under his control any horse, cow, mule, hog, goat, sheep, or other animal of like kind, or any chicken, turkey or similar domestic fowl, to permit the same to be at large in the streets or upon the premises not his own or under his care or control within the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 1, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 4-82. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to licensed stockyards, holding pens, sale barns, wholesale cattle dealers or slaughter houses. This article shall no application to small domestic type pets usually maintained in the owner's home such as pet birds, noncommercial rabbits, chickens and other type fowl. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 2, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 4-83. - Stable required. 
Every person, firm, association or corporation who shall maintain a horse, mule, cow, hog, goat, sheep, or any other animal of like kind, or any chicken, turkey, or similar domestic fowl within the corporate limits of the city shall provide a stable, shed, or pen for such animal or animals. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 3, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 4-84. - Distance and space requirements. 
(a)  Distance requirements for swine. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, individually or collectively to keep within the city limits of the city any animals of the swine type unless such are kept at all times a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet or more from any residence other than the keeper of such animals, church, school, public building, park, playground or cafe. 
(b)  Distance requirements for horses, mules, cows, sheep, rabbits, monkeys, fowl. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, individually or collectively, to keep within the city limits, any animals of the equine type and animals of the bovine type, any animals of the ovine type and rabbits or animals of the hare family, any monkeys, and fowl, to include chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas, quail, pheasants, or other fowl unless such animals are kept at all times at a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet or more from any residence other than the residence of the keeper of such animals or town, church, school, public building, park, playground or cafe. 
(c)  Space requirements for pastures in residential, commercial and industrial district. It shall be unlawful to keep any of such livestock described above in a residential, commercial, or industrial district as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city unless such pasture shall have a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for one (1) such animal and four thousand (4,000) square feet for each additional animal there kept, to every portion of which such animal shall have free and unrestricted access. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 4, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 4-85. - Sanitation. 
Every stable, shed, pen, or lot where any livestock is kept in the city shall be kept clean and dry and shall have sufficient light to make cleaning practicable, and shall have sufficient ventilation to keep the air of such building pure at all times. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 5, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 4-86. - Food bin; control of feed. 
All such stables, sheds or pens shall have a food bin for the storage of food which shall be of rat-proof construction; all grain, malt, or other animal food, except hay stored or kept in such stable, must be kept in a feed bin. Such feed bin must be kept closed at all times except when momentarily opened to take food therefrom, or when the same is being filled. No feed shall be scattered about outside such bin or in the stable, and all such feed found on the floor or in the stall of such stable shall be removed daily and placed in the manure receptacle. No feed stuff intended for human consumption shall be kept or stored in any stable or any place where animals are kept. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 6, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 4-87. - Manure and litter containers. 
Every such stable, shed, or pen shall have either within or immediately adjoining it an approved fly-proof container or room for receiving and holding animal manure and litter accumulating between times of removal from the premises. The fitness of such container shall be passed upon by an agent of the sanitary department of the city. The bin or container shall be located at a point most remote from any dwelling or other structure owned or occupied by other than the owner of such premises and shall likewise be placed at a place most remote on the premises from any street or avenue. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 7, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 4-88. - Storage and disposition of manure and other waste. 
All accumulations of manure and bedding materials soiled by animal waste in and about such stable, shed, pen or pasture shall be collected at least once each day and immediately deposited in the container above provided. Such collection may be kept stored within the container for a period of not more than two (2) days, after which time the collection may be kept stored within the container for a period of not more than two (2) days, after which time the collection shall be removed from the premises and disposed of in such a manner as to prevent fly breeding therein. In lieu of storage as herein provided, manure and the other soiled material, when collected in accordance with the provisions hereof and being free of live fly larvae or pupae, may be disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours from time of collection, by surface of the ground at some place distant from human habitation so that the collection will be fully exposed to the effects of sunlight, provided, however, that any of such persons may used the manure on the premises for the purpose of enriching their own ground or for any other use to which manure can properly be put when the same is not offensive or unsanitary and further providing that same does not emit any obnoxious odors or smells. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 8, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 4-89. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this article by any person, firm, association or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in jail or at hard labor for a period for not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 9, 9-6-94)  
Secs. 4-90—4-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - DOG PARKS 
 
Sec. 4-101. - Definitions. 
Attendant means a person fourteen (14) years or older who brings a dog to the dog park. Such person is expected to be competent and knowledgeable relative to the behavior of, and have control over, said dog(s) at all times while at or inside the facility. 
Dog park means an enclosed fence facility designated by the City of Guntersville for the purpose of allowing dogs, under the control of their owner or attendant, to exercise and socialize off-leash. 
Owner means any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or harboring one (1) or more dogs. A dog shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for seven (7) consecutive days or more. 
Vicious dog means a dog that: 
(1)  Without justification, attacks a person or domestic animal causing physical injury or death; 
(2)  Has a known history of attacks on people or other domestic animals; or 
(3)  Behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe imposes an unjustified imminent threat of physical injury or death to a person or to a domestic or owned animal. 
Visual control means the attendant can see the dog(s) and is within one hundred (100) feet of the dog(s) at all times. 
Voice control means the attendant is within one hundred (100) feet of the dog(s), is able to control and recall the dog(s) at all times and is not allowing the dog(s) to fight with other dogs. A dog under voice control must immediately come to the attendant when so commanded. 
(Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 2-2-15)  
Sec. 4-102. - Park operations. 
The director of parks and recreation shall have authority to control and maintain the dog park consistent with this article. The dog park will be operated on a daily basis from sunrise to sunset, unless closed for maintenance or severe weather. 
The dog park shall be divided into two (2) areas: 
(1)  For dogs under twenty-five (25) pounds; 
(2)  For dogs twenty-five (25) pounds and over. 
(Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 2-2-15)  
Sec. 4-103. - Responsibilities of dog park users. 
All dogs must be under the direct supervision of an attendant. 
The attendant must ensure that their dog(s) are legally licensed and have documentation that their dog's vaccinations are up to date. Current license, vaccination tags and identification of owner must be displayed on the dog's collar. 
All dogs shall be free of contagious or infectious diseases, be parasite free both externally and internally and have no visible wounds or injuries. 
No more than two (2) dogs per attendant are allowed in the dog park. 
The attendant of the dog(s) must be inside the enclosed dog park and have visual and voice control of their dog(s) at all times. Dogs shall not be left unattended at or inside the facility. 
All dogs must be wearing a collar. Spike, choke and electronic collars are not permitted. 
The attendant of any dog(s) using the facility must have in his hand a leash at all times which must be attached to the dog(s) when outside the facility area. 
The attendant must fill in any holes dug at the facility by their dog(s). 
The attendant must remove their dog(s) when they become engaged in excessive barking or are fighting with other dogs. 
The attendant of dogs using the facility must use a suitable container to promptly remove any feces deposited by their dog(s) and properly dispose of such waste material in designated receptacles. 
The attendant must wear shoes at all times while inside the fenced area of the dog park. 
The dog park gates must be closed securely when entering and exiting the dog park. 
(Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 2-2-15)  
Sec. 4-104. - Children regulations. 
While inside the facility, children under fourteen (14) years of age shall be accompanied by an adult of nineteen (19) years of age or older who is solely responsible for each child's proper behavior and safety. Such children are not permitted to excite or antagonize any dogs using the facility by any means including, but not limited to, shouting, screaming, waving their arms, throwing objects, running at or chasing dogs. 
(Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 2-2-15)  
Sec. 4-105. - Prohibited actions. 
To ensure the safety of the dogs and attendants, the following are not permitted at the dog park: 
(1)  Animals that are not dogs; 
(2)  Dogs under the age of three (3) months; 
(3)  Dogs who have not been spayed or neutered; 
(4)  Female dogs in heat within three hundred (300) feet of the dog park; 
(5)  Dogs deemed to be vicious, or who have a previous history of aggressive behavior toward other animals or humans; 
(6)  The use of bicycles, roller blades/skates, skateboards and similar types of exercise equipment; 
(7)  Motorized vehicles and devices, except for wheelchairs for the disabled; 
(8)  Glass bottles and similar breakable containers; 
(9)  Alcoholic beverages; 
(10)  Smoking; 
(11)  Food of any type, including dog biscuits/treats; and 
(12)  Professional dog trainers may not use the facility in conjunction with the operation of their business. 
(Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 2-2-15)  
Sec. 4-106. - Liability. 
Users of the dog park shall comply with all rules and regulations governing the use of the facility. 
The owner and/or attendant is responsible for and liable for all injuries and damages caused by their dog(s). 
Use of the dog park shall constitute the implied consent of the dog owner and/or attendant to all conditions of this article and shall constitute a waiver of liability to the City of Guntersville. As such, users of the dog park agree and undertake to protect, indemnify, defend and hold the City of Guntersville harmless for any injury or damage caused by or to their dog(s) during any time that said dog(s) is at the dog park. 
(Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 2-2-15)  
Sec. 4-107. - Enforcement. 
A person found to be in violation of this article is subject to removal from the facility and may be prohibited from future use of the dog park. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine for the first offense and two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine for any subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 2-2-15)  
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicle loads, transporting on streets, 16-51 et seq.; no permit to be issued until building number assigned, § 16-2(b); permit to excavate on streets, § 16-4; site plan review, App. A, § 8-1; building permit requirements, App. A, § 13-2 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-43-59, 11-45-8, 11-53-1 et seq.; refusal to permit inspection, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-3; state minimum building standards code, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-9-160 et seq.; state energy conservation building code, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-9-170 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Building official—Office established; function. 
There is hereby established in the city the office of building official, which official is charged with the enforcement of the codes adopted herein. The terms "building official," "administrative officer" and "building inspector" as used in this Code are interchangeable. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 102.1, 8-28-62)  
Sec. 5-2. - Requirements not covered by codes. 
Any requirement not specifically covered by the codes herein adopted, found necessary for the safety, health, and general welfare of the occupants of any building shall be determined by the building official subject to appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 103.3, 8-28-62)  
Sec. 5-3. - Liability. 
Any officer or employee or member of the board of adjustment charged with the enforcement of the codes, acting for the city in the discharge of official duties, shall not thereby render such person's self liable personally, and such person is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of enforcement of such codes shall be defended by the city attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 103.5, 8-28-62)  
Sec. 5-4. - Same—Records. 
The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the office. The records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 102.5, 8-28-62)  
Sec. 5-5. - Same—Reports. 
The building official shall annually submit a report to the council covering the work of the office during the preceding year. The building official shall incorporate in the report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustment during such year. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 103.6, 8-28-62)  
Sec. 5-6. - Same—Conflict of interest. 
No officer or employee connected with the building official's office except one whose only connection is as a member of the board of adjustment, shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, or in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless such person is the owner of such building. No such officer or employee shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with such person's duties or with the interests of the office. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 102.2, 8-28-62)  
Sec. 5-7. - Board of appeals for unsafe building abatement. 
There is hereby designated a building code board of appeals. The mayor is authorized and empowered to appoint five (5) residents of the city to serve on said board. The members shall be qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, property maintenance and related matters. No member shall be an employee of the city. The code official shall be an ex-officio member, but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall serve staggered and overlapping terms. 
(Ord. No. 587, § 2, 1-20-86; Ord. No. 694, § 2, 1-25-93; Ord. No. 844, § 2, 3-18-02; Ord. No. 935, § 2, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 5-8. - Technical codes adopted. 
(1)  The International Building Code - 2006 Edition, including appendix chapters B, C, F, G, I, J, as published by the International Code Council and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said building code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed as follows: 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Guntersville, Alabama 
Section 1612.3. Insert: The City of Guntersville, Alabama 
Section 1612.3. Insert: August 19, 1991 
Section 3410.2. Insert: "Effective Date of this Ordinance" 
(2)  The International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, including appendix chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, M, N, Q, as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the residential code for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one and two family dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed as follows: 
Insert: The City of Guntersville, Alabama 
Section R301.2. (1) Insert: The Following Design Criteria: 
Ground Snow Load - 10 Pounds Per Square Foot 
Wind Speed 90 Miles Per Hour 
Seismic Design Category - C 
Subject To Damage From: 
Weathering - Moderate 
Frost Line Depth - 12 Inches 
Termite - Very Heavy 
Winter Design Temperature - 16 
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required - No 
Flood Hazard - National Flood Insurance Program, 
Firm, Community Panel 
Effective Date August 19, 1991 
Air Freezing Index - 75 
Mean Annual Temperature - 60 
(3)  The International Property Maintenance Code - 2006 Edition, as published By the International Code Council, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the city building official are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed as follows: 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Guntersville, Alabama 
Section 103.1. General. Delete text and add the following: 
"The Building Official of the City shall be responsible for the property maintenance inspection, and shall be known as the Code Official". 
Section 103.5. Insert: "There are no fees" 
Section 106 Violation Penalties is hereby repealed and replaced with the following new section: 
106.4 Violation Penalties. For any and every violation of the provisions of this ordinance, and for each and every day that such violations continues, said violation(s) shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by a fine not to exceed $100.00 per day, or by imprisonment for not more than ten days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Persons charged with such violation(s) may include: 
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, contractor or any other person using the land, building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist. 
Any person, who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in such violation. 
Any person who maintains any land, building or premises in which such violation(s) shall exist. 
Section 302 Exterior Property Areas 
Section 302.1 Sanitation is hereby repealed and replaced with the following new section: 
302.1 Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The exterior area shall include unenclosed porches, carports, patios, accessory storage buildings, and any other area open to view. Clean, safe and sanitary conditions includes exterior property without visible garbage, refuse, junk, debris, salvage materials of any nature, household furniture, trash, unused motor vehicle tires, kitchen and other household appliances and rubbish. 
Section 302.4. Insert: 10 inches 
Section 304.14. Insert: January 1 to December 31 
Section 307 - Rubbish and garbage. 
Subsection 307.2.2 Refrigerators is hereby repealed and replaced with the following new subsection: 
307.2.2 Refrigerators and appliances. Refrigerators and household appliances (water heaters, dishwashers, plumbing fixtures, and etc.) not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on the exterior premises. Before disposal of refrigerators all doors shall be removed. 
Section 308 - Extermination. 
Add subsection 308.6 as follows: 
308.6 Mosquito control. The occupants of any structure shall be responsible to maintain the exterior area of all property and premises to eliminate mosquito-breeding habitat. Any container that could hold water shall be removed from the premises or stored in a manner so that water shall not collect in the container conducive to mosquito breeding. 
Section 602.3. Insert: September 1 to May 31 
Section 602.4 Insert: September 1 to May 31 
(4)  The ICC Electrical Code - Administrative Provisions, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the electrical code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Guntersville, Alabama 
Section 301.1. Delete text and add the following: 
"The Building Official of the City shall be responsible for all electrical inspection and shall be known as the Code Official." 
Section 404.2. Insert: Schedule of permit fees 
1. Residential and Apartments - $5.50 per unit 
2. Commercial and Business: 
Permit fees shall be based on schedule of permit fees as established for building construction-estimated value (Cost of Construction) 
Section 1201.1.1 Adoption. Delete text and add the following new paragraph: 
"Electrical systems and equipment shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, or NFPA 70, 2005, Edition, as applicable, except as follows: 
Amendment No. 1 
All electrical services shall be provided with a grounding electrode as provided in article 250.52A (5) - 8 FT. grounding rod. 
Amendment No. 2 
Article 230 - Services. VI. Service Equipment, subparagraph 230.70 General (A) location: Subparagraph (1) readily accessible location. Replace paragraph as follows: 
"The service disconnecting means for all services shall be installed at a readily accessible location outside of a building or structure nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors. Location inside of a building or structure nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors shall require approval of the code official." 
Amendment No. 3 
Article 300-Wiring Methods. Paragraph 1. General requirements. 3001. Scope (A) add the following! "All structures other than single family residential, duplexes, and multi-family apartments shall be wired in a metallic raceway (IMC, RMC, EMT) with the following exceptions: 
a. Additions, alterations and repairs to electrical systems and equipment shall follow Section 102 as approved by the Code Official. 
b. Schedule 40 PVC Electrical Conduit may be used under concrete slabs but may not penetrate the slab except when turning up for a primary free - standing distribution panel mounted flat on the floor slab. 
c. Schedule 40 PVC electrical conduit may be used from the main disconnect panel to sub feed panels only when run overhead and properly supported as required by the National Electric Code. 
Section 1202 Provisions, 120.2.2 non-metallic - sheathed cable . Delete. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, including appendix chapter A, as published by the International Code Council, with the additions, Insertions, and changes as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Guntersville, Alabama 
Section 101.3. General. Delete text and add the following: 
"The Building Official of the City shall be responsible for the mechanical inspection, and shall be known as the Code Official." 
Section 106.5.2 Insert: The following schedule: 
MECHANICAL PERMIT SCHEDULE 
Houses and Apartments ..... $ 5.00 Per Unit 
Commercial and Business: 
Permit Fees 
For issuing each permit: ..... $10.00 plus the following fees: 
1.  Fee for inspecting heating, ventilation, ductwork, air conditioning and refrigeration systems shall be $10.00 for the first $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, of valuation of the installation plus $2.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
2.  Fee for inspecting repairs, alterations and additions to an existing system shall be $5.00 plus $2.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
Section 106.5.3. Insert: Item 2. 50 percentage, Item 3. Zero percentage 
Section 108.4. Insert: "Misdemeanor," $100.00, and penalties as prescribed by law. 
Section 108.5. Insert: $100.00 in two locations. 
(6)  International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, including appendix chapters B, C, D, E, F, and G as published by the International Code Council, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Guntersville, Alabama 
Section 103.1. General. Delete text and add the following: "The Building Official of the City shall be responsible for the plumbing inspection and shall be known as the Code Official." 
Section 106.6.2. Insert: The following schedule 
PLUMBING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE 
Permit Issuance 
1. For issuing each permit: 
A. Residential and Multi-Family - Each Unit $5.50 per unit 
B. Non Residential - Each issue plus the following: $10.00 
Unit Fee Schedule 
1.  For each plumbing fixture, or trap or set of fixtures on one trap (including water, drainage piping and backflow protection thereof) ..... $ 2.50 
2.  For each building sewer .....   5.00 
3.  Rainwater systems - per drain (inside building) .....   2.00 
4.  For each private sewage disposal system .....  25.00 
5.  For each water heater and/or vent .....   2.50 
6.  For each industrial waste pretreatment interceptor including its trap and vent, excepting kitchen-type grease interceptors functioning as fixture traps .....   5.00 
7.  For installation, alteration or repair of water-piping and/or water-treating equipment, each .....   5.00 
8.  For repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping, each fixture .....   2.50 
9.  For each lawn sprinkler system on any one meter including backflow protection devices therefore .....   5.00 
10.  For atmospheric-type vacuum breakers not included in Item 2: 1 to 5 .....   2.50 
Over 5 each .....   1.00 
11.  For each backflow protective device other than atmospheric-type vacuum breakers: 2 inches (51mm) and smaller .....   2.50 
Over 2 inches (51mm) .....   2.50 
Section 106.6.3. Insert: Item 2.50 percent, Item 3. Zero percent 
Section 108.4. Insert: "Misdemeanor," $100.00, and penalties as prescribed by law 
Section 305.6.1. Insert: 18 inches in two locations 
Section 904.1. Insert: 6 Inches 
(7)  International Fuel Gas Code - 2006 Edition, including appendix chapters A, B, C, and D as published by the International Code Council, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Guntersville, Alabama 
Section 106.5.2. Insert: Schedule as published 
Section 106.5.3. Insert: Zero percent - Two locations 
Section 108.4. Insert: "Subject to penalties as prescribed by law" 
Section 108.5 Insert: $100.00 two locations 
(8)  International Private Sewage Disposal Code - 2006 Edition, including appendix chapters A and B, as published by the International Code Council, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Guntersville, Alabama 
Section 103.1. Delete and add new paragraph: "All enforcements of this code shall be made by the City Building Official." 
Section 104.3. Add the following: "Before any building permit or a permit for any private sewage disposal permit is issued by the Code Official, the application shall be approved by the Marshall County Health Department in accordance with all applicable state regulations." 
Section 106.4.2. Insert: $25.00 per system 
Section 106.4.3. Insert: Zero percent in two locations 
Section 108.4. Insert: "Violations and penalties shall be as specified in Ordinance No. 547" 
Section 108.5. Insert: "$100.00 in two locations" 
Section 405.2.5. Insert: "Dates of observations shall be determined by the Code Official" 
Section 405.2.6. Insert: "Dates of reporting data shall be determined by the Code Official" 
(Ord. No. 406A, 7-26-66; Ord. No. 481, 6-7-76; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 4-1-96; Ord. No. 753, § 1, 1-20-97; Ord. No. 844, § 1, 3-18-02; Ord. No. 935, § 1, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 990, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 844, § 3, adopted March 18, 2002, repealed Ord. No. 587, § 1, adopted Jan. 20, 1986; Ord. No. 694, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 1993; and Ord. No. 791, adopted Aug. 3, 1998. 
Cross reference— Adoption of fire prevention code, § 10-30.  
Sec. 5-9. - Fire limits established. 
The fire limits of the city are hereby established as all areas zoned for business and industrial uses, namely districts BW, O & I, BG-1, BG-1A, BG-2, BG-2A, I-1 and I-2. The fire limits shall be the fire limits already heretofore fixed by ordinance in the city together with any other fire limits or alterations of the present fire limits that may hereafter be made by the city. 
(Ord. No. 344, § 6, 1-17-58)  
Sec. 5-10. - Permit for excavation in streets—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or cause to be dug any ditch into, across, on, over, under or through any public street, sidewalk or other public way within the corporate limits of the city, without first having obtained from the building official a written permit therefor.  
Sec. 5-11. - Same—Money deposit. 
The building official shall not grant any permit for such work unless the applicant shall deposit with the city a sum of money in an amount not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) the amount to be fixed and determined by the building official, with the understanding and agreement that the sum so deposited shall be refunded by the city if and when the applicant has fixed the street in as good condition as it was prior to the disturbance of the soil and surface of the street, all without any expense to the city; and provided further, that if the street is not repaired in such manner, the building official to be the judge, then such sum shall be forfeited to the city as damages.  
Secs. 5-12—5-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN AND APPEARANCE IN COMMERCIAL ZONES 
 
Sec. 5-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Architectural features: The exterior architectural treatment and general arrangement of the portions of an improvement and site as shall be open to external view, including, but not by way of limitation, the kind, color and texture of building materials, types of windows and doors, attached or detached signs, landscaping, screens, parking lots, exterior lighting, walkways, and other fixtures appurtenant to such portions. 
Capital improvement: Any improvement by the city upon property owned by or under the control of the city. 
Improvement: Any building, structure, or other improvement to real property. It shall include, but not by way of limitation, street improvements, street furniture, park developments, private and public schools, commercial and business developments, public utility and governmental buildings and structures, religious institutions, hotels, motels, apartment houses, and other multiple-family dwellings, hospitals, rest homes, and other similar developments, and commercial and noncommercial recreational areas. It shall not include underground wires, pipes, or other similar underground utility installations. 
Regulated improvements: Any improvements upon any property within the city, not owned by or under the control of the city, other than single-family residences and buildings, structures and uses accessory thereto upon land zoned RS-1, RS-2 or RS-3. 
Street furniture: Improvements located in streets or rights-of-way and parking lots or other similar open spaces on a site, including, but not limited to, light standards, utility poles, newspaper stands, bus shelters, planters, traffic signs, traffic signals, benches, guardrails, rockeries, retaining walls, mailboxes, litter containers, and fire hydrants. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 1, 8-6-84)  
Sec. 5-21. - Design commission—Creation. 
There is hereby created a design commission for the city, which shall have the powers, duties and functions as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 2, 8-6-84)  
Sec. 5-22. - Same—Members; qualifications, terms. 
The design commission shall consist of five (5) members, of which at least one (1) shall be selected from the profession of architecture, landscape architecture, urban planning, and civil engineering, and at least four (4) lay members. All four (4) members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the city council. In making appointments to the design commission, the mayor shall seek to appoint persons who are knowledgeable in matters of design and aesthetic judgment by virtue of training, education, and/or experience and who possess qualities of impartiality and broad judgment. Members shall serve without compensation. The initial appointment of members of the design commission shall be for the following respective terms: one (1) for one (1) year; one (1) for two (2) years; and one (1) for three (3) years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. A person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member of the design commission shall participate in discussions or vote on any matters involving any client such member is serving or from any business of which such member is owner, corporation officer or employee. The mayor, with concurrence of a majority of the council, shall have the authority to remove any member without cause. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 3, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 634, 12-5-88)  
Sec. 5-23. - Same—Rules and records. 
The design commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, subject to the approval of the city council. A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. Action by the design commission shall be by majority vote. A tie vote on a motion to approve shall constitute a failure of the motion and a denial of the application. The building inspector or such inspector's duly authorized representative shall serve as executive secretary of the design commission and shall be responsible for records. All meetings of the design commission shall be open to the public. The design commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and such minutes and a copy of its rules shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and open to inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 4, 8-6-84)  
Sec. 5-24. - Same—Assistance and cooperation. 
(a)  The design commission may assist any person, group, or agency who requests design advise on matters not requiring formal commission action. 
(b)  The design commission shall consult and cooperate with the planning commission and other governmental bodies on matters affecting the appearance of the city. The design commission may offer recommendations to the appropriate city agencies and officials on legislation to promote aesthetic and environmental values. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 6, 8-6-84)  
Sec. 5-25. - Improvement approval—Required; scope. 
(a)  No building permit or other required permit shall be issued by the city for any regulated improvement except upon prior approval of the design commission and no significant changes shall be made in or to an architectural feature of any regulated improvement without the prior approval of the design commission. Deviations from a plan approved by the design commission shall be permitted only upon the filing and approval of an amended plan. 
(b)  The design commission may require a bond to the city in a reasonable amount to secure the installation and maintenance of landscaping, screens, parking lots, exterior lighting, walkways and other similar site improvements. 
(c)  When the city council deems it necessary to retain consultants for a proposed capital improvement, the council shall seek recommendations from the design commission as to the selection of consultants to provide design services. 
(d)  Consultants or city officials charged with the design responsibility for a capital improvement shall hold preliminary discussions on the proposed project with the design commission to obtain preliminary recommendations from the design commission as to esthetic, environmental and design principles and objectives, which should be sought in the development of the improvement. In addition, the design commission shall review substantial capital improvements at the completion of the design development phase and construction document phase, or at any time they deem necessary. A capital improvement approved by the city council after review and recommendations by the design commission may be implemented on a phasing basis without further review so long as the improvement is developed in substantial conformity with the reviewed plan. Significant deviations from an approved plan shall be submitted to the design commission for its further review and recommendations. 
(e)  The design commission shall complete its review and make its decision and recommendations within sixty (60) days after a matter is submitted to it, unless an extension is authorized by the city council. Decisions of the design commission shall be based upon the criteria set forth in section 5-27. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 4, 8-6-84)  
Sec. 5-26. - Same—Procedure. 
An applicant seeking design commission approval shall submit to the building inspector a site plan and exterior elevations and such other data as will assist the design commission in evaluating the proposed improvement. Preliminary drawings may be submitted for review and for a preliminary advisory opinion by the design commission. No formal design commission action shall be taken except upon final plans and elevations. Final plans and elevations shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and shall show in detail how they conform with the provisions of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. The building inspector shall refer all applications to the design commission at its next regular meeting. The design commission may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove an application. In no instance shall the design commission's action conflict with the zoning, subdivision, building or other applicable city ordinances or with state or federal requirements. All formal decisions of the design commission shall be reduced to writing and shall include findings of fact and a statement of the reasons deemed controlling to the decision. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 7, 8-6-84)  
Sec. 5-27. - Same—Criteria. 
(a)  Relationship of building to site: 
(1)  The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape, and to provide for adequate planting and pedestrian movement. 
(2)  Parking and service areas shall be located, designed and screened to be obscured from public view. 
(3)  The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and adjoining buildings. 
(b)  Relationship of building and site to adjoining area: 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be made compatible with adjacent buildings of conflicting architectural styles by such means as screens, site breaks, and materials. 
(2)  Harmony in texture, lines, and masses shall be provided in the design of buildings. 
(3)  Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
(4)  Public and quasi-public buildings and structures shall be consistent with the established neighborhood character. 
(c)  Landscape and site treatment: 
(1)  Where existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. 
(2)  Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance. 
(3)  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas and provide shade. 
(4)  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices, wherever possible. 
(5)  Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees or shrubs in parkways or paved areas is encouraged, and shall be approved by the design commission. 
(6)  Screening of service yards and other places, which tend to be unsightly, shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these. Screening shall be effective in winter and summer. 
(7)  In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials such as fences, walls, and pavings of wood, brick, stone, rocks and gravel shall be used. 
(8)  Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be shielded and restrained in design. Excessive brightness, flashing lights, and brilliant colors should be avoided. 
(d)  Building design: 
(1)  Architectural style is not restricted; evaluation of a project shall be based on quality of its design and relationship to surroundings. 
(2)  Buildings shall be of proportionate size to be in harmony with permanent neighborhood development. 
(3)  Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
(4)  Colors shall be harmonious, with bright or brilliant colors used only as accent. 
(5)  Design attention shall be given to mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roofs, ground or buildings, so as to screen them from view. 
(6)  Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories should be harmonious with building design. 
(7)  Monotony of design in single- or multiple-building projects shall be avoided. Variety of detail, form, and siding shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple-building projects, variable siding on individual buildings may be used to prevent monotonous appearance. 
(e)  Signs: 
(1)  Signs shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, materials, color, lettering, location, number, and arrangement shall be harmonious with the building design. 
(2)  The number of signs shall be minimized in order to avoid visual clutter. 
(3)  Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Excessive brightness and brilliant colors shall be avoided. Lighting shall be harmonious with the design. If external spot or floodlighting is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is shielded from view. 
(f)  Miscellaneous structures and street furniture: 
(1)  Miscellaneous structures and street furniture located on private property, public ways and other public property shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be appropriate, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings, and sizes shall be in proportion to nearby buildings and improvements. 
(2)  Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street furniture shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings and signs. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 8, 8-6-84)  
Sec. 5-28. - Pamphlets. 
The design commission may prepare pamphlets for distribution at cost, describing the policies and procedures to be used by architects and builders under this article. Authority to spend city funds must be sought in the usual way. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 9, 8-6-84)  
Sec. 5-29. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any action of the design commission may file a notice of appeal with the city council setting forth the reasons for such appeal. Appeals must be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days from the date of formal action by the design commission. The filing of an appeal shall suspend the issuance of any building or other required permit until the council has taken final action on the appeal. The city council shall take final action within forty-five (45) days of the filing of a notice of appeal. Review by the city council shall be confined to the decision and record of proceedings before the design commission, except that the city council may elect to take additional testimony bearing on the issue of alleged procedural irregularities in the proceedings before the design commission, not shown in the record. The city council shall, upon request, consider oral and written arguments. The city council may affirm the decision of the design commission, reverse the decision of the design commission if it finds that the substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because the findings, conclusions or decisions of the design commission were in violation or in excess of its authority or jurisdiction, made upon unlawful procedure, clearly erroneous in view of the entire record as submitted and the public policy contained in this article, or arbitrary or capricious. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 10, 8-6-84)  
Secs. 5-30—5-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION (NON-COASTAL/RIVERINE COMMUNITIES)[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 951, Arts. 1—9, adopted November 5, 2007, repealed Ord. No. 784, adopted April 6, 1998, from which article III derived and provided for similar provisions to read as herein set out. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-41. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state has in the Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 11, ch. 19, §§ 1—24; ch. 45, §§ 1—11; ch. 52, §§ 1—84, and tit. 41, ch. 9, § 166 authorized local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 1, § A, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-42. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 1, § B, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-43. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 1, § C, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-44. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 1, § D, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-45. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 2, § A, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-46. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated August 19, 1991, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Marshall County are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 2, § B, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-47. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 2, § C, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-48. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 2, § D, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-49. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 2, § E, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-50. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 2, § F, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-51. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 2, § G, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-52. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 2, § H, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-53. - Savings clause. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this article for any reason held to be noncompliant with 44 Code of Federal Regulation 59-78, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 2, § I, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-54. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building official interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 5-46. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 5, 1991. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 5, 1991. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 5, 1991 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 5, 1991. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local flood plain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the article or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Section 1316 means no new flood insurance shall be provided for any property which the administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body, to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances which are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. 
(NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or; 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §44, Sec. 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) and corresponding parts of this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 6, 11-5-07)  
Secs. 5-55—5-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 5-66. - Designation of administrator. 
The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 3, § A, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-67. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the building official (floodplain administrator) on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory lowest floor level, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsections 5-82(2) and 5-84(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage: For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level using appropriate FEMA elevation or flood-proofing certificate immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building official (floodplain administrator) shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 3, § B, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-68. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the building official (floodplain administrator) shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; and, that sites are reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 5-46, then the building official (floodplain administrator) shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of sections 5-81—5-86. 
(4)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 5-67(2). 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structure have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsections 5-82(2) and 5-84(2). 
(6)  When flood proofing is utilized for a structure, the building official (floodplain administrator) shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsections 5-67(1)c., and 5-82(2) or 5-84(2). 
(7)  Notify adjacent communities and the Alabama Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs/Office of Water Resources/NFIP State Coordinator's Office. 
(8)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA and state to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the floodplain administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 3, § C, 11-5-07)  
Secs. 5-69—5-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3: - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 5-81. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 4, § A, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-82. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 5-81(4). 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 5-68(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: (i) individual lots or parcels, (ii) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (iii) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (iv) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  Where no base flood elevation exists, the manufactured home chassis and supporting equipment is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength and is elevated to a maximum of sixty (60) inches [five (5) feet]. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.(Refer to section 5-81.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, fully licensed and ready for highway use if it is licensed, on it's wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions; or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a. and (3)c., above. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 4, § B, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-83. - Floodways. 
Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 5-46 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point; 
(2)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the adopted regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; 
(3)  Require, until a regulatory floodway is designated, that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(4)  Only if subsections (2) or (3) above are satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 5-81—5-86. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 4, § C, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-84. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations (approximate a-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 5-46 where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (approximate A-zones), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with 5-46, then the building official (floodplain administrator) shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 5-81—5-86. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  All development in zone A must meet the requirements of section 5-81 and subsections 5-82(1)—5-82(3). 
(4)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Also, in the absence of a base flood elevation, a manufactured home must also meet the elevation requirements of subsection 5-82(3)a.(ii) in that the structure must be elevated to a maximum of sixty (60) inches [five (5) feet]. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 5-81(4). 
The building official (floodplain administrator) shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 4, § D, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-85. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of section 5-46 designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 5-81(4). 
The building official (administrator) shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level or two (2) feet (if no map elevation is listed), above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 5-67(1)c. and 5-67(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 4, § E, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-86. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 4, § F, 11-5-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 951, Art. 4, § F, adopted November 5, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (1) through (4). In keeping with the style of the Code said provisions have been redesignated as (a) through (c).  
Sec. 5-87. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of adjustment as established by the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by law. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs/Office of Water Resources upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 951, Art. 5, 11-5-07)  
Secs. 5-88—5-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 952, §§ 1—14, adopted November 5, 2007, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article IV, sections 5-121—5-134 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 952 states: "Authority for Ordinance: This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to authority granted in Sections 11-53B-1 through Section 11-53B-16 of the Code of Alabama, 1975, as same has been or may be amended or superseded ("State Law"). The provisions set forth herein, or those set forth in State Law shall apply, whichever are the more stringent." 
 
Sec. 5-121. - Notice from appropriate city official; failure to comply. 
Whenever the appropriate city official as defined herein shall find that any building, structure, part of building or structure, party wall, or foundation situated in the city is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance, the official shall give the person or persons, firm, association, or corporation who is the record owner, notice to remedy the unsafe condition of the building or structure by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address and to the owner at the address of the property. A copy of all notices, orders and other communications required by this article to be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner of an interest in the property, or to the person last assessing the property for state taxes, also shall be given to all mortgages of record by certified mail or registered mail to the address set forth in the mortgage, or if no address for the mortgagee is set forth in the mortgage, to the address determined to be the correct address by the person responsible for the notice or other communication. The term "appropriate city official" shall mean any building official or deputy and any other municipal official or city employee designated by the mayor or other chief executive officer of the municipality as the person to exercise the authority and perform the duties delegated by this article to "appropriate city official." 
The notice shall set forth in detail the basis for the appropriate city official's finding and shall direct the owner to take either of the following actions: 
(1)  In the case where repair is required, accomplish the specified repairs or improvements within forty-five (45) days of the date of the notice or if the same cannot be repaired within that time to provide the appropriate city official with a work plan to accomplish the repairs, which plan shall be submitted within forty-five (45) days of the making of the notice and shall be subject to the city's approval. 
(2)  In the case where the demolition is required, demolish the structure within forty-five (45) days of the notice. 
The notice shall also state that in the event the owner does not comply within the time specified therein, the municipality shall accomplish the repairs or demolition and the cost thereof assessed against the property. 
The mailing of the notice, properly addressed and postage prepaid shall constitute notice as required herein. Notice of the order, or a copy thereof, shall within three (3) days of the date of mailing, also be posted at or within three (3) feet of an entrance to the building or structure, provided that if there is no entrance the notice may be posted at any location upon the building or structure. 
If the owner of any property cited hereunder fails to comply with the notice prescribed, the municipality may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  In the case where repair is required, repair the building at the expense of the municipality and assess the expenses of the repair on the land on which the building stands or to which it is attached. 
(2)  In the case where demolition is required, demolish the building at the expense of the municipality and assess the expenses of the demolition on the land on which the building stands or to which it is attached. The term "assessment" as used in this article shall refer to the cost of repair or demolition as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 1, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-122. - Hearing; appeal. 
Within thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, any person, firm, or corporation having an interest in the building or structure may file a written request for a hearing before the governing body of the city, together with that person's objections to the finding by the city official that the building or structure is unsafe to the extent of becoming a public nuisance. The filing of the request shall hold in abeyance any action on the finding of the city official until the governing body thereon makes determination. 
Upon holding the hearing, which shall be held not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after the request, or in the event no hearing is timely requested, after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, the governing body of the municipality shall determine whether or not the building or structure is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance. 
In the event that it is determined by the governing body that the building or structure is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance, the governing body shall order the building or structure to be repaired or demolished, as the case may be. The repairs or demolition may be accomplished by the municipality be contract for the repairs or demolition. The municipality shall have authority to sell or otherwise dispose of salvaged materials resulting from any demolition hereunder. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the governing body at the hearing may, within ten (10) days thereafter, appeal to the circuit court upon filing with the clerk of the court notice of the appeal bond for security of costs in the form and amount to be approved by the circuit clerk upon filing of the notice of appeal and approval of the bond, the clerk of the court shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the clerk of the city and the appeal shall be docketed in the court, and shall be a preferred case therein. 
The clerk of the city shall, upon receiving the notice, file with the clerk of the court a copy of the findings and determination of the governing body in proceedings and trails shall be held without jury upon the determination of the governing body that the building or structure is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 2, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-123. - Fixing of costs. 
Upon demolition or repair of the building or structure, the appropriate city official shall make a report to the governing body of the cost thereof, and the governing body shall adopt a resolution fixing the costs which it finds were reasonably incurred in the demolition or repair and assessing the same against the property; provided, however, the proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials from the building or structure shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition; and provided further, that any person, firm, or corporation having an interest in the property may be heard at the meeting as to any objection he or she may have to the fixing of such costs or the amounts thereof. The clerk of the municipality shall give notice of the meeting at which the fixing of the costs is to be considered by first-class mail to all entities having an interest in the property whose address and interest is determined from the tax assessor's records on the property or as otherwise known to the clerk. The fixing of the costs by the governing body shall constitute an assessment against the lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land upon which the building or structure was located, and as made and confirmed shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment ("the final assessment"). The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property except liens for taxes, and except for mortgages recorded prior to the creation of the lien for the assessment, and shall continue in force until paid. A certified copy of the resolution fixing the final assessment shall also be recorded in the office of the judge of probate of the county. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 3, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-124. - Assessment of costs. 
The city shall have the power to assess the costs authorized herein against any lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land purchased by the state at any sale for the nonpayment of taxes, and where such an assessment is made against the lot or lots, parcels of land, a subsequent redemption thereof by any person authorized to redeem, or sale thereof by the state, shall not operate or discharge, or in manner affect the lien of the city for the assessment, but any redemption or purchaser at any sale by the state of any lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land upon which an assessment has been levied, whether prior to or subsequent to a sale by the state for the nonpayment of taxes, shall take the same subject to the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 4, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-125. - Payment of costs. 
The city, in ordering any repair or demolition, the cost of which or any part thereof is to be assessed against any property in accordance with this ordinance, may provide that the same shall be paid in cash within thirty (30) days after the final assessment; provided, however, that if the assessed amount is greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000), the property owner may, at his or election, to be expressed by notifying the municipal official charged with the duty of collecting the assessments in writing within thirty (30) days after the final assessment is determined, pay the final assessment in ten (10) equal annual installments, which shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding twelve (12) percent per annum. Interest shall begin to accrue upon the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date on which the final assessment is set by the governing body and the interest shall be due and payable at the time and place the assessment is due and payable. 
Any person who elects to make installment payments may pay the outstanding balance of the final assessment together with all accrued interest thereon at any time during the installment payment schedule. The first installment shall be payable within thirty (30) days after the final assessment is determined, and all installments thereof shall be payable in the city clerk's office. Upon full payment of the final assessments and accrued interest thereon. The municipality shall record a satisfaction of the lien in the office of the judge or probate. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 5, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-126. - Failure to make payment. 
If the property owner fails to pay the assessment lien within thirty (30) days, or having elected to make installment payments, fails to make any installment payment when due, the whole assessment lien shall immediately become due and payable, and the officer designated by the city to collect the assessment shall proceed to sell the property against which the assessment lien is made to the highest bidder for cash, but in no event less than the amount of the lien plus interest thru the date of the default. Prior to the sale, notice shall be given by publication once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the municipality or of general circulation therein, setting forth the date and time of the sale and the purpose for which the same is made, together with a description of the property to be sold. If the officer shall fail to advertise and sell any property on which the payments are past due, any taxpayer of the issuing municipality shall have the right to apply for a writ of mandamus requiring the official to take such action to any court of competent jurisdiction, and the court shall, on proof, issue and enforce the writ. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 6, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-127. - Sale of property upon default. 
(a)  Any property owner, notwithstanding his or her default, may pay the assessment lien with interest and all costs if tendered before a sale of the property. 
(b)  The cost of any notice and sale resulting from a default on paying as assessment shall constitute a charge against the property to be sold and shall be retained out of the proceeds of the sale. 
(c)  The officer making the sale shall execute a deed to the purchaser, which shall convey all rights, title, and interest which the party against whose property the assessment was made had or held in the property at the date of making the assessment or on the date of making the sale. Any surplus arising from the sale shall be paid to the city clerk/treasurer to be kept as a separate fund by the city clerk/treasurer for the owner upon the responsibility of his or her official bond. The municipality may, by its agents, purchase real estate sold as provided under this ordinance and, in the event of the purchase, the deed for the same shall be made to the municipality. 
(d)  No mistake in the notice of sale in the description of the property or in the name of the owner shall vitiate the assessment or the lien and if for any reason, the sale made by the municipality is ineffectual to pass title, it shall operate as an assignment of the lien, and, upon the request of the purchaser, supplementary proceedings of the same general character as required in this article may be had to correct the errors in the proceedings for his or her benefit or the lien so assigned to him or her may be enforced by civil action. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 7, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-128. - Redemption of the property. 
(a)  Any real property heretofore or hereafter sold for the satisfaction of an assessment lien imposed thereon by the city council may be redeemed by the former owner, or his or her assigns, or other persons authorized to redeem property sold for taxes by the state, within two (2) years from the date of the sale by depositing with the officer designated by the city council to collect the assessments the amount of money for which the lands were sold, with interest thereon at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the date of the sale through the date of the payment. 
(b)  In addition to any other requirements set forth in this article, the proposed redemptioner must pay or tender the purchases or his transferee all insurance premiums paid or owed by the purchaser with accrued interest on the payments computed from the date the premiums were paid at twelve (12) percent per annum through the date of payment. 
(c)  In addition to any other requirements set forth in this section, the proposed redemptioner must pay or tender to the purchaser or his transferee the value of all permanent improvements made on the property determined in accordance with this article. As used herein "permanent improvements" shall include, but not be limited to, all repairs, improvements, and equipment attached to the property as fixtures. The proposed redemptioner shall make written demand upon the purchaser of a statement of the value of all permanent improvements made on the property since the assessment sale. In response to written demand made pursuant to this section, the purchaser shall within ten (10) days from the date of the demand, furnish the proposed redemptioner with the amount claimed as the value of the permanent improvements, and within ten (10) days after receipt of the response, the proposed redemptioner either shall accept the value so stated by the purchaser, or disagreeing there with, shall appoint a referee to ascertain the value of the permanent improvements. The proposed redemptioner shall in writing: 
(1)  Notify the purchaser of his or her disagreement as to the value; and 
(2)  Inform the purchaser of the name of the referee appointed by him or her. 
Within ten (10) days after the receipt of notice, the purchaser shall appoint a referee to ascertain the value of the permanent improvements and advise the proposed redemptioner of the name of the appointee. The two (2) referees shall, within ten (10) days after the purchaser has appointed his or her referee, meet and confer upon the award to be made by them. If they cannot agree, the referees shall at once appoint an umpire, and the award by a majority of the body shall be made within ten (10) days after the appointment of the umpire and shall be final between the parties. 
(d)  If the proposed redemptioner fails or refuse to nominate a referee as provided in subsection (c), he or she shall pay the value put upon the improvements by the purchaser. If the purchaser refuses or fails to appoint a referee, as provided in subsection (c), the purchaser shall forfeit his or her claim to compensation for the improvements. The failure of the referees or either of them to act or to appoint an umpire shall not operate to impair or forfeit the right of either the proposed redemptioner or the purchaser in the premises. In the event of failure without fault or the parties to affect an award, the appropriate court shall proceed to ascertain the true value of the permanent improvements and enforce the redemption accordingly. 
(e)  In addition to all other payments provided hereunder, the proposed redemptioner shall also pay interest to the purchaser on the value of all permanent improvements computed from the date the improvements were made at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum through the date of the payment. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 8, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-129. - Extension of redemption. 
The fixed two-year period of redemption allowed by section 5-128 for the redemption of any property heretofore or hereafter sold for the satisfaction of any assessment lien may be may be extended to a date sixty (60) days after the date of the certificate of warning to redeem provided for in section 5-130, but in no event for a longer period than six (6) years from the date of such sale. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 9, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-130. - Certificate of warning to redeem. 
At any time after an assessment sale deed has been recorded in the office of the judge of probate in which the property therein described lies and after expiration of the fixed two-year period of redemption allowed by section 12-128, any person may apply to the judge of probate for the certificate of warning to redeem, which references the recorded volume and page number of the deed to be recorded in the real estate records, in substantially the following form: "I hereby certify that on or prior to the date of this certificate, I mailed a certified copy of the deed here recorded, together with notice that the same is here recorded, and a warning to redeem to each of the one (1) or more persons other than the grantee in said deed, to whom the property therein described was last finally assessed for ad valorem taxation at the address of each such person as shown by said ad valorem tax assessment records. This day of _______ 2___, Judge of Probate, Marshall County, Alabama." 
(Ord. No. 952, § 10, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-131. - Application for entry of certificate. 
At the time of application for entry of the certificate of warning to redeem, the applicant shall deliver to the judge of probate three (3) certified copies of the recorded deed and shall pay the judge of probate a fee of one dollar ($1.00). Copies of the deed need not include any certificate of acknowledgment. The applicant shall also deliver to the judge of probate a certified copy of the ad valorem tax assessment records of the county containing the name of the person or persons other than the grantee in the deed to whom the property described in the deed was last finally assessed for ad valorem taxation, together with the address for each person as shown by the tax assessment records, or an affidavit that there is no one else. The judge of probate shall promptly mail to each person at such address one (1) of the aforesaid certified copies of the deed, together with an attached warning to redeem in substantially for the following form: "Take notice that there is recorded in my office in Deed Book at Page a deed of which the attached is a correct copy. You are warned that unless you, or those claiming under you, take prompt steps to redeem from those claiming under the deed, all rights of redemption may be lost. This day of 2007, Judge of Probate, Marshall County, Alabama." 
Promptly upon or after mailing the notice or notices and certified copy or copies of the deed, it shall be the duty of the judge of probate to record in the real estate records the signed and dated certificate of warning substantially as prescribed by section 5-130. At the expiration of sixty (60) days after the date of the certificate all rights to redeem from the sale shown by the deed shall cease and desist. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 11, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-132. - Redemption effected. 
Redemption may be effected after expiration of the fixed two-year period of redemption allowed or provided by section 5-128 and before the extended period of redemption has expired in the same manner and at the same redemption price as is provided in section 5-128; provided, that if the judge of probate has made the certificate of warning to redeem as provided in section 5-130, said redemption price shall be increased by one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. No. 952, § 12, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-133. - Emergency action. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the city shall have authority to enact, and authorize the appropriate city official to initiate immediate repair or demolition of a building structure when, in the opinion of the official so designated, such emergency action is required due to imminent danger or structural collapse endangering adjoining property, the public right-of-way, or human life or health. The cost of the emergency action shall be fixed by the city council and shall be assessed as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 13, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 5-134. - Effect of resolutions and account reports confirmed before enactment of article. 
All resolutions authorizing abatement or removal of nuisances enacted prior to the passage of this article under the authority of any other act, are hereby given full force and effect, and the city may proceed to have said nuisances removed or abated as provided under said authority. 
All account reports previously confirmed prior to the enactment of this article are hereby given full force and effect, and the city may proceed to collect these special assessments in the same manner as provided by prior ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 14, 11-5-07)  
Chapter 6 - BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Restaurant grease interceptor permit, § 12-67; connection to sewer, § 12-50 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - BUSINESS LICENSE CODE 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Levy of tax. 
Pursuant to the Code of Alabama, in accordance with the Municipal Business License reform act (Act No. 2006-586), the following is hereby declared to be and is adopted as the business license code and schedule of licenses for the city for the year beginning January 1, 2008, and for each subsequent year thereafter. There is hereby levied and assessed a business license fee for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession or other activity in the municipality, or the police jurisdiction, by whatever name called. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 1, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the following meaning as set forth below: 
Business means any commercial or industrial activity or any enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, or livelihood, including the lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, which is engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, within a municipality. 
Business license means an annual license issued by the municipality for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession, or any other activity in the municipality, by whatever name called, which document is required to be conspicuously posted or displayed except to the extent the taxpayer's business license tax or other financial information is listed thereon. 
Business license remittance form means any business license return, renewal reminder notice, or other writing on which the taxpayer calculates the business license tax liability for all or part of the license year and remits the amount so calculated with the form. 
Department or department of revenue means the state department of revenue, as created under Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2-1 et seq. 
Designee means an agent or employee of the municipality authorized to administer or collect, or both the municipality's business license taxes, which may include another taxing jurisdiction, the Department of Revenue, or a "private auditing or collecting firm" as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3. 
Gross receipts means the measure of any and all receipts of a business from whatever source derived, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable laws and constitutional provisions, to be used in calculating the amount due for a business license. Provided, however, that: 
(1)  Gross receipts shall not include any of the following taxes collected by the business on behalf of any taxing jurisdiction or the federal government: All taxes which are imposed on the ultimate consumer, collected by the taxpayer and remitted by or on behalf of the taxpayer to the taxing authority, whether state, local or federal, including utility gross receipts levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 21, art. 3; license taxes levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 21, art. 2; or reimbursements to professional employer organizations of federal, state or local payroll taxes or unemployment insurance contributions; but no other deductions or exclusions from gross receipts shall be allowed except as provided in this division. 
(2)  A different basis for calculating the business license may be used by the municipality with respect to certain categories of taxpayers as prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90(b). 
(3)  For a utility or other entity described in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-129, gross receipts shall be limited to the gross receipts derived from the retail furnishing of utility services within the municipality during the preceding year that are taxed under Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 21, art. 3, except that nothing herein shall affect any existing contract or agreement between a municipality and a utility or other entity. The gross receipts derived from the furnishing of utility services shall not be subject to further business license taxation by the municipality. 
(4)  Gross receipts shall not include dividends or other distributions received by a corporation, or proceeds from borrowing, the sale of a capital asset, the repayment of the principal portion of a loan, the issuance of stock or other equity investments, or capital contributions, or the undistributed earnings of subsidiary entities. 
License form means any business license application form, renewal reminder notice, business license remittance form, or business license return by whatever name called. 
License officer or municipal license officer means the municipal employee charged by the municipality with the primary responsibility of administering the municipality's business license tax division and related matters thereto. 
License year means the calendar year. 
Municipality means any town or city in this state that levies a business license tax from time to time. The term shall also include the town or city's police jurisdiction, where the business license tax is levied in the police jurisdiction. 
Person means any individual, association, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity of any kind, except for any nonprofit corporation formed under the laws of Alabama which is operated to enable municipalities that become members of such nonprofit corporation to finance or refinance capital projects and related undertakings, on a cooperative basis, and whose board of directors or other governing body consists primarily of elected officials of the municipality. 
Taxing jurisdiction means any municipality that levies a business license tax, whether or not a business license tax is levied within its police jurisdiction, or the department of revenue acting as agent on behalf of a municipality pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-180 et seq., as the context requires. 
Taxpayer means any person subject to or liable under this chapter for any business license tax; any person required to file a return with respect to, or pay or remit the business license tax levied under this chapter or to report any information or value to the taxing jurisdiction; or any person required to obtain, or who holds any interest in, any business license issued by the taxing jurisdiction; or any person that may be affected by any act or refusal to act by the taxing jurisdiction under this chapter, or to keep any required by this chapter. 
U.S.C. means the applicable title and section of the United States Code, as amended from time to time. 
Other terms means other capitalized or specialized terms used in this division, and not defined above, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them [as] in the Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3, unless the context therein otherwise specifies. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 2, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-3. - License term; minimums. 
The license term and the minimum amount for a business license are as follows: 
(1)  Full year. Every person who commences business before the first day of July shall be subject to and shall pay the annual license for such business in full. Unless otherwise specified in the enclosed schedules, the minimum annual license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  Half year. Every person who commences business on or after July 1 st , shall be subject to and shall pay one-half (½) the annual license for such business for that calendar year. 
(3)  Issuance fee. For each license issued, there shall be an issue fee collected equal to the state issuance fee and shall be collected in the same manner as the license tax. 
(4)  Annual renewal. Except as provided in subsections (i) or (ii), the business license shall be renewed annually on or before the 31 st day of January each year. 
a.  If the due date for payment of any business license falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized by the municipality from time to time, the due date shall automatically be extended until the next business day. 
b.  Insurance company annual license renewals shall be renewed in accordance with the Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-122 which states that each year, each insurance company shall furnish the municipality a statement in writing duly certified showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding year and shall accompany such statement with the amount of license tax due according to the licensing schedule. Failure to furnish such statement or to pay such sum shall subject the company and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license as provided for in the municipal code. 
c.  On or before December 31 of each year, a renewal reminder shall be mailed to each licensee that purchased a business license during the current year. Said renewal notice shall be mailed via regular U.S. mail to the licensee's last known address of record with the municipality. Licensees are required to furnish the municipality any address changes for their business prior to December 1 st in order for them to receive their notice. 
d.  Business license renewal payments received by the municipality shall be applied to the current renewal only when any and other debts the licensee owes to the municipality are first paid in full. No business license shall be issued if the current renewal payment does not meet said prior obligations and the current renewal. Failure to pay such sums shall subject the licensee and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license provided for in the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 3, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 1033, 11-26-12)  
Sec. 6-4. - License shall be location specific. 
(a)  For each place at which any business is carried on, a separate license shall be paid, and any person desiring to engage in any business for which a license is required shall designate the place at which business is carried on, and the license to be issued shall designate such place, and such license shall authorize the carrying on of such business only at the place designated. 
(b)  Every person dealing in two (2) or more of the articles, or engaging in two (2) or more of the businesses, vocations, occupations or professions scheduled herein, shall take out and pay for a license for each line of business. 
(c)  A taxpayer subject to the license authorized by this division that is engaged in business in other municipalities may account for its gross receipts so that the part of its gross receipts attributable to its branch offices will not be subject to the business license imposed by this division. To establish a bona fide branch office, the taxpayer must demonstrate proof of all following criteria: 
(1)  The taxpayer must demonstrate the continuing existence of an actual facility located outside the police jurisdiction in which its principal business office is located, such as a retail store, outlet, business office, showroom, or warehouse, to which employees and/or independent contractors are assigned or located during regular normal working hours. 
(2)  The taxpayer must maintain books and records, which reasonably indicate a segregation or allocation of the taxpayer's gross receipts to the particular facility or facilities. 
(3)  The taxpayer must provide proof that separate telephone listings, signs, and other indications of its separate activity are in existence. 
(4)  Billing and/or collection activities relating to the business conducted at the branch office or offices are performed by an employee or other representative, of the taxpayer who has such responsibility for the branch office. 
(5)  All business claimed by a branch office or offices must be conducted by and through said office or offices. 
(6)  The taxpayer must supply proof that all applicable business licenses with respect to the branch office or offices have been issued. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting businesses from payment of a license on the basis of a lack of physical location. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 4, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-5. - Restriction on transfer of license. 
No license shall be transferred except with the consent of the council or other governing body of the municipality or of the director of finance or other chief revenue officer or his or her designee, and no license shall be transferred to reflect a physical change of address of the taxpayer within the municipality more than once during a license year and never from one taxpayer to another. Provided that a mere change in the name or ownership of a taxpayer that is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other form of legal entity now or hereafter recognized by the laws of Alabama shall not constitute a transfer for purposes of this chapter, unless: 
(1)  The change requires the taxpayer to obtain a new federal employer identification number or department of revenue taxpayer identification number or; 
(2)  In the discretion of the municipality, the subject license is one for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a municipality from requiring a new business license application and approval for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 5, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-6. - Unlawful to do business without a license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, taxpayer, or agent of a person or taxpayer to engage in businesses or vocations in the municipality for which a license is required without first having procured a license. A violation of this division passed hereunder fixing a license shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and if a willful violation, by imprisonment, not to exceed six (6) months, or both, at the discretion of the court trying the same. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 6, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-7. - License must be posted. 
Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place, where said business, trade or occupation is carried on, and the holder of the license shall immediately show same to the designee of the municipality upon being requested so to do. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 7, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-8. - Duty to file report. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person subject to such license tax to render to the municipality on such forms as may be required, a sworn statement showing the total business done, amount of sales, gross receipts and gross sales, stock, value of furniture and other equipment, capital invested, number of helpers or employees, amount of space occupied, or other factor described in the schedule, one or several, as the case may require, for the ascertainment of the classification of such person for license taxation purposes and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject. 
(b)  If the municipality determines that the amount of business license tax reported on or remitted with any business license remittance form is incorrect, if no business license remittance form is filed within the time prescribed, or if the information provided on the form is insufficient to allow the taxing jurisdiction to determine the proper amount of business license tax due, the municipality shall calculate the correct amount of the tax based on the most accurate and complete information reasonably obtainable and enter a preliminary assessment for the correct amount of business license tax, including any applicable penalty and interest. 
(c)  The municipality shall promptly mail a copy of any preliminary assessment to the taxpayer's last known address by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested, or, in the sole discretion of the municipality, deliver the preliminary assessment to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(d)  If the amount of business license tax remitted by the taxpayer is undisputed by the municipality, or if the taxpayer consents to the amount of any deficiency or preliminary assessment in writing, the municipality shall enter a final assessment for the amount of the tax due, plus any applicable penalty and interest. 
(e)  (1)  If a taxpayer disagrees with a preliminary assessment as entered by the taxing jurisdiction, the taxpayer shall file a petition for review with the municipal license officer within thirty (30) days from the date of entry of the preliminary assessment setting out the specific objections to the preliminary assessment. If a petition for review is timely filed, the license officer of the municipality shall schedule a conference with the taxpayer for the purpose of allowing the taxpayer or its representatives and the representatives of the municipality to present their respective positions, discuss any omissions or errors, and to attempt to agree upon any changes or modifications to their respective positions. 
(2)  If a petition for review is not timely filed, or is timely filed, and upon further review the license officer determines that the preliminary assessment is due to be upheld in whole or in part, the municipality may make the assessment final in the amount of business license tax due as computed by the license officer, with applicable interest and penalty computed to the date of entry of the final assessment. The license officer shall, whenever practicable, complete his or her review of the taxpayer's petition for review and applicable law within ninety (90) days following the later of the date of filing of the petition or the conference, if any. 
(3)  A copy of the final assessment shall promptly be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address: 
a.  By either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, or 
b.  By certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of more then five hundred ($500.00). 
In either case, at the option of the taxing jurisdiction a copy of the final assessment may be delivered to the taxpayer by personal delivery. The final assessment shall include a statement informing the taxpayer of his or her right to appeal the final assessment to circuit court within thirty (30) days from the date of the entry of the final assessment. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 8, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-9. - Duty to permit inspection and produce records. 
Upon demand by the designee of the municipality, it shall be the duty of all licensees to: 
(1)  Permit the designee of the municipality to enter the business and to inspect all portions of his place or places of business for the purposes of enabling said municipal designee to gain such information as may be necessary or convenient for determining the proper license classification, and determining the correct amount of license tax; 
(2)  To furnish information during reasonable business hours, at the licensee's place of business, in the municipality or the police jurisdiction, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information from which the correct license tax classification of such person may be ascertained and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax returns to the state, copies of state income tax returns and federal income tax returns. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 9, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-10. - Unlawful to obstruct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any agent, servant or employee of such person, to fail or refuse to perform any duty imposed by this division; nor shall any person, agent, servant or employee of such person obstruct or interfere with the designee of the municipality in carrying out the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 10, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-11. - Privacy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the administration of this division to divulge any information obtained by him/her in the course of inspection and examination of the books, papers, reports and memoranda of the taxpayer made pursuant to the provisions of this division, except to the mayor, the municipal attorney or others authorized by law to receive such information described herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to print, publish, or divulge, without the written permission or approval of the taxpayer, the license form of any taxpayer or any part of the license form, or any information secured in arriving at the amount of tax or value reported, for any purpose other than the proper administration of any matter administered by the taxing jurisdiction, or upon order of any court, or as otherwise allowed in this division. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the disclosure of the fact that a taxpayer has or has not purchased a business license. Statistical information pertaining to taxes may be disclosed to the municipality council upon their written request through the mayor's office. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 11, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-12. - Failure to file assessment. 
(a)  In any case where a person subject to paying a license tax as provided herein fails to do so, the municipal designee shall be authorized to assess and determine the amount of license taxes due using the best information available either by return filed or by other means. 
(b)  The taxpayer shall be notified by registered or certified mail, or by personal service, of the amount of any such assessment, and of his right to appear before the municipal governing body on a day named not less than twenty (20) days from the date of notice and to show cause why such assessment shall not be made final. Such appearance may be made by agent or attorney. 
(c)  If no showing is made on or before the date fixed in such notice, or if such showing is not sufficient in the judgment of the municipality, such assessment shall be made final in the amount originally fixed, or in such other amount as is determined by the municipality to be correct. If upon such hearing the municipal designee finds a different amount due than that originally assessed, he/she shall make the assessment final in the correct amount, and in all cases shall notify the taxpayer of the assessment as finally fixed. 
(d)  A notice by the United States mail, addressed to the taxpayer's last known place of business, shall be sufficient. Any assessment made by the designee of the municipality shall be prima facie correct upon any appeal. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 12, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-13. - Lien for non-payment of license tax. 
On all property, both real and personal, used in the business, the municipality shall have a lien for such license, which lien shall attach as of the date when the license is due, as allowed by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-44. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 13, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-14. - Criminal penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may also be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six (6) months, in the discretion of the court trying the case, and violations on separate days shall each constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 14, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-15. - Civil penalties. 
In addition to the remedies provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-150 et seq., the continued or recurrent performance of any act or acts within the corporate limits or within its police jurisdiction for which a license may be revoked or suspended under this division is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the public and is a nuisance. The municipality, as an additional or alternative remedy, may institute injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 15, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-16. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  All licenses not paid within thirty (30) days from the date they fall due shall be increased by fifteen (15) percent for the first thirty (30) days they shall be delinquent and shall be measured by an additional fifteen (15) percent for a delinquency of sixty (60) or more days, but this provision shall not be deemed to authorize the delay of thirty (30) days in the payment of the license due, which may be enforced at once. 
(b)  In the case of persons who began business on or after the first day of the calendar year, the license for such "new business" shall be increased by fifteen (15) percent for the first fifteen (15) days they shall be delinquent, and shall be measured by an additional fifteen (15) percent for a delinquency of forty-five (45) days or more. 
(c)  All delinquent accounts (both license taxes and penalties) shall also be charged simple interest at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 16, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-17. - Prosecutions unaffected. 
The adoption of this division shall not in any manner affect any prosecution of any act illegally done contrary to the provisions of any ordinance now or heretofore in existence, and every such prosecution, whether begun before or after the enactment of this division shall be governed by the law under which the offense was committed; nor shall a prosecution, or the right to prosecute, for the recovery of any penalty or the enforcement of any forfeiture be in any manner affected by the adoption of this division; nor shall any civil action or cause of action existing prior to or at the time of the adoption of this division be affected in any manner by its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 17, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-18. - Procedure for denial of new applications. 
(a)  The municipal designee shall have the authority to investigate all applications and may refer any application to the municipal governing body for a determination of whether such license should or should not be issued. 
(b)  If the municipal governing body denies the issuance of any license referred to it, the municipal clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of the municipal governing body's decision. 
(c)  If said applicant desires to appear before the municipal governing body to show cause why said license should be issued, he shall file a written notice with the municipal clerk, said notice to be filed within two (2) weeks from the date of mailing by the municipal clerk of the notice of the denial of such license by the municipal governing body. 
(d)  Upon receipt of said notice the municipal clerk shall promptly schedule a hearing, to be held within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of such notice, before the municipal governing body and shall give the notice of the date, time and place of said hearing to the applicant. 
(e)  The applicant shall be given the opportunity to appear personally, or through his counsel, or both, and the municipal governing body shall proceed to hear any evidence which may be presented both for and against the issuance of said license. 
(f)  If the municipal governing body determines from the evidence presented that in order to either provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the prosperity, or improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the municipality said license should not be granted, it shall enter an order to that effect; otherwise, said license shall be ordered issued upon payment of any required license fees. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 18, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-19. - Procedure for revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Any lawful license issued to any person to conduct any business shall be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body for the violation by the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee of any provision of this division or of any ordinance of the municipality, or any statute of the state relating to the business for which such license is issued; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee under color of such license violates or aids or abets in violating or knowingly permits or suffers to be violated any penal ordinance of the municipality or any criminal law of the state; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if, in connection with the issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee or his agent filed or caused to be filed any application, affidavit, statement, certificate, book, or any other data containing any false, deceptive or other misleading information or omission of material fact. 
(b)  The conditions hereinabove set forth as grounds for the revocation of a license shall also constitute grounds for refusing to renew a license. 
(c)  The municipal governing body shall set a time for hearing on the matter of revoking or refusing to renew a license; and a notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee, or the applicant for renewal, as the case may be, at least ten (10) days before the day set for said hearing. At the hearing the municipal governing body shall hear all evidence offered by any party and all evidence that may be presented bearing upon the question of revocation or the refusal of renewal, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 19, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-20. - Refunds on overpayments 
(a)  Any taxpayer may file a petition for refund with the municipality for any overpayment of business license tax erroneously paid to the municipality. If a final assessment for the tax has been entered by the municipality, a petition for refund of all or a portion of the tax may be filed only if the final assessment has been paid in full prior to or simultaneously with the filing of the petition for refund. 
(b)  A petition for refund shall be filed with the municipality within two (2) years from the date of payment of the business license tax, which is the subject of the petition. 
(c)  The municipality shall either grant or deny a petition for refund within six (6) months from the date the petition is filed, unless the period is extended by written agreement of the taxpayer and the municipality. The taxpayer shall be notified of the municipality's decision concerning the petition for refund by first class U.S. mail or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, sent to the taxpayer's last known address. It the municipality fails to grant a full refund within the time provided herein, the refund petition shall be deemed to be denied. 
(d)  If the petition is granted or the municipality or a court otherwise determines that a refund is due, the overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer by the municipality, together with interest to the extent provided for in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-92. If the municipality determines that a refund is due, the amount of overpayment plus any interest due thereon may first be credited by the municipality against any outstanding tax liabilities due and owing by the taxpayer to the municipality, and the balance of any overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer. If any refund or part thereof is credited to any other tax by the municipality, the taxpayer shall be provided with a written detailed statement showing the amount of overpayment, the amount credited for payment to other taxes, and the resulting amount of the refund. 
(e)  A taxpayer may appeal from the denial in whole or in part of a petition for refund by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the circuit court of the county in which the municipality denying the petition for refund is located. Said notice of appeal must be filed within two (2) years from the date the petition was denied. The circuit court shall hear the appeal according to its own rules and procedures and shall determine the correct amount of refund due, if any. If an appeal is not filed with the appropriate circuit court within two (2) years of the date the petition was denied, then the appeal shall be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 20, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-21. - License classifications. 
CODE 	2002 NAICS TITLES/BUSINESS LICENSE CODES 	SCHEDULE 
	A 	
541211 	Accountant/CPAs - individual and/or firm professional license 	41 
926110 	Administration of Economic programs 	41 
924110 	Administration of Environmental Quality Programs 	41 
925110 	Administration of housing, urban, comm. 	41 
923110 	Administration of human resource programs 	41 
561499 	Administrative services - answering, employment, office, sec., travel 	47 
541850 	Advertising 	1 
524210 	Agent Office - administration of third parties, pension funds, annuities, etc 	41 
111000 	Agriculture and Support 	23 
481111 	Air transportation 	58 
441229 	Aircraft Sales 	2 
488190 	Aircraft Servicing 	47 
481111 	Airline Charter Service 	58 
481111 	Airline Ticket Sales 	58 
424830 	Alcoholic Beverages - Beer and Wine Wholesale 	64 
424810 	Alcoholic Beverages - Beer Wholesale 	62 
722410 	Alcoholic Beverages - Lounge Retail Liquor 	65 
445330 	Alcoholic Beverages - Package Stores 	73 
722440 	Alcoholic Beverages - Private Club Liquor Class II 	68 
722430 	Alcoholic Beverages - Private Club Liquor License 	67 
722420 	Alcoholic Beverages - Restaurant retail liquor 	66 
445320 	Alcoholic Beverages - Retail Beer off premise 	71 
722470 	Alcoholic Beverages - Retail Beer on and off premise 	72 
445330 	Alcoholic Beverages - Retail Liquor, Wine and Beer off premise 	73 
722450 	Alcoholic Beverages - Retail Table Wine off premise 	69 
722460 	Alcoholic Beverages - Retail Table Wine on and off premise 	70 
445350 	Alcoholic Beverages - Special Events Retail License (for profit) 	75 
445340 	Alcoholic Beverages - Special Events Retail License (non profit organization) 	74 
424820 	Alcoholic Beverages - Wine Wholesale 	63 
811490 	Alteration Shops 	47 
331521 	Aluminum Manufacturing 	31 
621910 	Ambulance - ambulance company and/or services 	47 
713110 	Amusement 	17 
311991 	Animal Food Manufacturing 	31 
112990 	Animal Production 	23 
453310 	Antiques 	33 
531110 	Apartment Rentals 	46 
315999 	Apparel and Accessories Manufacturing 	31 
422990 	Apparel Wholesale 	34 
335512 	Appliance Manufacturing 	31 
811412 	Appliance Repairs 	47 
443112 	Appliances - Retail 	33 
531320 	Appraisers 	41 
713110 	Arcade 	17 
541310 	Architect - individual and/or firm professional license 	41 
453220 	Art Shop 	33 
711510 	Artist 	41 
711310 	Arts and sports - dance, musical, teams, tracks, promoters, agents 	17 
324199 	Asphalt Manufacturing 	31 
238990 	Asphalt Paving 	13 
541110 	Attorney/Lawyers - individual and/or firm professional license 	41 
334419 	Audio and Video Manufacturing 	31 
441110 	Auto Dealers 	2 
336112 	Auto Manufacturing 	31 
441310 	Auto Parts and Accessories 	33 
811118 	Auto Repairs 	47 
	B 	
812991 	Bail Bonds 	6 
311811 	Bakeries - Retail 	48 
424420 	Bakeries - Wholesale 	34 
522111 	Bank ATM 	9 
522111 	Bank Branch 	9 
522110 	Bank Main Office 	9 
812111 	Barber Shop 	4 
812112 	Beauty Shop 	4 
721191 	Bed and Breakfast 	26 
422990 	Beverages Wholesale - non alcoholic 	24 
713990 	Billiard Room 	5 
721310 	Boarding House 	26 
336112 	Boat Manufacturing 	31 
441310 	Boat Parts and Accessories 	33 
441110 	Boats New and Used 	2 
323110 	Book Printing 	47 
511110 	Book Publishing 	37 
451110 	Books - Retail 	33 
811430 	Boot and Shoe Repairs 	47 
312112 	Bottled Water Manufacturing 	31 
713111 	Bowling 	7 
713990 	Boxing 	32 
327331 	Brick Manufacturing 	31 
515100 	Broadcasting 	43 
523999 	Brokerage Firm 	8 
444130 	Building Materials - Retail 	33 
485113 	Bus Lines - Local 	10 
488490 	Bus Station or Terminals 	36 
	C 	
238350 	Cabinet Maker 	47 
721211 	Campground / RV Park 	57 
811118 	Car Wash 	47 
713993 	Carnival 	11 
910003 	Category for number of - amusement devices and/or games 	60 
930006 	Category for number of - square feet used for calculating license amount 	35 
910001 	Category for number of - vending machines for all types vending 	60 
910002 	Category for number of - vending machines for all types vending 	60 
722320 	Caterers 	48 
517212 	Cell Phone Services 	47 
327331 	Cement Manufacturing 	31 
325998 	Chemical Manufacturing 	31 
541311 	Chiropractor - individual and/or firm professional license 	41 
713993 	Circus 	11 
812992 	Clairvoyant 	32 
448130 	Clothing and Accessories - Retail 	33 
324199 	Coal Manufacturing 	31 
812310 	Coin Operated Laundry 	30 
334419 	Computer and Electronic Manufacturing 	31 
541511 	Computer Programmer - individual and/or professional firm license 	41 
443112 	Computers - Retail 	33 
453310 	Consignment Shops 	33 
238310 	Contractors - Acoustical 	13 
237290 	Contractors - Building Equipment 	13 
238350 	Contractors - Carpentry 	13 
238110 	Contractors - Concrete 	13 
238910 	Contractors - Demolition 	13 
238310 	Contractors - Drywall 	13 
238210 	Contractors - Electrical 	13 
238910 	Contractors - Excavation 	13 
238330 	Contractors - Floor Coverings - All 	13 
236220 	Contractors - General 	13 
238150 	Contractors - Glass 	13 
238220 	Contractors - Heating and Cooling 	13 
237990 	Contractors - Heavy Construction 	13 
238110 	Contractors - Irrigation 	13 
238140 	Contractors - Masonry 	13 
237290 	Contractors - Mechanical Installation 	13 
238130 	Contractors - Non General and Non Heavy 	13 
238320 	Contractors - Painting 	13 
238220 	Contractors - Plumbing 	13 
238160 	Contractors - Roofing 	13 
238160 	Contractors - Sheet Metal 	13 
238160 	Contractors - Siding 	13 
238910 	Contractors - Site Development 	15 
238120 	Contractors - Steel Structural 	13 
238340 	Contractors - Tile Work 	13 
238320 	Contractors - Wall Coverings 	13 
445120 	Convenience Store 	33 
331521 	Cooper Manufacturing 	31 
446110 	Cosmetic Store 	33 
492110 	Couriers 	14 
522390 	Credit Service Companies 	47 
	D 	
519190 	Data Processing Services 	47 
492110 	Delivery Only 	14 
541210 	Dentist - individual and/or firm professional license 	41 
452990 	Department Store 	33 
812191 	Diet Center 	47 
323110 	Digital Printing 	47 
454210 	Direct Selling Business 	59 
511140 	Directories 	16 
512131 	Drive In Theatre 	56 
446110 	Drug Store 	33 
812320 	Dry Cleaners 	29 
	E 	
611699 	Educational services - technical, computer, sports, services, business 	47 
811219 	Electronic Equipment Repairs 	47 
334419 	Electronic Manufacturing 	31 
443112 	Electronics - Retail 	33 
541330 	Engineer - individual and/or firm professional license 	41 
421990 	Equipment Wholesale 	34 
561710 	Exterminating services - exterminating company and its services 	18 
	F 	
333990 	Farm Machine Manufacturing 	31 
325998 	Fertilizer Manufacturing 	31 
522291 	Finance Company 	19 
523999 	Financial Services 	19 
114119 	Fishing and Hunting 	33 
451110 	Fishing Supplies - Retail 	33 
713110 	Fitness 	47 
453310 	Flea Market 	33 
442110 	Floor Coverings - Retail 	33 
453220 	Florist 	33 
311991 	Food Manufacturing 	31 
445120 	Food and beverage stores 	33 
113110 	Forestry 	13 
812992 	Fortune Teller 	32 
525990 	Funds, trusts, other financial agencies - Funds, plans, and/or programs 	8 
812210 	Funeral 	20 
442110 	Furniture - furniture, home furnishings, stores, floor coverings, window 	33 
337129 	Furniture Manufacturing 	31 
421990 	Furniture Wholesale 	34 
	G 	
444130 	Gardening Equipment Dealers - Retail 	33 
447110 	Gasoline Retail 	21 
424720 	Gasoline Wholesale 	21 
452990 	General Merchandise Stores 	33 
453220 	Gift Shop 	33 
327331 	Glass Manufacturing 	31 
713112 	Golf 	22 
713110 	Golf Clubs 	17 
311991 	Grain Manufacturing 	31 
445120 	Grocery Store 	33 
422990 	Grocery Wholesale 	24 
	H 	
444130 	Hardware Store - Retail 	33 
446110 	Health and personal care stores 	33 
713940 	Health Club 	47 
446110 	Health Food Store 	33 
621491 	HMO - medical centers and services 	25 
451110 	Hobby Shop - Retail 	33 
811412 	Home and Garden Equipment Repairs 	47 
442110 	Home Furnishings - Retail 	33 
444110 	Home Improvement Store 	33 
541350 	Home Inspector Services 	41 
622110 	Hospitals - surgical, substance abuse, psychiatric, general care, special 	25 
721110 	Hotel 	26 
333990 	HVAC Machine Manufacturing 	31 
	I 	
445299 	Ice Cream Shop 	33 
312113 	Ice Manufacturing 	31 
541213 	Income Tax Services 	41 
333990 	Industrial Machine Manufacturing 	31 
519190 	Information services 	47 
524126 	Insurance Company - casualty, fire, marine (11-51-31) 	27a 
524128 	Insurance Company - all other (11-51-31A) 	27b 
523999 	Investment Services 	8 
331521 	Iron Manufacturing 	31 
	J 	
561720 	Janitorial firm - janitorial cleaning services - individual or firm 	47 
448130 	Jewelry - Retail 	33 
	L 	
561730 	Landscaping Services 	13 
812320 	Laundries - Dry Cleaning 	29 
812310 	Laundries - Self Service 	30 
444220 	Lawn and Garden Center 	33 
811411 	Lawn Mower Repair 	47 
316993 	Leather Products Manufacturing 	31 
492110 	Local Messenger Services 	14 
561622 	Locksmith 	47 
	M 	
332999 	Machine Shops 	47 
333990 	Machinery Manufacturing 	31 
454210 	Mail Order Business 	59 
551990 	Management companies - offices, enterprises, regional, corporate 	35 
314129 	Manufacturing - All Others 	31 
713110 	Marina 	46 
332999 	Metal Fabrication 	31 
999111 	Miscellaneous Business Services not elsewhere classified 	35 
999222 	Miscellaneous Personal Services not elsewhere classified 	35 
453220 	Miscellaneous retailers 	33 
722320 	Mobile Food Service 	48 
721110 	Motel 	26 
336112 	Motor Home Manufacturing 	31 
441310 	Motor vehicle parts and accessories 	33 
441110 	Motor vehicles - New and Used 	2 
336112 	Motorcycle Manufacturing 	31 
441310 	Motorcycle Parts and Accessories 	33 
441110 	Motorcycles New and Used 	2 
512131 	Movie Theatre 	56 
712110 	Museums - museums and historical sites, zoos, botanical gardens, parks 	17 
611610 	Music Instruction 	49 
451220 	Music Stores 	33 
451140 	Musical Instruments 	33 
	N 	
812113 	Nail Salon 	47 
511110 	Newspaper Publishing 	37 
327331 	Nonmetallic Manufacturing 	31 
454391 	Non-Store Retailer 	59 
623110 	Nursing care - residential care facility, day care, assisted living 	25 
623112 	Nursing Home - care for elderly and continuing care facilities 	25 
	O 	
333990 	Office Machinery Manufacturing 	31 
453210 	Office Supplies - Retail 	33 
812922 	One Hour Photofinishing 	47 
446110 	Optical - Retail 	33 
541320 	Optometrist - individual and/or firm professional license 	41 
621498 	Outpatient Care Centers - all other types of services 	25 
	P 	
444130 	Paint - Retail Store 	33 
811118 	Paint and Body Repairs 	47 
322229 	Paper Products Manufacturing 	31 
422990 	Paper Wholesale 	34 
812930 	Parking Lot 	38 
485114 	Passenger transportation - Bus Terminals - state regulated (37-3-33) 	36 
485113 	Passenger transportation - Charter 	36 
485320 	Passenger transportation - Rental of Vehicles 	3 
324199 	Paving Products Manufacturing 	31 
522298 	Pawn Shop 	39 
454391 	Peddler 	59 
561710 	Pest Control 	18 
		
812910 	Pet Boarding 	28 
453220 	Pet Shop 	33 
324199 	Petroleum Manufacturing 	31 
446110 	Pharmacy 	33 
541921 	Photographer - studios, portrait, commercial, services 	41 
541111 	Physician - individual and/or firm professional license 	41 
451111 	Pistol and Weapons 	40 
326291 	Plastic Manufacturing 	31 
713990 	Pool Room 	5 
327331 	Pottery Manufacturing 	31 
311991 	Poultry Processing Manufacturing 	31 
331521 	Primary Metal Manufacturing 	31 
541990 	Professional Services Not Elsewhere Classified - scientific, technical 	41 
511110 	Publishing industries except internet 	37 
	R 	
515112 	Radio Broadcasting 	43 
482110 	Rail transportation - State Regulated (11-51-124) 	44 
531210 	Real estate - offices, agents, brokers, management, appraisers 	45 
512131 	Recording Studio 	55 
532310 	Rental and leasing - auto, truck, trailer, RV, all tangible property 	3 
532230 	Rental and leasing - movie and video rental 	46 
811412 	Repairs and maintenance - all appliances, home and garden equipment 	47 
811219 	Repairs and maintenance - all electronic equipment 	47 
811118 	Repairs and maintenance - auto, paint/body, carwash, other vehicular 	47 
722110 	Restaurant - full service 	48 
722211 	Restaurant - limited facility 	48 
711310 	Rodeo 	17 
326291 	Rubber Manufacturing 	31 
721214 	RV Park 	57 
	S 	
522121 	Savings and Loan Branch 	9 
611610 	Schools 	49 
323110 	Screen Printing 	47 
523999 	Securities, commodity 	8 
448130 	Shoes - Retail 	33 
487990 	Sightseeing transportation 	47 
624110 	Social assistance - shelters, vocational, child care, abuse, emergency 	47 
312111 	Soft Drink Manufacturing 	31 
511110 	Software Publishing 	37 
512131 	Sound Studio 	41 
927100 	Space, research, and technology 	41 
711310 	Special Events - promoter or activity - see schedule for rates 	17 
451110 	Sporting Goods - Retail 	33 
713990 	Stables 	35 
331521 	Steel Manufacturing 	31 
493110 	Storage and Warehousing 	61 
452990 	Superstores 	33 
541360 	Surveyor - individual and/or firm professional license 	41 
713940 	Swimming Pool 	51 
453998 	Swimming Pool Equipment - Retail 	33 
	T 	
812199 	Tanning Salon 	47 
812194 	Tattoo Artist 	52 
812195 	Tattoo Establishment 	52 
541213 	Tax Services 	41 
485321 	Taxi Cab Service 	53 
711510 	Taxidermists 	47 
517212 	Telecommunications - cellular 	33 
517315 	Telecommunications - resellers of service 	33 
517310 	Telecommunications - telephone local (11-51-128) 	54 
517320 	Telecommunications - telephone long distance (11-51-128) 	54 
515112 	Television Broadcasting 	43 
515111 	Television Distribution 	55 
443112 	Televisions - Retail 	33 
313112 	Textiles Manufacturing 	31 
327331 	Tile Manufacturing 	31 
441320 	Tire and Muffler Shop 	33 
326291 	Tire Manufacturing 	31 
522298 	Title Pawn 	39 
453220 	Tobacco Store 	33 
451110 	Toy Store - Retail 	33 
531190 	Trailer Park 	57 
454391 	Transient Merchants 	59 
336112 	Transportation Manufacturing 	31 
441110 	Travel Trailers New and Used 	2 
561730 	Tree Surgeon 	13 
484110 	Truck transportation - Freight/moving 	58 
484230 	Truck transportation - terminal - state regulated (37-3-33) 	58 
	U 	
812331 	Uniform Service 	47 
453310 	Used Merchandise Stores 	33 
221122 	Utilities Electric 	42 
221210 	Utilities Gas 	42 
221310 	Utilities Water and Sewage 	42 
	V 	
454210 	Vending Machine Operators 	60 
454210 	Vending Machines 	60 
541940 	Veterinarian 	28 
334419 	Video and Audio Manufacturing 	31 
	W 	
452990 	Warehouse Clubs 	33 
493110 	Warehousing and storage 	61 
562998 	Waste management - companies, trucks, septic tanks, landfill, services 	47 
811490 	Watch Repair 	47 
483212 	Water transportation 	58 
811310 	Welding Services 	47 
453220 	Welding Supplies 	33 
424720 	Wholesale - Gasoline 	21 
421990 	Wholesale Trade - Durable 	34 
422990 	Wholesale trade - Non-durable 	34 
442110 	Windows - Retail 	33 
331521 	Wire Manufacturing 	31 
321999 	Wood Products Manufacturing 	31 
488410 	Wrecker Services 	47 
711310 	Wrestling 	32 
		
		
		
 
In addition to the NAICS codes listed, the city hereby adopts all NAICS codes as needed. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 21, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 1033, 11-26-12)  
Sec. 6-22. - License fee schedules. 
1.  Advertising agencies, per year ..... $ 150.00 
Bill posters: 
Per year .....  125.00 
Per week .....   10.00 
In moving picture houses, per year .....   50.00 
Outdoor signs, each per year, per side .....  100.00 
Soliciting by telephone, where telephone solicitation is used as a primary means of advertisement or solicitation, per year .....  200.00 
Any other manner, per year .....   50.00 
In addition to the above base license tax, each person so engaged shall pay an amount equal to 1/10 of 1% of the gross receipts derived from such businesses in excess of $20,000.00. 
2.  Each person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or trading new or used trucks, automobiles, mobile homes, industrial and farm tractors, and equipment or aircraft, shall pay a license tax based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $3,000,000.00 .....  500.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to 1/100 of 1% of all gross receipts over $3,000,000.00. 
For the purpose of this category, "gross receipts" shall mean the entire receipts of the business including all receipts from government sales, outside the city, parts departments, connecting garages, shops, services, etc., that form an integral part of the "dealership." 
Deductions from gross receipts may be taken for used vehicles taken in trade as credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle; dealer transfers and internal parts. A deduction from gross receipts may also be taken for repossessions of vehicles, such deduction being based on the unpaid purchase price remaining at the time of repossession. 
Each person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or trading, used trucks or automobiles only, shall pay an annual license tax of .....  300.00 
Plus a percentage of gross receipts as required above. 
3.  Each person engaged in the business of renting or leasing automobiles or trucks shall pay a license tax as follows: 
For each automobile or truck .....   50.00 
For each automobile or truck rented by contract specifying the rental of five or more vehicles on a fleet basis for a period of 12 months or more .....   25.00 
This category does not apply to the rental or lease of aircraft which business should be licensed under the category "automobile dealers" and which license should be computed on a gross receipt basis as provided in the category "automobile dealers." 
4.  Each person operating a barbershop or beauty shop shall pay a license tax in accordance with the number of chairs or beauty operators therein as follows: 
For one barber chair or beauty operator ..... 100.00 
For each additional barber chair or beauty operator .....   25.00 
5.  Each billiard or pool room or parlor shall pay an annual license tax: 
For the first table .....  100.00 
For each additional table .....   25.00 
This license is required for all tables whether in use or not. Decals must be purchased for each. 
6.  Each person engaged in the business of becoming or procuring surety for any court, appeal appearances or otherwise for a consideration, except guaranty companies or corporations otherwise specifically licensed, shall pay a license tax based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $125,000.00 ..... 1,000.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to 1/10 of 1% of all gross receipts in excess of $125,000.00. 
Prior to the issuance of a privilege license, we must have an updated copy (each year) of the order granting, denying or revoking authorization to be a professional bondsman to be signed by the current circuit court judge of Marshall County. 
7.  Each person engaged in the business of providing bowling alleys, including ten pin alleys, box ball alleys, shuffle boards and miniature bowling alleys and shuffle boards, shall pay a license tax as follows: 
Each alley (whether in use of not) .....   20.00 
8.  Each person engaged in the business of acting as broker or dealer in securities, commodities, or mutual funds, or in the business of lending money on said stocks, bonds, securities, or commodities, shall pay an annual license tax based on his gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $25,000 .....   100.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to one-twentieth of one percent of all gross receipts in excess of $25,000. 
9.  Each person operating a building and loan association, savings and loan association, or bank shall pay an annual license tax as authorized by state law .....  350.00 
In addition, a license must be obtained for each branch of such association or bank as authorized by state law. Each branch .....   25.00 
State Law reference— Authorized license tax, Code of Ala. 1975, 11-51-130, 11-51-131. 
10.  Each person engaged in the operation of a bus line furnishing local service for hire within the city shall pay a license tax of .....   100.00 
11.  Each person operating a carnival, fair, circus, or similar activity shall pay a license tax as follows: 
Circus, per day .....  150.00 
Carnival or fair, per week .....  600.00 
And for each side show, concession stand, ride, or other stand, in connection with the above shall pay a license tax per week of .....   10.00 
Provided, however, that where a carnival is conducted in connection with a regularly licensed business or merchants association, the license fee shall be: 
Per week .....   25.00 
Plus for each mechanical ride .....    5.00 
Plus for each side show, concession stand or other stand, other than mechanical rides, in connection with such promotion .....   25.00 
When carnivals, fairs, tent shows, concession stands, and rides are operated in connection with, and at the same time and on the same general grounds with state, county, or district agricultural fairs as defined by Code of Ala. 1975 40-12-163 and operated under their general supervision, the fair shall pay a license tax of $1,000.00 to cover all operations of the fair week. 
12.  Each person engaged in the business of selling, soliciting the sale, or of furnishing cemetery lots shall pay a license tax of .....  250.00 
13.  Each person engaged in the business of accepting orders, contracts or subcontracts for erecting, enlarging, improving, relocating any building or structure, or making improvements to the land (including, but not limited to building, grading, paving, installation of curbs, gutters, or sewers, excavating, landscaping, roads, bridges, or utilities construction, engineering, research, or manufacturing of a product developed by the engineering or research services) or any other type of construction shall pay a license tax based on gross annual receipts from contracts performed within the city and its police jurisdiction as follows: 
On less than $100,000.00 .....  100.00 
And in addition 1/40 of 1% on all gross receipts in excess of $100,000.00 but less than $500,000.00 plus 1/80 of 1% of gross receipts in excess of $500,000.00. 
14.  A.  In lieu of any other type of license, a taxpayer may at its option purchase for $100.00 plus the issuance fee, a delivery license for the privilege of delivering its merchandise in the municipality if the taxpayer meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  Other than deliveries, the taxpayer has not other physical presence within the municipality or its police jurisdiction; 
2.  The taxpayer conducts no other business in the municipality other than delivering merchandise and performing the requisite set-up and installation of said merchandise; 
3.  Such delivery and set-up and installation is performed by the taxpayer's employees or agents, concerns the taxpayer's own merchandise in that municipality, and is done by means of delivery vehicles owned, leased, or contracted by the taxpayer; 
4.  The gross receipts derived from the sale and any requisite set-up or installation of all merchandise so delivered shall not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) during the license year; 
5.  Any set-up or installation shall relate only to (i) that required by the contract between the taxpayer and the customer or as may be required by state or local law, and (ii) the merchandise so delivered; 
6.  If at any time during the current license year the taxpayer fails to meet any of the above suited criteria, then within 10 days after any of said criteria have been violated or exceeded, the taxpayer shall purchase all appropriate business licenses from the municipality for the entire license year and without regard to this section. 
B.  Mere delivery of the taxpayer's merchandise by common carrier shall not allow the municipality to assess a business license tax against the taxpayer, but the gross receipts derived from any sale and delivery accomplished by means of a common carrier shall be counted against the seventy-five thousand ($75,000) limitation described in the preceding section. If the taxpayer also during the same license year sells and delivers into the taxing jurisdiction using a delivery vehicle other than a common carrier. 
C.  A common carrier, contract carrier, or similar delivery service making deliveries on behalf of other shall not be entitled to purchase a delivery license. 
D.  The delivery license shall be calculated in arrears, based on the related gross receipts during the preceding license year. 
E.  The purchase of a delivery license shall not, in and of itself, establish nexus between the taxpayer and the municipality for purposes of the taxes levied by or under the authority of the Code of Ala., tit. 40 or other provisions of law, not does the purchase of a delivery license conclusively determine that nexus does not exist between the taxpayer and the municipality. 
15.  Each person engaged in the business of developing, subdividing, and selling lots to builders or others shall pay an annual license tax of .....  100.00 
Plus an amount equal to 1/10 of 1% of gross receipts for the preceding year in excess of $50,000.00. 
16.  Each person making, compiling, selling, or offering for sale any directory shall pay a license tax of .....  250.00 
Such license shall also entitle such person to sell advertising in such directory without procuring an additional license therefore. 
17.  Each person, other than religious, charitable, or educational organization, engaged in any type of entertainment, not otherwise provided for, including but not limited to rodeos, sports events, races, museums, lectures, concerts, or other shows or performances where charges are made for admission shall pay a license tax per week of .....   50.00 
17A.  Each person, other than religious, charitable or educational organization, who provides food, merchandise or services in conjunction with a licensed entertainment event where no admission is charged, shall pay a license tax of .....   25.00 
This license shall be effective for 1 day up through 7 days. 
17B.  Each person, other than religious, charitable or educational organization, who provides food, merchandise or services in conjunction with a licensed entertainment event where admission is charged, shall pay a license tax of .....   50.00 
This license shall be effective for 1 day up through 7 days. 
18.  Each person selling disinfectant, insecticide, and/or exterminators engaged in this business of pest extermination in any manner shall pay an amount equal to ¼ of 1% of gross annual receipts with a minimum license tax of .....  100.00 
19.  Each person engaged in the business of lending money or discounting or buying conditional sales contracts, drafts, acceptances, notes or mortgages shall pay an annual license tax on the following basis: When the total amount is addition to principal customarily paid by the borrow including interest, investigation fees, service charges and every other item of expense of every kind exceeds 1% per month .....  500.00 
20.  Each person engaged in business as funeral director, undertaker, or mortician shall pay an annual license tax based on gross receipts as follows: 
On gross receipts of less than $50,000.00 .....  150.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to 1/10 of 1% on all gross receipts in excess of $5,000.00. The foregoing license tax shall include embalming, the sales of caskets, vaults, undertaking supplies, and the operation of ambulances and hearses where the gross receipts from such sales and services are included in computing this license. 
21.  Each person engaged in the business of selling gasoline at retail or operating a gasoline filling station shall pay a license tax as follows: 
a.  First single hose pump .....   30.00 
Each additional single hose pump .....   20.00 
b.  First double hose pump .....   50.00 
Each additional double hose pump .....   30.00 
c.  First triple hose pump .....   70.00 
Each additional triple hose pump .....  40.00 
d.  Tank trucks for delivering to airplanes, each truck .....   35.00 
This license shall include sales of kerosene, but not the sale of other merchandise such as tires, batteries, accessories, etc., for which a merchant-retail license must be paid. Gross receipts from sales of gasoline should not be included in the computation of any other license required. 
Each person engaged in the business of selling gasoline or other petroleum products at wholesale or delivering gasoline within the city or its police jurisdiction, shall pay a license tax based on the number of gallons sold or delivered within the city or its police jurisdiction, as follows: 
1.  On less than 3,000,000 gallons .....   300.00 
2.  3,000,000 and less than 4,000,000 gallons .....  350.00 
3.  4,000,000 gallons and over .....  400.00 
22.  Each person engaged in the operation of a golf course, driving range, miniature golf, or similar activity shall pay an annual license tax of .....  $200.00 
23.  Each person engaged in selling grain or grain commodities to others for resale shall pay a license tax based on gross receipts from sales within the city and its police jurisdiction as follows: 
On gross receipts of less than $2,000,000.00 .....  300.00 
And in addition 1/200 of 1% of all gross receipts over $2,000,000.00 
24.  Each person engaged in selling groceries, meats or drugs to others for resale shall pay a license tax based on gross receipts from sales within the city and its police jurisdiction as follows: 
On less than $200,000.00 .....  100.00 
And in addition, 1/50 of 1% of such gross receipts in excess of $200,000.00 
25.  Each person operating a hospital, clinic, rest home, nursing home or sanatorium for profit shall pay a license tax as follows: 
Hospital or clinic: 
5 beds or less .....  200.00 
Each additional bed .....   10.00 
Rest home, nursing home or sanatorium: 
5 beds or less .....  200.00 
Each additional bed .....   10.00 
26.  Any person engaged in the hotel, motel, or similar business shall pay an annual license tax as follows: 
First 25 rooms .....  100.00 
Each additional room .....    4.00 
This license does not include the right to operate a restaurant, barber shop, cigar or newsstand, or any other secondary business operated in connection with the renting of rooms without an additional license. 
27.  Insurance companies. 
a.  Fire or marine insurance. For the privilege of engaging in fire or marine insurance business, each company doing business in the city shall pay a license tax to the city equal to 4% of each $100.00, or major fraction thereof, of the gross premiums, less return premiums, on policies issued during the preceding year on property located in the city. Provided, that if the company has done no fire or marine insurance business in the city the preceding year, there is hereby levied and assessed a license tax of $25.00, at the time and in the manner prescribed for other licenses under this section, and at the expiration of the calendar year for which such license is issued, or within 60 days thereafter, the company shall furnish the mayor a written statement, verified by the affidavit of the president, vice president, or secretary of the company, setting out the full and true amount of the gross premiums less return premiums on fire or marine policies issued during the year for which the license was issued on property located in the city, which statement shall be accompanied by the additional amount of license tax due the city which additional amount is to be computed by taking 4% of each $100.00 or major fraction thereof of such gross premiums, less return premiums, and deducting there from the amount of the license tax previously paid, so that the total amount of the license tax paid the city shall equal 4% of each $100.00 or major fraction thereof of the gross premiums, less return premiums, on policies issued during the year for which the license was issued on property located in the city. In the event the $25.00 license tax previously paid by the company exceeds the amount owed the city, computed as set forth hereinabove, the city shall refund to the licensee the amount due it when such verified statement, is filed. 
b.  Insurance other than fire or marine. For the privilege of engaging in life insurance business, or any kind of insurance other than fire or marine, each company engaging in such business or its agents shall pay a license tax to the city of $15.00, and in addition thereto, an amount equal to $1.00 on each $100.00, or major fraction thereof, of the gross premiums less return premiums received during the preceding year on policies issued during said year to citizens of the city. Upon payment or tender of said sum of $15.00 to the city at the time and in the manner prescribed for other license under this article, such insurance company shall be permitted to do business in the city, through its agents. 
c.  Payment due. On the first day of January of each year, or within 60 days thereafter, each insurance company mentioned in subsections "a." and "b." above which did any business in the city during any part of the preceding year shall furnish the mayor a statement in writing, verified by the affidavit of the president, vice president, or secretary of the company, showing the full and true amount of gross premiums, less return premiums, received during the preceding year on policies issued during such year, which policies are described in subsections "a." and "b." above, and each insurance company shall accompany such statement with the amount of license tax due, according to the provisions herein set forth. 
d.  Violations. Upon a failure of any insurance company to furnish any statement or to pay the license fee prescribed, in the time manner, or amount set forth and provided for in this category, there shall be a forfeiture of the right of such company so failing, and its agents, to continue to do business in the city until such statement shall have been furnished and such sum shall have been paid in full, and such company and its agents doing business in the city pending such forfeiture shall be guilty of a misdemeanor against the city and shall be punished as though it or they were doing business without a license, as is provided within the limits of the punishment prescribed in sections 6-14—6-16. 
28.  Each person operating a veterinary hospital or kennel, including each person and each member of a firm or partnership engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine shall pay, for the operation thereof, a license tax based on such person's gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $25,000.00 .....  100.00 
$25,000.00 and less than $50,000.00 .....  50.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to 1/20 of 1% of all gross receipts in excess of $50,000.00 
29.  Any person operating a laundry, dry cleaner, linen supply service, or diaper service shall pay an annual license tax of .....  150.00 
And in addition, 1/10 of 1% of gross annual receipts in excess of $50,000.00 from said business. In addition to the license provided above, each branch or place of business for the purpose of collecting laundry or dry cleaning shall pay an annual license tax of .....   25.00 
30.  Each person operating any self-service laundry or renting washing machines, dryers, or dry cleaning machines shall pay an annual license tax for each machine as follows: 
For each machine up to 10 .....   10.00 
For each machine over 10 .....    5.00 
31.  Each person engaged in the business of manufacturing, producing, fabricating, or processing, not otherwise specifically, licensed, shall pay a license tax based on his gross annual receipts as follows: 
On gross receipts of less than $2,000,000,.00 .....  300.00 
And in addition, 1/200 of 1% all over $2,000,000.00. 
For the purpose of this category gross receipts shall mean the entire receipts shall mean the entire receipts of the business including all gross receipts from government sales outside the city and intercompany book transfers (thus meaning the volume or value of the plant's transferred products regardless of whether transferred to another plant or affiliated company, or sold or manufactured under contract.) 
32.  Each medium, fortuneteller, palmist, clairvoyant, crystal gazer, divine healer, spiritual reader, boxing [boxer], and wrestling [wrestler], whether or not any fee is charged directly or indirectly or whether or not any gratuity is accepted shall pay a license tax per week of .....  500.00 
33.  Each person engaged in selling goods, wares, products, or services (not specifically provided for in this license schedule) to others for consumption or use shall pay a license tax based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $10,000.00 .....  100.00 
In addition 1/12 of 1% on the next $200,000.00 and 1/15 of 1 % on the next $300,000.00 and 1/30 of 1% on the next $500,000.00 and 1/50 of 1% all over $1,010,000.00. 
34.  Each person engaged in selling goods, wares, products, or services (not specifically provided for in this license schedule) to others for resale and who is entitled to "Merchants, Wholesale" rates as defined in section 6-12 shall pay a license tax based on gross receipts from sales within the city and its police jurisdiction as follows: 
On less than $25,000.00 .....  100.00 
$25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 .....  150.00 
$50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00 .....  200.00 
$100,000.00 but less than $150,000.00 .....  250.00 
$150,000.00 but less than $250,000.00 .....  300.00 
And in addition, 1/50 of 1% of gross receipts in excess of $250,000.00. 
35.  Each person who shall in any capacity engage in or transact any trade, business, commerce, occupation, vocation, or profession for which no other license is specifically required by this schedule shall pay an annual license tax of .....  150.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to 1/10 of 1% of annual gross receipts over $20,000.00. 
36.  Any motor bus terminal, or any person, firm, or corporation operating any terminal or station facilities for transportation by motor carrier, of passengers, property or express .....  100.00 
a.  Any motor carrier, as defined in the Alabama Motor Carrier Act (Code of Ala. 1975, 37-3-1 et seq.) for the privilege of doing business in the city by receiving passengers or freight for transportation for hire between the city and other points in the state .....   100.00 
37.  Each person publishing or distributing newspapers of more than two (2) issues per week shall pay an annual license tax of .....   250.00 
Plus an amount equal to 1/20 of 1% of the gross receipts in excess of $50,000.00 from said business during the next preceding year. Gross receipts shall include all revenue received from sales of newspapers, advertising, and other goods or services. 
Each person publishing or distributing newspapers of two (2) or less issues per week shall pay an annual license tax of .....   100.00 
Plus an amount equal to 1/20 of 1% of the gross receipts in excess of $50,000.00 as described above. 
Each person distributing or delivering newspapers published outside of the city or its police jurisdiction shall pay an annual license tax of .....    35.00 
38.  Each person engaged in the business of storing or parking automobiles or other vehicles shall pay a license tax as follows: 
Where space for not more than 25 automobiles or vehicles is provided .....   100.00 
Plus $5.00 for each additional space provided over 25. 
39.  Each person engaged in business as a pawnbroker shall pay an annual license tax based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $10,000.00 .....   250.00 
In addition 1/12 of 1% on the next $200,000 and 1/15 of 1% on the next $300,000 and 1/30 of 1% on the next $500,000 and 1/50 of 1% for all over $1,010,000.00. 
40.  Each dealer in guns, pistols, revolvers, explosives, bowie knives, dirks, or other weapons, whether in connection with other business or not, shall pay an annual license tax of $100.00 
Plus such additional amount as will equal 1/10 of 1% of the total gross receipts from such sales. 
41.  Each person and each member or professional employee of a firm, of a firm, professional corporation or partnership engaged in any practice, vocation or profession shall pay a license tax based on his gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $25,000.00 .....   100.00 
$25,000.00 and less than $35,000.00 .....   150.00 
$35,000.00 and less than $50,000.00 .....   200.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to 1/10 of 1% of gross receipts above $50,000.00. 
Where the licensed entity is a partnership, the gross receipts of each partner will be determined according to the partnership agreement by allocating to each partner gross receipts in the same proportion as the profits distributed to said partner. Where the entity licensed is a corporation, the records and accounts of the corporation shall be so kept as to show the percentage of the business actually owned by each professional practitioner, and the license of each practitioner shall be determined according to such practitioner's percentage of ownership. In the event the books, records, and accounts of the licensed entity are not kept so as to show the interest of each professional practitioner, then each practitioner shall be deemed to have gross receipts requiring the maximum license tax payment under this schedule. 
Firms or corporations which are primarily performing such services as are described in the category "contractors and subcontractors" of this license schedule shall be exempt from this license if a "contractors and subcontractors, engineering, research, and manufacturing" license is lawfully obtained by such firm or corporation. 
42.  Each person engaged in the operation of a public utility (except telephone and telegraph companies, railways and sleeping car companies, express companies and city public municipal boards) furnishing, supplying, or selling public utility service such as water, gas, light, or power shall pay an annual license tax of 3% of the gross receipts of the business done by the utility in the city during the preceding year. 
43.  Each person who solicits advertising for radio or television broadcasting stations or companies shall pay an annual license tax based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $50,000.00 .....   150.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to 1/20 of 1% of gross receipts in excess of $50,000.00. 
Provided, that this license shall not apply to that portion of the business that may be in interstate or foreign commerce or to business with the government of the United States. 
44.  Operating a railroad within this state as a common carrier, for the privilege of doing intrastate business within the city .....   250.00 
State Law reference— Authorized license tax, Code of Ala. 1975, 11-51-124. 
45.  Each real estate company and each legally constituted business organization formed for the purpose of sharing or dividing profit, compensation, commission or fee with that company is subject to a business privilege license of a base of $500.00 and an additional amount of $150.00 for each state real estate licensee that operates under that real estate company or legally constituted business organization formed for the purpose of sharing or dividing profit, compensation, commission or fee with that company. For the purposes of this subsection a real estate company or legally constituted business organization formed for the purpose of sharing or dividing profit, compensation, commission or fee with that company may consist of a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company or corporation. 
46.  Each person engaged in the business of renting or leasing real or personal property to others, including but not limited to apartments, office spaces, buildings, houses, office furniture and equipment, shall pay a license tax based on gross receipts as follows: 
On more than $5,000.00 and less than $10,000.00 .....   100.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to 1/10 of 1% of all gross receipts over $10,000 but less than $100,000 and 1/20 of 1% of gross receipts in excess of $100,000. 
47.  Each person engaged in the business of repairing, installing, improving, or servicing property which belongs to others, or performs any other service not regarded as a profession or vocation, shall pay an annual license tax based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $20,000.00 .....   100.00 
Where gross receipts for any such business exceeds $20,000.00, the amount of the license tax shall be $100.00 plus 1/10 of 1% of all such gross receipts in excess of $20,000.00. 
48.  Each person conducting a restaurant, cafe, cafeteria, lunch counter, soda fountain, or public place where meals, food, or refreshments are prepared, furnished, or served shall pay an annual license tax based on gross receipts as follows: 
Where gross annual receipts do not exceed $25,000.00 .....   100.00 
Where the gross annual receipts exceed $25,00.00 the amount of the license tax shall be $100.00 plus 1/10 of 1% of all such gross receipts in excess of $25,000.00 from such business. Approval from the county health officer must be submitted with application for city license. 
This license must be obtained whether in connection with other business or not. 
49.  Each person conducting a school or college as a business for profit shall pay a license tax for the privilege of engaging in such business as follows: 
Where gross receipts do not exceed $25,000.00 .....   100.00 
Where gross receipts exceed $25,000.00, a license tax in the amount of $100.00 shall be paid on the first $25,000.00 of gross receipts from such business, plus 1/10 of 1% of all gross receipts in excess of $25,000.00. This license tax shall not apply to schools operated by the state, county, city, church or other nonprofit organizations. 
50.  Each person engaged in the business of acting as broker or dealing in securities, commodities, or mutual funds, or in the business of lending money on said stocks, bonds, securities, or commodities, shall pay an annual license tax based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $25,000.00 .....   100.00 
Plus an additional amount equal to 1/20 of 1% of all gross receipts in excess of $25,000.00. 
51.  Each person operating for profit a swimming pool not in connection with a business otherwise licensed shall pay an annual license tax of .....   100.00 
52.  Each tattoo establishment owner shall pay an establishment license tax an in addition, each individual tattoo operator within that establishment shall also pay a license tax based on gross receipts as follows: 
Less than $5,000.00 .....   100.00 
$5,000.00 to $9,900.00 .....   125.00 
$10,000.00 .....   150.00 
Plus 1/10 of 1% of all gross receipts in excess of $25,000.00. 
53.  Any person engaged in the business of operating automobiles or other motor vehicles for hire commonly called and known as taxicabs shall pay an annual license tax for each vehicle so operated .....   100.00 
As used in this article the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Parking: The standing of taxicabs, motor driven or propelled in any manner, longer than may be necessary to receive or discharge passengers whom the driver of such taxicab had been engaged to transport. 
Taxicabs: All automobiles and other vehicles of like construction and operation employed in the transportation of passengers for hire within the city or the police jurisdiction thereof. 
License: Every person driving or operating a taxicab in the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof must procure from the city clerk a license to operate such taxicab. 
Rules and regulations governing the issuance: 
a.  No person shall be granted a license to operate a taxicab unless he is eighteen (18) years of age or over and has the free use of both hands and feet. 
b.  No applicant shall be granted a license to operate a taxicab that has not had at least six (6) months experience in operating automobiles. 
c.  No applicant shall be granted a license to operate a taxicab that is not familiar with the provisions of this Code governing the use and operation of automobiles on the streets. 
d.  No person shall be granted a license to operate a taxicab except upon written application therefore to the city clerk, which shall be in such form as to require the applicant to give all the information required by this article, and such application shall be sworn to by the applicant. 
e.  The city clerk shall keep on file the application which shall show in addition to other information called for in this article, the name, age and address of all persons issued a license as taxicab drivers. 
f.  Should the city clerk fail or refuse to issue a license to any person under the provisions of this article the applicant for such license may appeal to the city council and upon hearing, if the city council is satisfied to the fitness of the applicant under the provisions of this article to operate a taxicab, the city council may direct the clerk to issue a license to the applicant. 
Insurance: No person shall operate a taxicab without the same being covered by a public liability insurance policy issued by a solvent insurance company authorized to write automobile liability insurance in the state, protecting passengers, pedestrians, and other persons against injury subject to the following minimum limits: 
a.  For all damages arising out of a bodily injury to one person, ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); and subject to that limit for each person, the total liability on account of one accident shall be limited to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). It shall not be required that such coverage shall apply to the assureds employee while engaged in operating or being carried in any of the assureds taxicabs of other employee of the assured, who are injured while engaged at the time of such injury in performing any duties for the assured in connection with the trade, business or occupation of the assured. 
b.  For all property damage in one accident, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), except property of the assured or property in the custody of the assured for which assured is legally responsible. 
Said policy shall include endorsement to the effect that said policy shall not be cancelled without notice of cancellation being served upon the city clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the date of cancellation. Said policy shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall remain on file with said city clerk. 
The clerk shall not issue any taxicab license under this article unless the applicant or the owner of the taxicab shall first file with said city clerk an insurance policy as herein specified. In the event said insurance policy should expire or be cancelled, the license to operate the taxicab covered by said insurance policy shall immediately be cancelled and become null and void and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate such taxicab after the expiration or cancellation of such insurance policy. 
Period cabs permitted to park; stand: No taxicab shall be permitted to park or stand on any street, alley or other public place in the city at any hour of the day or night for a longer period of time than is actually necessary to receive or discharge passengers; provided, however, the city council may designate stands for such taxicabs at such places as it may see fit. 
Approval and display of fare schedule: Schedule of taxicab fares must be approved by the city council, and each driver must at all times have in his possession a copy of the fares, and there must be displayed within the taxicab a copy of the fares for the benefit of the public. 
Vehicle inspection: Prior to the issuance of a license each taxicab must be inspected and approved by either the state highway patrolman assigned to this area or by the chief of police of the city, and such subsequent inspections as these officers may deem necessary. 
Driving while intoxicated: Whenever any person who is the operator of a taxicab is convicted of operating such taxicab while in an intoxicated condition it shall be within the discretion of the judge trying the case to direct that the city license under which such person is operating such taxicab, be revoked, and if such operator be the owner of such taxicab the judge trying the case in his discretion may direct that the city license under which said taxicab is operating shall be revoked. Upon direction of the judge trying the case that said license of any person operating a taxicab shall be revoked, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to revoke such permit of license; and thereafter if such person should continue to operate such taxicab he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished in accordance to the law. 
Penalties: 
a.  Fine and imprisonment: Any driver or owner of a taxicab who shall fail to comply with any provision of this article, or who shall violate any provision of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance to the law. 
b.  Suspension from operation of taxicabs; revocation of permits: Any person or owner of a taxicab who shall fail to comply with any provision of this article, or who shall violate any provision of this article, upon conviction, in addition to the fine and imprisonment provided, for the first offense shall be suspended form the operation of the taxicab for a period of thirty (30) days; for the second offense in addition to the fine and imprisonment provided, the license to operate said taxicab shall be revoked, and if the operator of said taxicab be the owner, the license of said owner and operator shall also be revoked. 
54.  Each person operating local telephone exchange, for the privilege of doing intrastate business within the city .....   390.00 
For the operation of long distance telephone lines in the state, for the privilege of doing intrastate business within the limits of the city by providing long distance connection between this and other points in the state .....    98.00 
State Law reference— Authorized license tax, Code of Ala. 1975, 11-51-128. 
55.  Each person conducting or engaging in the business of cable television distribution shall pay a license tax of .....  1,000.00 
Plus such additional amount as will 2% of the total gross receipts from said business during the next preceding year. Provided, however, that no person shall engage in or be licensed to operate a television distribution system without first having secured a franchise for same from the city. Provided further this privilege license is in addition to any charge or license provided in any cable television franchise ordinance. 
56.  Each person operating a theater, motion or moving picture show, or theatrical theater where general admission is charged shall pay an annual license of .....   200.00 
Plus 1/10 of 1% of the total gross receipts over $20,000.00 received during the next preceding year. 
A separate license must be purchased for sales of merchandise, advertisement or other secondary operations. 
57.  Each person operating a camp, lot or other place in which are parked or stationed house trailers, tents, etc., which trailers, tents, etc., are used as a place of abode shall pay an annual license tax for each lot or camp with space for not more than 10 trailers, tents, etc., of ..... 100.00 
Plus an additional amount for each accommodation or parking place in excess of 10 of .....     5.00 
58.  Each person engaged in the business of transporting freight or other property for hire within the city shall pay an annual license tax for each vehicle so employed of .....   100.00 
59.  Each person, dealer, association, or other business who shall in any capacity engage in or transact any trade, business, commerce, occupation, vocation or profession as a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor without any established place of business in the city shall pay a weekly license fee of .....   300.00 
60.  Each person owning, operating, possessing, or giving space in their place of business to a lawful automatic merchandise, drink, food, music, amusement, picture, or information vending, dispensing or displaying machine shall pay a license tax for each machine as follows .....    25.00 
And there shall be a decal affixed and visible on each machine or face penalties of doing business without a license. 
Sweepstake machines or game machines, if found to be legal, per machine .....  2,000.00 
This license shall be due and payable by the person, owner or proprietor, of the business where such vending machine is located. This schedule shall not apply to any coin-operated gas meter or telephone or to any machine vending postage stamps or other necessary articles on a nonprofit basis for emergency use only by employees. If gross receipts are included in the computation of a merchant's license under category "merchants, retail" or category "merchants, wholesale" of this license schedule. This schedule does not apply to those machines dispensing tangible products. 
61.  Each person engaged in the warehousing or storage of merchandise, including cotton, household goods, and other freight or commodities shall pay an annual license tax of .....   100.00 
Plus an additional amount of 1/10 of 1% of gross receipts over $10,000.00. 
[61A.]  Alcoholic beverages: Each person licensed by the board, who shall engage in the alcoholic beverage, liquor, beer or wine business within the corporate limits, shall, prior to engaging in such business, in addition to any other privilege licenses required, pay to the city, for the privilege of so engaging in business, an annual fee or tax and further license fees or taxes as established in the alcoholic beverages chapter. 
62.  Beer wholesale .....   250.00 
63.  Wine wholesale .....   275.00 
64.  Beer and wine wholesale .....   375.00 
65.  Lounge retail liquor .....  2,500.00 
66.  Restaurant retail liquor .....  1,000.00 
67.  Private club liquor license .....  1,000.00 
68.  Private club liquor class II .....  2,500.00 
69.  Retail table wine off-premises .....   75.00 
70.  Retail table wine on- and off-premises .....   100.00 
71.  Retail beer off-premises .....    50.00 
72.  Retail beer on- and off-premises .....    75.00 
73.  Retail liquor, wine and beer off-premises .....  1,500.00 
74.  Special events retail license (non profit organization), per day .....    50.00 
75.  Special events retail license (for profit), per day .....   150.00 
76.  Manufacturer: Each person licensed by the board as a manufacturer or distiller of alcoholic beverages under Code of Ala. 1975, Title 28 Chapter 3A shall pay to the city an annual license fee as follows: 
Micro-brewery: $1,500.00 
Micro-distillery: $2,500.00 
77.  Brewpub: Each person licensed as a brewpub under Code of Ala. 1975, Title 28 Chapter 4A shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each establishment licensed as a brewpub shall meet the qualifications of a brewpub under the ordinances established by the City of Guntersville. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 22, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 956, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 979, 6-1-09; Ord. No. 1033, 11-26-12; Ord. No. 1057, § 2, 11-17-14)  
Sec. 6-23. - Exchange of information. 
(a)  The license officer may exchange tax returns, information, records, and other documents secured by the municipality, with other municipalities adopting similar ordinances for the exchange of taxpayer information, or with county or state authorities. The license officer may charge a reasonable fee for providing such information or documents. Any tax returns, information, records, or other documents so exchanged shall remain subject to the confidentiality provisions, restrictions, and criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure as provided under state or municipal law. 
(b)  Any such exchange shall be for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Collecting taxes due; 
(2)  Ascertaining the amount of taxes due from any person; 
(3)  Determining whether a person is liable for, or whether there is probable cause for believing a person might be liable for, the payment of any tax to a state, county, or municipal agency. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of tax returns or tax information by the municipality in the proper administration of any matter administered by the license officer. The license officer may also divulge to a purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor of a business or stock of goods the outstanding sales, use, or rental tax liability of the seller for which the purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor may be liable pursuant to the Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-23-25, 40-23-82, or 40-12-224. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 23, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 6-24. - License fees in police jurisdiction. 
Any person, firm, association, or corporation engaged in any business outside the municipality but within the police jurisdiction hereof shall pay one-half (½) of the amount of the license imposed for like business within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 24, 11-5-07)  
DIVISION 2. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-25. - Leasing or renting tangible personal property. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the words, terms and phrases used in this section shall have the same meaning as ascribed to them in and by the Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, tit. 40, ch. 12, art. 4; and the following words or phrases not defined in said ch. 12, wherever used in this section, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
City means the City of Guntersville. 
(b)  Levy and amount of privilege or license tax. There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax on each person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of leasing or renting tangible personal property which shall be in the amounts to be determined by the application of the rates against gross proceeds or gross receipts derived by the lessor from the lease or rental of tangible personal property, as follows: 
(1)  General rate. On each person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of leasing or renting tangible personal property, there is hereby levied at the rate of four (4) percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor from the lease or rental of tangible personal property of every kind and description; provided, further, that the privilege or license tax on each person or firm engaging or continuing within this city in the business of the leasing and rental of linens and garments shall be at the rate of four (4) percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor from the lease or rental of such linens and garments. 
(2)  Automotive rate. Provided, further, that the said privilege or license tax on each person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of leasing or renting any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer shall be at the rate of two (2) percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor from the lease or rental of such automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer. 
(3)  Exclusions. Provided, however, that the tax levied in this section shall not apply to any leasing or rental, as lessor, by the state, or any municipality or county in the state, or any public corporation organized under the laws of the state, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any corporation organized under the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975. §§ 11-54-80—11-54-101. 
(4)  Pass On authority. Notwithstanding the above, nothing shall prohibit a lessor subject to the privilege or license tax from passing such amounts on to a lessee by adding such taxes to the leasing price or otherwise, provided, however, that all such amounts passed on to the lessee shall be includable in the gross proceeds derived from the lease of tangible personal property which shall be subject to the privilege or license tax owed by the lessor. 
Provided, however, the authority to pass on such amounts of the privilege or license tax granted in this section shall not apply to the leasing or renting of tangible personal property to the state, a municipality, or county in the state, unless the flat amount collected by the lessor includes both the tax and the leasing fee. 
(c)  Levy of the tax in police jurisdiction. Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in the doing of any act, or who shall do any act, or continuing in the doing of any act, or engaged in the operation of any business, or who shall engage in the operation of any business, within the police jurisdiction of the city but beyond the corporate limits of the said city, for which or upon which a privilege or license tax is in this section levied or required within the corporate limits of the city, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law or by municipal ordinance, to be collected as herein provided for the privilege or license taxes herein levied within the corporate limits of the city, a privilege or license tax equal to one-half (½) of that provided, levied or required in this section for the doing of such act, or the engaging or continuing therein, or the engaging or continuing in the operation of such business within the corporate limits of the city. Provided, further, that except for the amount of the privilege or license tax herein levied within the police jurisdiction of the city but without the corporate limits thereof, all the provisions of this ordinance extend and apply to all the area within the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(d)  Provisions of state statutes applicable to this ordinance and taxes herein levied. The taxes levied by subsections (b) and (c) shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, provisions, rules, regulations, statutes of limitation, penalties, fines, punishments, deductions, and collection and enforcement provisions as are provided for the corresponding state rental tax statutes, including the Alabama Taxpayers' Bill of Rights and Uniform Revenue Procedures Act, including Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, §§ 40-2A-7 and 40-2A-11 and including Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, tit. 40, ch. 12, art. 4, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, all of which are adopted and made a part hereof by reference. Special exemptions from the taxes imposed by this section are also allowed in all other instances where the taxes levied by Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 12, art. 4 are exempted under any other provision of the Code of Ala. 1975. 
(e)  Administration of taxes by revenue discovery system. The taxes levied under the provisions of this section shall be administered and collected by the revenue discovery system (hereinafter referred to as the "RDS") in accordance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 12, art. 4, including § 40-12-224, and §§ 11-51-180—11-51-185, inclusive, 11-51-207(b), 11-51-208, and 11-51-210, Code of Ala. 1975. Except as otherwise provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-224, the taxes shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrues. On or before the due date, every person, firm or corporation on whom the taxes levied by this section are imposed shall render to the RDS, on a form prescribed by the RDS, a true and correct statement showing such information as the RDS may require, and at the time of making such monthly report the taxpayer shall compute the taxes due and shall pay to the RDS the amount of taxes shown to be due. 
(f)  Article cumulative. This section shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the city's general license tax code, but shall be held to be cumulative and the amounts of the taxes herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of other taxes imposed by the city by its general business license code or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 926, §§ 1—5, 7, 10-16-06; Ord. No. 997, 8-2-10)  
Secs. 6-26—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 924, §§ 1—9, adopted October 16, 2006, amended chapter 6, article II, §§ 6-30—6-41 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly chapter 6, article II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 614, §§ 1—12, adopted September 1, 1987.   Section 11 of Ord. No. 924 states: "Upon the effective date of this ordinance, there is hereby repealed Ordinance No. 614; provided, however, that all taxes accruing and all reports due under Ordinance No. 614 prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be remitted and made in accordance with Ordinance No. 614 as if Ordinance No. 614 were still in full force and effect." 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the same meaning as ascribed to them in and by Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, tit. 40, ch. 23, and the following words or phrases not defined in said ch. 23, wherever used in this article, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
City means the City of Guntersville, Alabama. 
State sales tax statutes shall mean Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, tit. 40, ch. 23, art. 1. 
State use tax statutes shall mean Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, tit. 40, ch. 23, art. 2. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 1, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-32. - Levy of sales tax. 
There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of rates against the gross sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows: 
(1)  General rate. Upon every person, firm, or corporation, (including the state, the University of Alabama, Auburn University, and all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether the institutions be denominational, state, county, or municipal institutions, any association or other agency or instrumentality of the institutions) engaged or continuing within this city in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character, (not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sales of material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair, or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft, and commercial fishing vessels of over five (5) tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources), an amount equal to four percent (4%) of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein. Provided, however, that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of the business at the rates specified, when his or her books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his or her books are not kept he or she shall pay the tax as a retailer, on the gross sales of the business. 
Where any used part including tires of an automotive vehicle or a truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or rebuilt part or tire, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used part or tire sold less the credit for the used part or tire taken in trade, provided, however, this provision shall not be construed to include batteries. 
(2)  Amusement/entertainment rate. Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within this city in the business of conducting or operating places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theaters, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games, (including athletic contests, conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within this city, or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether the institution or association be a denominational, a state, or county, or a municipal institution, or association or a state, county, or city school, or other institution, association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, golf courses, or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement, or entertainment is offered to the public or place or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dance halls of every kind and description within the city, an amount equal to four percent (4%) of the gross receipts of any such business. Provided, however, notwithstanding any language to the contrary in the prior portion of this ordinance, the tax provisions so specified shall not apply to any athletic event conducted by a public primary or secondary school or any football playoff conducted by or under the auspices of the Alabama High School Athletic Association. The tax amount which would have been collected pursuant to this subsection shall continue to be collected by the public primary or secondary school but shall be retained by the school which collected it and shall be used by the school for school purposes. 
(3)  Machine rate. Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within this city in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, and manufacturing of tangible personal property an amount equal to one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the gross proceeds of the sale of the machines. The term "machine," as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of the machines, attachments, and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of the machines and which are necessary to the operation of the machines and are customarily so used. 
(4)  Automotive rate. Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within this city in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer, or mobile home set-up materials and supplies including but not limited to steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes, and any other materials pertaining thereto an amount equal to three-quarters of one percent (.75%) of the gross proceeds of sale of the automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer, or mobile home set-up materials and supplies provided, however, where a person subject to the tax provided for in this subsection withdraws from his or her stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer for use by him or her or by his or her employee or agent in the operation of the business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year or part thereof during which the automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of the person. Each year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be of such withdrawal and shall run for the twelve (12) succeeding months or part thereof during which the automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of the person. 
Where any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the new difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
Sales of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, truck trailers, or semitrailers that will be registered or titled outside of the state, that are exported or removed from the state within seventy-two (72) hours by the purchaser or his or her agent for first use outside of the state are not subject to city sales tax. Sales of other vehicles such as mobile homes, motor bikes, all terrain vehicles, and boats do not qualify for the export exemption provision and are taxable unless the dealer can provide factual evidence that the vehicle was delivered outside of the state or to a common carrier for transportation outside the state. In order for the sale to be exempt from municipal sales tax, the information relative to the exempt sale shall be documented on forms approved by the city or its agent. 
(5)  Agricultural machine rate. Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within this city in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to one and one-half percent (1.5%) the gross proceeds of the sale thereof; provided, that the one and one-half percent (1.5%) rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. 
Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(6)  Vending machine rate. Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within this city in the business of selling through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for human consumption, not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products, and substitutes therefor, there is levied a tax equal to four percent (4%) of the cost of the food, food products, and beverages sold through the machines, which cost for the purpose of this subsection shall be the gross proceeds of sales of the business. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-33. - Levy of the sales tax in police jurisdiction. 
Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in the doing of any act, or who shall do any act, or continuing in the doing of any act, or engaged in the operation of any business, or who shall engage in the operation of any business, within the police jurisdiction of the city but beyond the corporate limits of the said city, for which or upon which a privilege or license tax is levied or required by section 6-32 of this article within the corporate limits of the city, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law or by city ordinance, to be collected as herein provided for the privilege or license taxes herein levied within the corporate limits of the city, a privilege or license tax equal to one-half (½) of that provided, levied or required in this ordinance for the doing of such act, or the engaging or continuing therein, or the engaging or continuing in the operation of such business within the corporate limits of the city. Provided, further, that except for the amount of the privilege or license tax herein levied within the police jurisdiction of the city but without the corporate limits thereof, all the provisions of this article extend and apply to all the area within the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 3, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-34. - Provisions of state sales tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes herein levied. 
The taxes levied by sections 6-32 and 6-33 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, provisions, rules and regulations promulgated under the Alabama Administrative Procedure Act, direct pay permit and drive-out certificate procedures, statutes of limitation, penalties, fines, punishments, deductions, and collection and enforcement provisions for the corresponding state sales tax, including the Taxpayers' Bill of Rights and Uniform Revenue Procedures Act, including Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, §§ 40-2A-7, 40-2A-11, 40-23-1, 40-23-2, 40-23-2.1, 40-23-4—40-23-31, inclusive, 40-23-36—40-23-38, except for those provisions relating to the tax rate or where inapplicable or otherwise provided in this article, all of which are adopted and made a part hereof by reference. Special exemptions from the sales taxes imposed by sections 6-32 and 6-33 are also allowed in all other instances where the sales taxes levied by the Code of Ala. 1975. tit. 40, ch. 23, art. 1 are exempted under any other provision of the Code of Ala. 1975. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 4, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-35. - Levy of use tax. 
There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, an excise tax on the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property, in amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross sales or gross purchases as follows: 
(1)  General rate. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property, not including, however, materials and supplies bought for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repairing or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five (5) tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources, purchased at retail on or after the effective date of this article for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate of four percent (4%) of the sales price of such property or the amount of tax collected by the seller, whichever is greater; provided, however, when the seller follows the state department of revenue's suggested use tax brackets and his records prove that his following said brackets resulted in a net undercollection of tax for the month, he may report the tax due or tax collected, whichever is less, except as provided in subsections (2), (3) and (4). 
(2)  Machine rate. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property, purchased at retail on or after the effective date of this article at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the sales price of any such machine or the amount of tax collected by the seller, whichever is greater; provided, however, when the seller follows the state department of revenue's suggested use tax brackets and his records prove that his following said brackets resulted in a net undercollection of tax for the month, he may report the tax due or tax collected, whichever is less; provided, that the term "machine," as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(3)  Automotive rate. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, and mobile home set-up materials and supplies including but not limited to steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes and any other materials pertaining thereto, purchased at retail on or after the effective date of this article for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (.75%) of the sales price of such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, and mobile home set-up materials and supplies as specified above, or the amount of tax collected by the seller, whichever is greater; provided, however, when the seller follows the state department of revenue's suggested use tax brackets and his records prove that his following said brackets resulted in a net undercollection of tax for the month, he may report the tax due or tax collected, whichever is less. When any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(4)  Agricultural rate. There is hereby levied and imposed an excise tax on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of any machine, machinery, or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry, or farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, which is purchased at retail after the effective date of this ordinance for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the sales price of such property or the amount of tax collected by the seller, whichever is greater, provided, however, when the seller follows the state department of revenue's suggested use tax brackets and his records prove that his following said brackets resulted in a net undercollection of tax for the month, he may report the tax due or tax collected whichever is less, regardless of whether the retailer is or is not engaged in business in this city. Provided, however, the one and one-half percent (1.5%) rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(5)  Liability for tax not extinguished. Every person storing, using or otherwise consuming in this city such tangible personal property purchased at retail shall be liable for the tax imposed by this section, and the liability shall not be extinguished until the tax has been paid to this city or its duly authorized agent; provided, that a receipt from a retailer maintaining a place of business in this city or a retailer authorized by the city or its agent under such rules and regulations as the commissioner of the state department of revenue may prescribe, to collect the tax imposed hereby and who shall for the purpose of this article be regarded as a retailer maintaining a place of business in this city, given to the purchaser in accordance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-67, shall be sufficient to relieve the purchaser from further liability for a tax to which such receipt may refer. 
(6)  Measure of use tax. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the classes of tangible personal property, and at the rates imposed on such classes, specified in subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4), on the storage, use, or other consumption in the performance of a contract in this city of any such tangible personal property, new or used, the tax to be measured by the sales price or the fair and reasonable market value of such tangible personal property when put into use in this city, whichever is less; provided, that the tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply where the taxes imposed by subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) apply. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 5, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-36. - Levy of the use tax in police jurisdiction. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property outside the corporate limits of the city, but within its police jurisdiction, at one-half (½) the rates specified in subsections 6-35(1)—6-35(4). 
(Ord. No. 924, § 6, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-37. - Provisions of state use tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes herein levied. 
The taxes levied by sections 6-35 and 6-36 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, provisions, rules and regulations promulgated under the Alabama Administrative Procedure Act, direct pay permit and drive-out certificate procedures, statutes of limitation, penalties, fines, punishments, deductions, and collection and enforcement provisions for the corresponding State Use Tax, including the Taxpayers' Bill of Rights and Uniform Revenue Procedures Act, including Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, §§ 40-2A-7 and 40-2A-11, and including Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, tit. 40, ch. 23, art. 2, except for those provisions relating to the tax rate or where inapplicable or otherwise provided in this article, all of which are adopted and made a part hereof by reference. Special exemptions from the sales taxes imposed by sections 6-35 and 6-36 are also allowed in all other instances where the use taxes levied by Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 23, art. 2 are exempted under any other provision of the Code of Ala. 1975. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 7, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-38. - Administration of taxes by revenue discovery system. 
(a)  The sales and use taxes levied under the provisions of this article shall be administered and collected by the revenue discovery system (hereinafter referred to as the "RDS") in accordance with the provisions of Articles 1 and 2, Chapter 23, Title 40, Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 23, arts. 1, 2 and Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-180—11-51-185 inclusive, 11-51-207(a), 11-51-208, 11-51-210, and 11-51-211. Except as otherwise provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-7 or 40-23-68, as applicable, the taxes shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrues. On or before the required due date, every person, firm or corporation on whom the taxes levied by this article are imposed shall render to the RDS, on a form prescribed by the RDS, a true and correct statement showing such information as the RDS may require, and at the time of making such monthly report the taxpayer shall compute the taxes due and shall pay to the RDS the amount of city taxes shown to be due. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), the taxes provided in sections 6-32 and 6-33 on any automotive vehicle, truck trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or travel trailer required to be registered or licensed with the probate judge, which is not sold through a licensed state dealer, shall be collected and fees paid in accordance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-23-104 and 40-23-107, respectively. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), the taxes provided in sections 6-35 and 6-36 on any automotive vehicle, truck trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or travel trailer required to be licensed with the probate judge, which were sold by dealers that are not licensed in the state, or were sold by licensed state dealers who failed to collect city sales taxes at the point of sale, shall be collected and fees paid in accordance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-23-104 and 40-23-107, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 8, 10-16-06; Ord. No. 997, 8-2-10)  
Sec. 6-39. - Article cumulative. 
This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the city's general license tax code, but shall be held to be cumulative and the amounts of the taxes herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of other taxes imposed by the city by its general business license code or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 9, 10-16-06)  
Secs. 6-40—6-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GARAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 6-50. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Garage sales: All sales entitled garage sales, lawn sales, yard sales, attic sales, rummage sales, flea market sales, or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property, which is advertised by any means, whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale. 
Goods: Any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 11-5-84)  
Sec. 6-51. - Permits and fees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the city without first filing with the clerk the information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such clerk a permit to do so, to be known as a "garage sale permit." The fee for such permit shall be two dollars ($2.00). 
(Ord. No. 569, § 2, 11-5-84)  
Sec. 6-52. - Restriction on permit issuance. 
Such permit shall be issued to any one (1) person only twice within a twelve-month period, and no such permit shall be issued for more than two (2) consecutive calendar days. Each permit issued under this section must be permanently displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the permitted sale. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 3, 11-5-84)  
Sec. 6-53. - Information to be filed. 
Information to be filed with the clerk pursuant to this article, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Name of person conducting the sale. 
(2)  Name of owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted, and consent of owner, if applicant is other than the owner. 
(3)  Location at which sale is to be conducted. 
(4)  Number of days of sale. 
(5)  Date and nature of any past sale. 
(6)  Relationship or connection applicant may have had with any other person conducting such sale and the date of such sale. 
(7)  Whether or not applicant has been issued any other license or permit by any local, state, or federal agency. 
(8)  Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the information therein given is full and true and known to such person to be so. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 4, 11-5-84)  
Sec. 6-54. - Persons and sales excepted. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Any person advertising for sale items of personal property, which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five (5) in number. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 5, 11-5-84)  
Sec. 6-55. - Penalties. 
Any person conducting any such sale without being properly licensed therefor or who shall violate any of the other terms or regulations of this article, shall, upon conviction, be fined for not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ten (10) days for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 6, 11-5-84)  
Secs. 6-56—6-59. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1037, § 8, adopted Apr. 1, 2013, repealed §§ 6-56—6-58, which pertained to farmer's markets and derived from Ord. No. 825, §§ 1—3, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 983, 9-21-09. For current provisions, see §§ 6-191—6-197.  
ARTICLE IV. - CIGARETTE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— State tobacco tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-25-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-60. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Cigarettes: A roll of finely cut tobacco or any substitute therefor enclosed in paper prepared for smoking by individuals. 
Dealer: Any wholesale or retail dealer as herein defined. 
Package: An individual container from which or in which retail sales of cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
Retail dealer: Any person, other than a wholesale dealer, who sells or delivers cigarettes within the city or its police jurisdiction, and any person operating under a retail dealer's license. 
Sold and sale: Any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration or any agreement therefor, including rewards, prizes or premiums of cigarettes given as a result of operation on punch boards, shooting galleries or other activities. 
Stamps: The stamp by the use of one (1) or more of which the taxes levied under this article are paid. 
State law definitions: Any words or phrases used in this article and not herein defined which are defined in the general revenue act of Alabama. 
Store and stored: The storage or warehousing of cigarettes in any manner, or the withdrawal or use of the same for any purpose, other than for resale or reshipment outside of the city or its police jurisdiction. 
Wholesale dealer: A person who sells or delivers within the city or its police jurisdiction, at wholesale only, cigarettes to retail dealers for the purpose of resale only. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 1, 11-15-49) 
State Law reference— General revenue act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 21-40-1 et seq.  
Sec. 6-61. - Levy of tax. 
In addition to all other taxes now imposed by law, every person who sells, stores or delivers cigarettes shall pay a license tax to the city, and a license tax is hereby fixed and levied, for the sale, storage, or delivery of cigarettes in the corporate limits, which license tax shall be in an amount equal to four cents for each twenty (20) cigarettes, or fraction of such number, contained in the package so sold, stored or delivered, and in the police jurisdiction of the city an additional license tax shall be in an amount equal to two cents for each twenty (20) cigarettes, or fraction of such number, contained in the package so sold, stored or delivered. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 2, 11-15-49; Ord. No. 449, 7-19-71)  
Sec. 6-62. - Stamps—Purchase. 
The city clerk shall keep on hand for sale an adequate quantity of stamps to be affixed to each package of cigarettes in denominations as required under this article. Each such stamp shall have inscribed thereon the words "City of Guntersville Tobacco Tax," but such words need not be arranged in the foregoing order and may be abbreviated. Stamps may be sold to wholesale dealers only by the city clerk at a price equal to ninety (90) percent of the full amount representing compensation to the wholesale dealer for the labor of affixing such stamps to the packages in which the cigarettes are contained. All other persons, except such wholesale dealers, must pay the full amount of the stamps, but no person shall be entitled to purchase any such number of stamps as shall cause the purchase price to include a fraction of a cent. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 3, 11-15-49)  
Sec. 6-63. - Same—Affixing. 
(a)  Before any cigarettes shall be sold, stored or delivered within the corporate limits of the city or its police jurisdiction by any dealer, such dealer shall affix to each package of cigarettes a stamp obtained from the city clerk in the amounts set out in this article in payment of the license taxes imposed by this article. Every dealer shall, within six (6) hours after receipt of any cigarettes, unless sooner offered for sale, cause stamps to the requisite amount of the tax to be affixed as herein provided and shall cause the same to be cancelled by writing or stamping with waterproof ink across the face of each stamp such registered number as shall be furnished to such dealer by the city clerk. After such stamping has been begun it shall be continued with reasonable diligence by such dealer until all unstamped cigarettes shall have been stamped, and the stamps cancelled as herein provided, but no stamp required to be affixed to any package of cigarettes shall, after the same has been affixed as herein provided, be again used in payment of any part of the tax levied under this article. Such stamps shall be affixed in such manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. In the case of cigarettes sold by retail in packages, the stamps shall be affixed to each individual package in such a way that such stamps shall be torn in two or mutilated when such package is opened. 
(b)  Whenever the requisite amount of stamps has been affixed to the cigarettes or the packages containing the same as required herein, this article shall not be construed to require additional stamps to be affixed thereto in case of subsequent sales, deliveries or storage; provided, that where such cigarettes have been properly stamped for sale, delivery or storage within the police jurisdiction, then before the same may be sold, delivered or stored in the corporate limits of the city there must be properly affixed to such cigarettes and properly cancelled an equal amount of stamps to those already affixed. 
(Ord. No. 291, §§ 4, 7(d), 11-15-49)  
Sec. 6-64. - Records; reports. 
(a)  Every wholesale dealer shall, at the time of selling or delivering cigarettes into the city or its police jurisdiction, make a true duplicate invoice of the same, which shall show full and complete details of the sale or delivery of such cigarettes and the prices thereof. 
(b)  Every wholesale dealer and every retail dealer shall keep a record of the purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of cigarettes. All such invoices and cancelled checks and other memoranda pertaining to any such purchase, sale, exchange or receipt shall be retained for a period of three (3) years and shall be subject to inspection by the city clerk, who shall have the power and authority to enter upon the premises of any dealer at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining such invoices, records, cancelled checks and other memoranda. 
(c)  Any person who purchases or receives in any manner whatsoever cigarettes which do not have stamps affixed in the manner required by this article shall, within three (3) days after receipt of such cigarettes, report the receipt and purchase thereof to the city clerk, giving the date of purchase or receipt, the name of the person from whom purchased or received, and a list describing the cigarettes so purchased or received and the purchase price thereof. Such report must be made by certified mail or in person. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 5, 11-15-49)  
Sec. 6-65. - Illegal acts. 
Among others, the following acts and omissions shall be unlawful: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this article to affix stamps to cigarettes to fail to affix such stamps or to cancel such stamps in the manner or within the time required by this article. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, store or deliver within the city or its police jurisdiction any cigarettes upon which stamps have not been affixed and cancelled as provided in this article. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession or under such person's control any cigarettes upon which stamps have not been affixed in the manner required by this article for more than six (6) hours after receipt of such cigarettes on the premises of such person. The possession of each package of cigarettes not having proper stamps affixed as required by this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to manufacture, buy, sell, offer for sale, or possess, or attempt so to do, any reproduction or counterfeit of the stamps provided for in this article, or to possess tools, implements, instruments or materials of any kind necessary or appropriate to reproduce or counterfeit such stamps, or to alter or cause to be altered any stamps herein provided for. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to remove from a package or otherwise prepare any stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used, after it has already been used, or to buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any washed, removed, altered or restored stamp to any person, or to have in possession any such washed or removed or restored or altered stamp, or, for the purpose of indicating payment of any tax hereunder, to reuse any stamp which has theretofore been used for the payment of any tax provided for herein except as to the sales made by the city clerk. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to reuse or refill with cigarettes any packages from which cigarettes have been removed and with respect to which the tax has theretofore been paid. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person, who is in this article required to keep records, to fail or omit to keep the same in the manner herein provided, or to refuse to permit the city clerk to inspect the same at any reasonable hour, or to interfere with or obstruct the city clerk in the making of any such inspection. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is herein required to file statements with the city clerk to fail or omit to make or file any statement herein provided within the time herein specified, or to make any false statement therein, and such offense shall be a continuing offense against the city and each day during which such person shall sell, store or deliver cigarettes in the city or its police jurisdiction during such default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is required to pay the license tax herein provided for to fail or omit to pay the same within the time herein specified, and such offense shall be a continuing offense against the city and each day during which such person shall sell, store or deliver cigarettes in the city or its police jurisdiction during such default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 6, 11-15-49)  
Sec. 6-66. - Exclusions; cumulative. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to tax interstate commerce or any business of the United States government or any branch or agency thereof. 
(b)  This article shall not be construed to apply to cigarettes stored for the purpose of resale or reshipment outside the city and its police jurisdiction and which are actually so resold or reshipped. 
(c)  This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 7(a)—(c), 11-15-49)  
Secs. 6-67—6-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MOTOR FUEL TAX 
 
Sec. 6-70. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Distributor, seller: Any person who shall engage in the selling or delivering of gasoline as herein defined, within the corporate limits of the city and within the police jurisdiction thereof. 
Gasoline: Includes gasoline, naphtha, and all other motor fuels commonly used in combustible engines, but shall not include kerosene oil. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 1, 12-17-34)  
Sec. 6-71. - Levy of tax—In city. 
Every distributor or seller shall pay a privilege license to the city in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and in addition thereto shall pay an amount equal to one cent on each gallon of gasoline sold or delivered within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 2, 12-17-34)  
Sec. 6-72. - Same—In police jurisdiction. 
Every distributor or seller shall pay an amount equal to one-half cent on each gallon of gasoline sold or delivered beyond the corporate limits of the city and within the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 3, 12-17-34)  
Sec. 6-73. - License period. 
The license herein required and issued hereunder shall be for each license or calendar year only in which issued, and no license shall be issued for any year to extend into the next succeeding year. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 9, 12-17-34)  
Sec. 6-74. - Exemption. 
Any person engaged as seller or distributor in selling or distributing gasoline purchased in whole from other sellers or distributors who have paid the license tax herein provided shall be required to pay no license based on the sale of, or delivery of such gasoline so purchased, but in order to obtain the exemption in this section provided, such seller or distributor must on or before the first day of each year, and on or before the fifteenth day of each month, file with the city clerk a sworn statement in writing showing each purchase by such person of gasoline during the calendar year preceding, as well as the name of the person from whom, and the date on which purchased, and the amount so purchased by such person on blanks to be furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 4, 12-17-34)  
Sec. 6-75. - Liability for tax of persons with no place of business in city. 
All persons engaged in the business of selling and distributing gasoline, but who have no place of business in the corporate limits and who solicits orders for gasoline in the city limits or within the police jurisdiction thereof to fill orders previously taken or not from other points within the state shall be liable for and shall pay the same license as that fixed and specified in section 6-71 and shall be subject to the same penalties for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 7, 12-17-34)  
Sec. 6-76. - Interstate commerce transactions excluded. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales or deliveries which constitute interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 6, 12-17-34)  
Sec. 6-77. - Reports. 
(a)  Each distributor or seller, except such as is exempt from license tax under the provisions of section 6-74, shall on or before the first day of each year, and on or before the fifteenth day of each month, file with the clerk of the city a sworn statement which shall be full, true, and accurate of the amount and quantity of all gasoline so sold and delivered by such distributor or seller within the corporate limits and within the police jurisdiction of the city, and which shall also contain a detailed and specific statement of the amount and quantity of all gasoline sold and delivered to any other distributor or seller engaged in either of such businesses within the corporate limits and within the police jurisdiction. 
(b)  Any seller or distributor who shall fail or refuse to make or file any statement herein provided for, as required to be filed with the city clerk, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 192, §§ 5, 10, 12-17-34)  
Sec. 6-78. - Delinquency. 
The license herein fixed shall be paid by each person against whom the same is herein levied and fixed on or before the fifteenth day of each calendar month being the time fixed for the filing of such statement, based on the sales and deliveries made in the preceding month and any person failing or omitting to pay the same within the time shall be guilty of an offense against the city, and shall be also guilty of an offense each day thereafter until paid, and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8; and in addition to such punishment shall be liable for and shall pay unto the city clerk a penalty of twenty (20) percent thereon, payable and collectable as are other license penalties. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 12, 12-17-34)  
Sec. 6-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS, ETC. 
 
Sec. 6-80. - Registration—Required. 
Any person purchasing or otherwise dealing in antique, used or scrap jewelry and precious metals, including but not limited to gold and silver, where the purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk, shall be required to register with the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 1, 10-20-80)  
Sec. 6-81. - Same—Information required. 
At the time of such registration the following information shall be supplied: 
(1)  Name of the business, if other than an individual. 
(2)  Name of the individual responsible for the operation of the business. 
(3)  Location and hours of operation of the business. 
(4)  Residence address of person responsible for operation. 
(5)  Permanent location for firm or corporation operating the business. 
(6)  Name of each employee intended to be engaged in the business. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 2, 10-20-80)  
Sec. 6-82. - Same—Investigation; disqualifying offenses. 
The chief of police shall investigate each applicant and employee. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offenses of buying or receiving stolen goods, burglary, robbery, embezzlement or theft. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 3, 10-20-80)  
Sec. 6-83. - Procuring licenses, paying taxes. 
Any person authorized to operate under this article shall in addition procure all licenses necessary to operate the business and pay all taxes and fees to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 4, 10-20-80)  
Sec. 6-84. - Holding period before alteration of items. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaging in the activity described in section 6-80 to sell, exchange, barter, or remove from the place in which such business is conducted, or to change the form of any of such items by remounting, melting, cutting up or otherwise changing the form of any of the items for a period of seventy-two (72) hours from the date of the purchase. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 5, 10-20-80)  
Sec. 6-85. - Record of transactions; reports. 
(a)  Every person engaging in the activity described in section 6-80 shall keep a record containing a clear and accurate description of all items purchased (including specifically any identifying marks such as words, names or initials), the date and amount of money paid for each item, the name of the seller, the social security or driver's license number of the seller, and the residence address (not general delivery or post office box, but including the box number if on any rural route) and telephone number of the seller. The seller and purchaser shall both sign the record of each transaction. 
(b)  On each day the purchaser transacts business of the type described herein such purchaser shall deliver to the chief of police a duplicate copy of the record concerning that day's business. This record shall be delivered by noon of the day following the date of the transaction and by noon on Monday for all transactions since the preceding Friday. 
(c)  The record shall be carefully preserved without any alteration and shall be at all times available for inspection by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 6, 10-20-80)  
Sec. 6-86. - Punishment. 
Every person, whether principal, agent or employee, who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined a sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), within the limits of section 1-8, and otherwise punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 7, 10-20-80)  
Secs. 6-87—6-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 925, §§ 1—5, 7, 9, adopted October 16, 2006, amended chapter 6, article VII, §§ 6-90—6-96 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly chapter 6, article VII pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 439, §§ 1—5, 9, adopted July 6, 1970; Ord. No. 642, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 6, 1989 and Ord. No. 902, §§ 1—4, adopted August 1, 2005.   Section 8 of Ord. No. 925 states: "Upon the effective date of this ordinance, there is hereby repealed Ordinance Nos. 642 and 439; provided, however, that all taxes accruing and all reports due under Ordinance Nos. 642 and 439 prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be remitted and made in accordance with Ordinance Nos. 642 and 439 as if Ordinance Nos. 642 and 439 were still in full force and effect." 
 
Sec. 6-91. - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the same meaning as ascribed to them in and by Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, tit. 40, ch. 26; and the following words or phrases not defined in said ch. 26, wherever used in this article, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
City means the City of Guntersville. 
(Ord. No. 925, § 1, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-92. - Levy of tax or surcharge in the city limit and police jurisdiction. 
For the privilege of engaging in or continuing within the City of Guntersville, Alabama, and its police jurisdiction, the business activities hereinafter referred to, there is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, a privilege tax or surcharge upon every person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of renting any room, lodging, campsite or other accommodations to transients for a consideration, in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) per rental unit per night for such room, lodging, or other accommodation and eighty cents ($0.80) per night for each campsite in the city limits and one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per rental unit per night for such room, lodging, or other accommodation and forty cents ($0.40) per night for each campsite in the police jurisdiction. The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodging or accommodation rented to any one (1) party for a period of one hundred and eighty (180) continuous days or more. 
(Ord. No. 925, § 2, 9, 10-16-06; Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 10-13-14)  
Sec. 6-93. - Levy and amount of tax in the police jurisdiction. 
Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in the doing of any act, or who shall do any act, or continuing in the doing of any act, or engaged in the operation of any business, or who shall engage in the operation of any business, within the police jurisdiction of the city but beyond the corporate limits of the said city, for which or upon which a privilege or license tax is levied or required by section 6-92 within the corporate limits of the city, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law or by municipal ordinance, to be collected as herein provided for the privilege or license taxes herein levied within the corporate limits of the city, a privilege or license tax equal to one-half (½) of that provided, levied or required in this article for the doing of such act, or the engaging or continuing therein, or the engaging or continuing in the operation of such business within the corporate limits of the city. Provided, further, that except for the amount of the privilege or license tax herein levied within the police jurisdiction of the city but without the corporate limits thereof, all the provisions of this article extend and apply to all the area within the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 925, § 3, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-94. - Application of state law. 
All taxes levied or assessed by the city pursuant to this provisions of this article shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, provisions, rules and regulations promulgated under the Alabama Administrative Procedure Act, statutes of limitation, penalties, fines, punishments, deductions, and collection and enforcement provisions for the corresponding state lodgings or transient occupancy tax, including the Taxpayers' Bill of Rights and Uniform Revenue Procedures Act, including the Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, §§ 40-2A-7 and 40-2A-11, and including the Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, tit. 40, ch. 26, except for the rate of tax and where inapplicable or where otherwise provided in this article, all of which are adopted and made a part hereof by reference. 
(Ord. No. 925, § 4, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 6-95. - Administration of taxes by revenue discovery system. 
Except for the taxes or surcharges levied by section 6-92, the taxes levied under the provisions of this article shall be administered and collected by the revenue discovery system (hereinafter referred to as the "RDS") in accordance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 40, ch. 26, including § 40-26-3 and §§ 11-51-180—185, inclusive, 11-51-207(a), 11-51-208, and 11-51-210. In accordance with § 40-26-3, the taxes levied hereunder shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrues. On or before the twentieth day of each month, every person, firm or corporation on whom the taxes levied by this article are imposed shall render to the RDS, on a form prescribed by the RDS, a true and correct statement showing the gross proceeds of the business for the next preceding month, together with such other information as the RDS may demand and require, and at the time of making such monthly report the taxpayer shall compute the taxes due and shall pay to the RDS the amount of taxes shown to be due. The RDS, for good cause, may extend the time for making any return required under the provisions of this article, but the time for filing any such return shall not be extended for a period greater than thirty (30) days from the date such return is due to be made. 
(Ord. No. 925, § 5, 10-16-06; Ord. No. 997, 8-2-10)  
Sec. 6-96. - Article cumulative. 
This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the city's general license tax code, but shall be held to be cumulative and the amounts of the taxes herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of other taxes imposed by the city by its general business license code or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 925, § 7, 10-16-06)  
Secs. 6-97—6-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Article VIII has been deleted by the editor, inasmuch as it appears to have been superseded by Ord. No. 950, § 22 53, adopted November 5, 2007, codified as section 6-22 53 of this chapter. The former article VIII pertained to taxicabs, and derived from Ord. No. 263, § 1, 2, 9, adopted May 14, 1946. 
 
Secs. 6-100—6-106. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 819, adopted January 3, 2000, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 70-1—70-11. For purposes of classification, said Ord. No. 819 has been art. IX, §§ 6-107—6-117, at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— License schedule, § 6-2 et. seq. 
 
Sec. 6-107. - Definitions. 
Health Officer means the county health officer or his authorized representative, or a designated medical officer appointed by the Mayor of the City of Guntersville. 
Operator means any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing is performed and any individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing on the person of another. 
Tattoo, tattooed or tattooing refer to any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any other substances resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-1, 1-3-00)  
Sec. 6-108. - Health and sanitary requirements. 
Each person who operates a tattooing establishment shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Clean and sanitary restroom facilities must be available. 
2.  Hand washing facilities must be provided on premises with hot and cold water tempered through a mixing faucet. 
3.  Proper procedures for cleaning and preparing the skin for a tattoo should include washing with an antiseptic swab. 
4.  Clean and sanitary sheets, towels and drapes are to be used only once between laundering. 
5.  Dye should be properly labeled to indicate government approval for subcutaneous injection. 
6.  The VDRL test currently required by the Code of Alabama for beauticians and barbers will be required for tattooists. 
7.  Adequate facilities must be provided for the storage of a potable water supply and for storage of wastewater. A means must also be provided for refilling the potable water tanks from an approved water supply. 
8.  The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair and provided with adequate lighting and ventilation. 
9.  For each customer the operator shall wear a clean new pair of latex gloves designed for use in surgery. 
10.  No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with chemicals for the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering any blemish, birthmark, scar or tattoo. 
11.  Safety razors with a new single-service blade shall be used for shaving each customer. As an alternative, a straight edge razor may be used if it is thoroughly cleaned and sterilized before use on each customer. 
12.  Only petroleum jelly in collapsible metal or plastic tubes, or its equivalent, shall be used on the area to be tattooed. It shall be applied with sterile gauze. 
13.  The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks or other solid styptic to check the flow of blood is prohibited. 
14.  The operator must inquire of each customer and shall not tattoo anyone giving a history of recent jaundice or hepatitis. 
15.  Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with an individual sterile sponge or a disposable paper tissue which shall be used only on one person and then immediately discarded. After completing work on any person the tattooed area shall be washed with sterile gauze saturated with an antiseptic soap solution or a seventy (70) percent alcohol solution. The tattooed area shall be allowed to dry and petroleum jelly from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied using sterile gauze. A sterile gauze dressing shall then be fastened to the tattooed area with adhesive. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-2, 1-3-99)  
Sec. 6-109. - Care of instruments. 
(a)  Storing instruments. All clean, sterilized and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept in a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet while not in use. Such cabinet shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times. 
(b)  Sterilizing instruments. A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided for sterilizing all needles and similar instruments before use on any customer, person or patron.(Alternate heat sterilizing procedures may be used.) Sterilization of equipment will be accomplished by exposure to live steam for at least thirty (30) minutes at a minimum pressure of fifteen (15) pounds per square inch, temperature of two hundred forty (240) degrees Fahrenheit or one hundred sixteen (116) degrees Celsius. Chemical sterilization is not permitted. 
(c)  Use of instruments. The needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be so used, handled and temporarily placed during tattooing so that they will not be contaminated. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-3, 1-3-00)  
Sec. 6-110. - Records. 
Permanent records for each customer shall be maintained by the operator. Before the tattooing operation begins, the customer shall be required personally to enter on a record form provided by the establishment the date, name, address, age, serial number if a member of the armed forces, and signature. Such records shall be maintained in the tattoo establishment and shall be available for examination by the health officer. Records shall be retained by the operator for a period of not less than two (2) years. In the event of change of ownership or closing of the business, all such records shall be made available to the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-4, 1-3-00)  
Sec. 6-111. - Parental consent. 
Any individual that wishes to be tattooed must be over the age of eighteen or have a signed parental or guardian consent. These records of consent shall be kept on file at the tattoo establishment for inspection by the health officer. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or tattooist to require proper age identification before the tattooing operation begins. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-5, 1-3-00)  
Sec. 6-112. - General. 
The tattoo establishment will provide a disclosure statement and a list of directions pertaining to the care of the tattoo. To reduce the spread of communicable disease, tattoo artist are required to be immunized against the Hepatitis B disease and they must wear latex gloves. Also, smoking and drinking are not permitted in the tattoo area. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-6, 1-3-00)  
Sec. 6-113. - Infections. 
No person having any rash, pimple, boil or skin infection or other disease of the skin, any communicable disease, or any evidence of unhealthy condition shall be tattooed. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing which become known to the operator shall promptly be reported to the health officer by the person owning or operating the tattooing establishment. The infected customer shall be referred to a physician. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-7, 1-3-00)  
Sec. 6-114. - Pigments, dyes. 
All pigments, dyes, colors, etc., used in tattooing shall be sterile and free from bacteria, virus particles and noxious agents and substances. The pigments, dyes and colors used from stock solutions for each customer shall be placed in a single service receptacle. The receptacle and remaining solution shall be discarded after use on each customer. Any dye in which a needle was dipped shall not be used on another person. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-8, 1-3-00)  
Sec. 6-115. - Bandages and surgical dressings. 
All bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with the tattooing of a person shall be sterile. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-9, 1-3-00)  
Sec. 6-116. - Inspections. 
The health officer may conduct periodic inspections of a tattooing establishment for the purpose of determining whether or not the establishment and the persons performing tattooing therein are in compliance with this and other pertinent ordinances. It shall be unlawful for any person or operator of a tattooing establishment willfully to prevent or restrain the health officer from entering any establishment where tattooing is being performed for the purpose of inspecting said premises, after proper identification is presented to the operator. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-10, 1-3-00)  
Sec. 6-117. - Penalty. 
In addition to the penalties provided in section 6-22, the revocation and suspension of any license of any person violating any provision of this article shall be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 819, § 70-11, 1-3-00)  
Secs. 6-118—6-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PAWNBROKERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 957, §§ 1—10, adopted January 22, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article X, sections 6-151—6-160 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 6-151. - Definition. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
Those entities exempt from regulation under the Alabama Pawnshop Act, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 5-19A-1 et seq. are also exempt from the regulations under this article. 
Unless otherwise herein defined, the terms in this division have the same meaning as provided in the Alabama Pawnshop Act. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 1, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 6-152. - Registration. 
Every person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker is required to register with the police chief and provide the following information: 
(1)  Name of the business, if other than an individual. 
(2)  Name of individual responsible for the operation of the business. 
(3)  Location and hours of operation of the business. 
(4)  Residence address of person responsible for operation. 
(5)  Permanent location for entity operating the business. 
(6)  Name of each employee intended to be engaged in the business. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 2, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 6-153. - Business license. 
Each person registering as a pawnbroker must comply with the licensing requirements of the Alabama Pawnshop Act and obtain a business license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 3, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 6-154. - Bond. 
No person shall carry on or conduct the business of a pawnbroker in the city unless he gives bond payable to the city and approved by the city, conditioned that he will in every particular conform to the provisions of this article and any other regulation which may be passed concerning pawnbrokers. Every person injured by him in any dealing or transaction with him as a pawnbroker shall have a right of action on such bond until the penalty is exhausted. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 4, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 6-165. - Record of property received. 
Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business a record in which he shall enter in writing a clear and accurate description of all property received on deposit, pledge or purchase, particularly mentioning any prominent or descriptive marks, model numbers and serial number, the time when received and the name and place of residence of the person from whom received. This record shall be kept in a clean and legible manner, and no entry therein shall be falsified, erased, obliterated, defaced or removed. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 5, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 6-156. - Hours of business. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to open his place of business between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day except on Saturdays and during the month of December, during which time the mandatory closing time of 8:00 p.m. shall be extended to midnight. Provided, however, the business shall be closed on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 6, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 6-157. - Inspection of record and pawned property. 
Every pawnbroker shall, during the ordinary hours of business, when requested by the mayor, chief of police or any police officer of the city, submit an exhibit to his inspection the book required by section 6-155 to be kept and shall exhibit any property that may have been left with or received by him. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 7, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 6-158. - Reports to chief of police. 
Every pawnbroker within the city shall report to the chief of police a description of every article or thing received by him in pawn, pledge, trade, purchase or consignment on the business day immediately preceding the filing of such report in a manner and time as set out herein. Reports shall be made every day (except Sunday) before the hour of noon. Business done on Saturday shall be reported before noon the following Monday. 
(1)  Computerized reporting of pawnshop information. 
a.  The police chief shall establish the format and requirements for the transmission of data and may restrict the scope of the items that are to be electronically reported. A transaction reported by electronic transmission under subsection (1)a. herein shall not be reported on paper forms unless the police chief so requests. Each pawnbroker shall pay a fee of fifty cents ($0.50) per transaction required to be electronically reported if the electronic report transmitted to the chief of police is erroneous, duplicative or in an incorrect or incompatible format, or if no electronic report of the transaction is transmitted. 
b.  Pawnbrokers shall report their transactions electronically to the police chief as required by subsections (1)a. and (1)b. herein from and after the following dates: 
1.  For each pawnshop for which a pawnbroker license is first obtained on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, effective upon commencing business. 
2.  For each pawnshop for which a pawnbroker license was first obtained before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, that maintains a computerized record-keeping system for its own record of transactions, no later than one month after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
3.  For each pawnshop for which a pawnbroker license was first obtained before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, not later than thirty (30) days. 
The chief of police may for good cause shown grant a pawnbroker an extension of the deadline to a date not later than ten (10) days. An extension may only be granted upon written application by the pawnbroker and upon a showing that the pawnbroker is making satisfactory progress toward acquiring computer programs and equipment to make the necessary transmission. 
(2)  Amendments to reports and formats. If, after establishing the format and requirements for the transmission of computerized reports of transactions, the police chief alters the required format, pawnbrokers shall be given at least thirty (30) days to comply with the new format requirements. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 8, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 6-159. - Punishment for violation. 
Every person, firm or corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code with a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 957, § 9, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 6-160. - Supervision or revocation of license. 
(a)  After notice and hearing, the city council may suspend or revoke a license upon a finding that: 
(1)  The pawnbroker, either knowingly or without the exercise of due care has violated this article. 
(2)  A fact or condition exists which, if it had been known at the time of the original application for a license, would have justified the refusal to issue a license. 
(3)  The licensee has aided, abetted or conspired with an individual or person to circumvent the requirements of this article. 
(4)  The licensee or a legal or beneficial owner of the license has been convicted of a crime that the police chief finds directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of the occupation of a pawnbroker. 
(5)  Has not accurately reported the information required under Code of Ala. 1975, § 5-19A-1 et seq. 
(b)  The city council may conditionally license or place on probation a person whose license has been suspended or may reprimand a license for a violation of this article. 
(c)  The city council may reinstate a suspended license or issue a new license to a person whose license has been revoked if no fact or condition then exists which would have justified the refusal to originally issue a license. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 10, 1-22-08)  
Secs. 6-161—6-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - FIREWORKS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 994, §§ 1—7, adopted June 21, 2010, have been included as §§ 6-171—6-177 at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 6-171. - Time of authorized sales. 
Common class "C" consumer fireworks as presently or hereafter defined by the U.S. Department of Transportation may be sold within the city limits of the City of Guntersville during the period beginning the twenty-fifth day of June and ending on the sixth day of July and beginning on the twentieth day of December and ending on the third day of January of each year, pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 1, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 6-172. - Sales of fireworks permit. 
Except as provided herein, no person shall offer for sale or sell at retail or wholesale any fireworks of any kind without having first applied for and received a permit from the State of Alabama Department of Insurance, State Fire Marshal's Office and a permit to sell fireworks for each location from which fireworks sales are permitted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 2, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 6-173. - Application for permit. 
All applications for a permit to sell fireworks shall: 
(1)  Be made in writing, accompanied by a permit from the State Fire Marshal's Office. Application must also include a statement that the applicant agrees to furnish the city with any additional information which may be required; 
(2)  Set forth the proposed location for the sale of fireworks. Applicant must contact code enforcement and license departments for approval of location before any structure is placed on proposed site; 
(3)  Be accompanied by an assurance that if the permit is granted, applicant shall at the time of issuance of the permit, deliver to the city clerk a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) combined single limits insurance certificate designating the City of Guntersville as an additional insured and a copy of the required permit from the State Fire Marshal; 
(4)  Include payment of required permit fee (business license) of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each sales location per sales year as described in section 6-171 of this article for locations in the city and five hundred dollars ($500.00) in the police jurisdiction. This permit fee will be refunded if permit is denied; 
(5)  Include payment of required security deposit of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per sales location. This security deposit will be refunded upon written request by the permittee once the permittee is no longer selling fireworks in the City of Guntersville. Security deposit may be held by the City of Guntersville on a continuous basis as long as permittee intends to do business again in the City of Guntersville. The City of Guntersville has the right to keep the security deposit if permittee knowingly fails to abide by all the rules of ordinance. The security deposit shall be forfeited to the City of Guntersville if permittee fails to abide by the rules and regulations set out in the ordinance from which this article was derived or any other rules of the City of Guntersville. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 3, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 6-174. - Operation of stand. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be issued a permit to sell fireworks in the City of Guntersville. 
(b)  Fireworks stand shall be occupied and managed by a person whom is eighteen (18) years or older while open for business. 
(c)  All fireworks stands shall be closed by 12:00 midnight each night of business except on July third, July fourth, and December thirty-first. 
(d)  "NO SMOKING" signs in letters not less than four (4) inches in height shall be prominently displayed on all four (4) sides of the temporary fireworks stand. 
(e)  The presence of lighted cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or any flame or glowing heat is unlawful within fifteen (15) feet of a temporary fireworks stand. 
(f)  No fireworks may be shot or discharged on premises. 
(g)  The operations of each fireworks stand and the sale of fireworks must be in compliance with all state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 4, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 6-175. - Fireworks structure requirements. 
All fireworks structures are subject to the following requirements and those required by the State of Alabama Department of Insurance and the State Fire Marshal's Office: 
(1)  Fireworks structures need not comply with the provisions of the building code provided, however, that all structures be erected in a manner that will reasonably insure the safety of attendants and customers. Code enforcement and business license departments must be contracted before any structure may be placed on site. 
(2)  Fireworks sales are not allowed from permanent buildings or structures; fireworks sales are permitted only from approved temporary stands, trailers, or structures. 
(3)  Fireworks structures must be temporary, and are only allowed in the City of Guntersville during the following dates: From June twenty-fifth until July sixth of each year, and from December twentieth until January third of each year. These limitations allow time for inspection by the State Fire Marshal's Office, and approval by city code and license departments, as well as clean up and removal of structures from sites. 
(4)  Each structure must be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet away from any school, public park or playground. 
(5)  Each structure must be at least twenty-five (25) feet away from all other buildings and/or dumpsters. 
(6)  No generators, gasoline, or other combustible/flammable materials may be placed or located within one hundred (100) feet of the structure. 
(7)  Each structure, which allows the paying customers to enter, must be at least thirty-two (32) feet in length and eight (8) feet in width. 
(8)  Each structure in excess of twenty-four (24) feet in length must have at least two (2) exits. Customers may not be permitted inside structures less than thirty-two (32) feet in length. 
(9)  Each structure in excess of twenty-four (24) feet in length must have at least two (2) ten-pound A.B.C. dry chemical fire extinguishers that are properly marked and certified. 
(10)  Temporary fireworks stands may be inspected by the city at any time prior to opening for business or during fireworks seasons. 
(11)  All litter shall be removed from each temporary fireworks stand location at the termination of each fireworks season. 
(12)  Each temporary fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location within three (3) days after each fireworks season. Any permit holder who leaves a temporary fireworks stand at its temporary location after said three (3) days will be charged two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day that the stand remains at the temporary location. 
(13)  Signage for temporary fireworks stands must comply with the sign regulations applicable to B-2 general business zones set forth in the City of Guntersville zoning ordinance; and no flashing signs allowed. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 5, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 6-176. - General requirements for permittee. 
(a)  All persons selling fireworks shall comply with applicable state and federal laws governing the sale and distribution of fireworks, as well as any City of Guntersville ordinances or regulations, which might also apply. 
(b)  Due to the seasonal nature of the fireworks business city permit fees are due before the opening of each stand, and will not be considered late when other business license fees are due. 
(c)  Prior to opening for business, the premises shall be cleared of weeds, litter and combustible material for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet around stand. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 6, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 6-177. - Timeframes for shooting of fireworks. 
The shooting of fireworks shall be limited to beginning the twenty-fifth day of June and ending on the sixth day of July and beginning on the twentieth day of December and ending on the third day of January of each year, pursuant to the provisions of this article, and shall not be shot any later than 12:00 midnight with the exception of New Year's Eve when the time can extend to 1:00 a.m. New Year's Day. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 7, 6-21-10)  
Secs. 6-178—6-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - FARMER'S MARKET 
 
Sec. 6-191. - General terms. 
(a)  The City of Guntersville shall have supervision and control of the farmer's market together with the streets and alleys adjoining the same which is located at Sunset Drive, Guntersville, Alabama. 
(b)  The farmer's market is created by the city for the purpose of providing a venue by which local producers and resellers may sell their products directly to the general public. It is the objective of the market to provide local farmers and resellers a market place for produce and agricultural products, to educate citizens about the agricultural importance of Marshall County and its surrounding counties, to promote the abundance of fruits and vegetables in our rural community and improve the economic impact of agriculture on small farmers and our community. 
(c)  The farmer's market is primarily a producer market. Reseller locations at the farmer's market shall be grouped together. All goods being sold as "resale" goods shall be designated by the seller as "not locally grown" in a manner which is open and obvious to customers. 
(1)  A producer is a person(s) that grows, raises and/or makes what they sell and produces local agricultural products within Marshall County and/or the seven (7) bordering counties of Madison, Jackson, Dekalb, Etowah, Blount, Cullman and Morgan. All agricultural products grown, raised or made and offered for sale must be produced by the seller or under the seller's direction and management in order for a vendor to be classified as a producer. 
(2)  A reseller is a person(s) selling agricultural products not meeting the definition and/or requirements of a producer. All resellers must purchase a city business license and collect and remit sales tax as required by law. 
(3)  An artisan is a person skilled in an art of producing a product which is considered high-quality or distinctive and is produced in small quantities, by hand or using traditional methods. An artisan shall be considered a "producer." 
(4)  All sellers shall be designated as either producers as described in subsection (c)(1) or as resellers as described in subsection (c)(2). 
(5)  Any person who chooses to sell goods as both a producer and reseller shall be required to obtain a user permit to sell goods as a reseller in one (1) stall and a separate user permit to sell goods as a producer in a separate stall. 
(d)  Sellers must obtain a current "growers permit" from the State of Alabama to obtain a permit to sell produce or vegetation at the farmer's market as a producer. 
(e)  All sellers must sign a Guntersville farmer's market facility user permit. 
(f)  All goods sold at the farmer's market must be grown, purchased or prepared by the person(s) authorized to sell at the market except that a producer may form a partnership with a producer of homegrown agricultural products within the seven (7) counties contiguous with Marshall County, Alabama without the requirement that the producer of the agricultural products produced in an adjoining county physically present at the market. The person from the adjoining county in partnership with another producer permitted to sell goods at the farmer's market must provide evidence of the grower's permit issued to the producer from the adjoining county and a document indicating the partnership arrangement. The farm in the adjoining county where the goods are produced would be subject to all provisions of this section relating to farm visits. 
(g)  All sellers must adhere to the terms of this article and all rules of the farmer's market authorized by this article. 
(h)  The farmer's market is a multi-use location. On days when the farmer's market is not in operation, the city may permit the use of the farmer's market facilities for other public purposes. The city's action in allowing a seller to sell products at the farmer's market shall not confer any right on the seller to own, possess or exclude any other person from the specific space designated for the seller or from the farmer's market location in general. 
(i)  The farmer's market shall be operated under the supervision of the Guntersville Park and Recreation Department. A seller in possession of a user permit is granted a fully revocable license to sell products at the farmer's market as defined by this article. The city retains full authority to revoke the license in its discretion for noncompliance with this article and rules promulgated by the city. 
(j)  No person(s) shall occupy or conduct any business at or upon the grounds of the farmer's market without an authorized user permit issued by the City of Guntersville. 
(k)  Permits are non-transferrable. 
(l)  The city may designate a market manager whose duties shall be the supervision and management of the market operation. 
(m)  The director of parks and recreation shall be entitled to establish and publish rules and regulations which govern the hours of operation, areas of use, number of artisan sellers, applicable fees, establishment and modifications of season length and site visits. The rules and regulations for each year shall be published within fourteen (14) days of the passage of this subsection and by March 1 of each year thereafter which shall govern the operation of the farmer's market from March 1 of that year until February 28 the following year. The rules and regulations shall be published at the Guntersville Recreation Center on a bulletin board accessible to the public, published on the city's website and attached to each user agreement between the city and each seller. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 1, 4-1-13; Ord. No. 1049, §§ 1—3, 2-3-14; Ord. No. 1073, §§ 1—3, 3-7-16)  
Sec. 6-192. - Advisory board. 
(a)  The formation of the farmer's market advisory board is hereby authorized consisting of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Two (2) of the initial at large members shall serve one-year terms, two (2) of the initial at large members shall serve two-year terms and three (3) of the at large members will serve three-year terms. At the expiration of each term of an initial at large member, the appointment for all following terms shall be three (3) years. The board will meet as needed. Members shall serve without compensation. The board will elect a chairperson annually. The chairperson may serve up to three (3) years. 
(c)  The city council may appoint a member of the council to sit as an ex-officio member of the board. 
(d)  Only the at large members shall be entitled to vote. A quorum shall consist of four (4) at large members and a quorum must be present in order for a vote to occur. Any recommendations to be made by the advisory board to the city council shall require a majority vote of those present who are entitled to vote. 
(e)  The board is advisory only and provides recommendations to the city council on matters concerning operating guidelines, long range planning, development and use and improvements of the farmer's market. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 2, 4-1-13)  
Sec. 6-193. - Seller applications and assignment. 
(a)  Applications may be submitted at any time after March 1 each year. A maximum of four (4) stalls/sites shall be made available for resellers until May 1 each year. If all reseller stalls are not filled by applications received by application deadline of May 1 remaining reseller stalls may be filled with producers. Anyone submitting an application after May 1 and meeting necessary requirements as stated herein shall be eligible, at the discretion of the applications review committee, for stall space remaining after all applications submitted before May 1 have been processed and stalls assigned to those applicants. 
(b)  Each application shall be reviewed by the applications review committee. The applications review committee consists of the farmer's market advisory board, the market manager, one (1) city council representative, Marshall County extension agent and the parks and recreation director or his designee. This group is responsible for qualifying, categorizing and selecting sellers from the pool of applicants and assigning spaces at the market. 
(c)  Any and all partnerships must be declared on the original user permit application. 
(d)  Each applicant must have a current grower's permit issued by the State of Alabama which lists anticipated crops or products to be sold which must be attached to the application at the time it is submitted if the applicant is applying as a producer. Artisans and resellers shall submit a written statement of anticipated crops or products to be sold in lieu of a state issued grower's permit. 
(e)  If an applicant intends to sell produce which is labeled as organic that applicant must provide a certificate to the city indicating organic certification. 
(f)  Sellers shall operate from his/her own assigned space. The applications review committee shall assign spaces based upon each seller's seniority, frequency of attendance in the prior season, market manager's farm visit report and promptness in arriving at the market in previous seasons. In the assignment process, the committee shall also consider a balance of goods distributed throughout the market. Sellers will be assigned one (1) space contingent upon the listed factors and in an arrangement that is beneficial to the general success of the market. If requested by the applicant, consideration will be given, but not guaranteed, to a preferred space previously occupied by the applicant. 
(g)  Address and directions to all sites must be attached to the permit application if applicant is applying as a producer. 
(h)  All resellers shall be assigned spaces together (consecutive to one another). 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 3, 4-1-13; Ord. No. 1073, §§ 4—7, 3-7-16)  
Sec. 6-194. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Each user space must be staffed by the permitted seller or an employee or an immediate family member of the seller who has signed a user agreement with the city. Immediate family is defined as spouse, parents, children, siblings and grandchildren of the vendor. 
(b)  Employees of the seller may be required to provide proof of the employment by presenting a signed employment contract between the seller and the employee, a W-2 or 1099 issued to the employee by the seller or a pay stub that shows that employee's name and the seller's name. 
(c)  Sellers must visibly display any licenses, certifications and permits required by law for all products. 
(d)  Signage identifying the seller and farm or identifying the products as "not locally grown" is required. All signs are restricted to the front of the display table. Signs for producers, resellers vendors and other decorations are to be approved by the market manager. No signage or other user personal hardware is to be attached to any Guntersville farmer's market structure. 
(e)  All sellers must furnish their own display surfaces (tables) and remove the same at the end of each market sale day. 
(f)  All items offered for sale must be located within seller's assigned sales space. If no fixed roof space is available, ten-foot by ten-foot pop-ups provided by the seller may be used in designated areas. 
(g)  Sellers set their own prices and are responsible for accurately representing their products. 
(h)  Producers selling at the Guntersville farmer's market are subject to one (1) or more compliance site visits by the market manager to verify that the items offered for sale by the producer are grown, raised or produced by the producer and that the quantity brought to the market were grown, raised or produced at the site inspected. The market manager may be accompanied on the compliance visit by persons designated by the market manager. Photographs may be taken at the farm site. 
(i)  Any site visit that does not verify producer's compliance with this section will subject the producer's permit to be become null and void and user privileges revoked. 
(j)  Animal products which may be sold shall include butter, cheese, honey and eggs. Eggs are subject to Alabama shell egg law and must be clearly labeled with seller name, date gathered/packaged and verbiage "Not Graded" clearly marked. Any and all dairy products must meet state and federal requirements governing their production and sale. 
(k)  If requested, a producer must accompany a representative of the city to the farm or other facility where the goods offered for sale at the market are being grown or produced. 
(l)  If samples are provided by a seller, the samples must meet the guidelines of the State of Alabama Public Health Department. 
(m)  All public litter containers in the market area are for reasonable use by sellers and customers. Sellers are required to collect refuse generated during their sale day and dispose of it in the site dumpster provided and shall not use public trash containers. Any and all produce not sold on any given market day must be removed from the assigned sale space either by taking it back home, arranging for delivery to a charitable organization or placing it into the farmer's market dumpster. 
(n)  No gambling, alcoholic beverages or illegal substances are allowed at the farmer's market. 
(o)  All unsafe or unsanitary conditions shall be brought to the immediate attention of the market manager. 
(p)  The City of Guntersville and its representatives shall not be responsible for damage or loss of any personal belongings of seller's or their employees or family members. 
(q)  The city shall require the seller to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Guntersville from any liability arising from the seller's participation in the Guntersville farmer's market. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 4, 4-1-13; Ord. No. 1073, §§ 8—10, 3-7-16)  
Sec. 6-195. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1073, § 11, adopted Mar. 7, 2016, repealed § 6-195, which pertained to vendor fees and derived from Ord. No. 1037, § 5, 4-1-13.  
Sec. 6-196. - Sale of prepared foods. 
(a)  Home processed foods allowed by state law or regulation may be sold at the farmer's market if those home processed foods are labeled as required by state law or regulation and produced as required by this article. 
(b)  Home processed vegetables cannot be sold at the farmer's market unless prepared in an establishment permitted by state statute or regulation. 
(c)  Alabama Department of Public Health (ADPH) amendment to Chapter 420-3-22-.01 states that certain home "value added" processed foods, for example baked breads, rolls, cookies, cakes, brownies, fudge and double crust fruit pies; traditional fruit jams, jellies, marmalades and relishes, candy, spices or herbs, snack items such as popcorn, caramel corn and peanut brittle may be sold at farmer's market with appropriate labeling. 
(d)  All home-prepared consumable products must be covered and labeled with the product name and date of preparation. A sign stating "These foods were prepared in a kitchen that is not inspected by a regulatory agency" must be posted in a conspicuous manner at the stall. 
(e)  Sellers of home processed foods shall be responsible to comply with all statutes, rules and regulations of the State of Alabama applicable to sales tax on processed or value added food sales. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 6, 4-1-13; Ord. No. 1049, §§ 4, 5, 2-3-14)  
Sec. 6-197. - Compliance and complaints. 
(a)  Failure by a seller to comply with this article may result in appropriate disciplinary action, which may include the forfeiture of the privilege to do business at the farmer's market. 
(b)  Any seller wishing to complain concerning the compliance with city ordinances and farmer's market rules shall submit the complaint in writing to the Director of the Guntersville Parks and Recreation Department and the director's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 7, 4-1-13)  
Chapter 6.3 - CITY CEMETERY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 993, adopted May 24, 2010, and Ord. No. 1004, §§ I—VII, adopted Nov. 1, 2010, have been included as §§ 6.3-1—6.3-23 at the editor's discretion. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6.3-1. - General provisions. 
(a)  The City of Guntersville building official or his designee is hereby identified as the "cemetery manager" and is charged with the administration, maintenance, and management of the Guntersville city cemetery. 
(b)  The administration, maintenance and management include the following: 
(1)  Sale of individual burial plots; 
(2)  Maintenance of records regarding occupied plots, vacant plots already sold, and vacant plots available for sale; 
(3)  Supervision of activities associated with the marking of, digging and preparation of plots and placement of monuments; 
(4)  Supervision of cemetery maintenance activities including, but not limited to, grass mowing and trimming, removal of unauthorized flowers, plants, or other items identified by the ordinance from which this article was derived; 
(5)  Supervision of improvements within the grounds and upon all plots and graves, including planting, sodding, survey and improvements generally; 
(6)  Enforcement of various cemetery rules specified in these policies and procedures; 
(7)  All procedures, rules and schedules authorized by the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be kept by the cemetery manager at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § I, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 6.3-2. - Sale of burial plots. 
(a)  The cemetery manager shall establish efficient procedures for the sale of vacant burial plots. 
(b)  The procedures shall include the preparation and use of a purchase application and deed form to ensure proper record keeping of individual burial plots. 
(c)  The cost of an individual burial plot and fees for opening and closing a burial site shall be established by a schedule approved by the mayor and city council by resolution which may be modified by resolution of the mayor and city council. At the time of purchase, all plots shall be paid for in full. No plots will be reserved without full payment. 
(d)  Burial plots may be purchased by individuals or families for personal or family use only and may not be purchased by businesses or corporations. 
(e)  Title to previously purchased plots may not be transferred to individuals who are not members of the owner's family without the right of first refusal by the City of Guntersville. Repurchase of such plots by the city shall be for an amount not to exceed the amount specified in the price schedule authorized by the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(f)  The city must be notified of every transfer of title to a burial plot. Any title transfer of burial plots shall require a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) transfer fee. Notice of title transfer is required in order that the cemetery may at all times have a complete and accurate record of all owners and purchasers. 
(g)  All terms and conditions for purpose of interment rights must be stated in the purchase contract which may be done by incorporation by reference. Verbal agreements or representations will not be recognized. 
(h)  The size of each plot shall be fifty (50) square feet. Only one interment per plot will be permitted with exception of cremations. 
(i)  The cemetery manager is authorized to execute deeds conveying cemetery plots on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § II, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 6.3-3. - Burial and monument placement policies. 
(a)  Prior to a burial or installation of a monument, the plot owner or his designee shall complete the required plot "use" documents provided by the cemetery manager. The documents shall, at a minimum, include the following information: 
(1)  Cemetery addition number; 
(2)  Cemetery section number or letter; 
(3)  Cemetery block number; 
(4)  Burial plot number; 
(5)  Owner of burial plot; 
(6)  Name of person being buried; 
(7)  Name, address and phone number of contact person. 
(b)  Only one headstone per plot will be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § III, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 6.3-4. - Maintenance policies. 
(a)  All interments will require a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches between the ground surface and the top of the burial vault or concrete liner, or casket. 
(b)  Only one interment per plot will be allowed except for interment of cremations. 
(c)  No grading of property is permitted. 
(d)  No plot shall be raised above grade level. 
(e)  No enclosures of any kind including coping, fences, ditches, or hedges shall be installed around a grave or plot after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived. The city shall have the right to remove enclosures around the grave or plot that have deteriorated. 
(f)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived, no additional trees, shrubbery, or plantings shall be permitted in the cemetery except as placed by the city. 
(g)  No more than three (3) bouquet or flower holders shall be installed per interment. 
(h)  All permanent flowers shall be placed in a vase or a saddle on a monument. 
(i)  No glass containers are allowed. No wire or metal anchors are permitted to anchor flowers in the ground. 
(j)  No metal crooks to hold flowers are permitted. 
(k)  Flowers, artificial or live, that have faded or deteriorated will be removed at the discretion of the cemetery manager. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § IV, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 6.3-5. - Monument and grave marker policies. 
(a)  Prior to the setting of any monument or grave marker, the plot owner or his designee must obtain approval from the cemetery manager. 
(b)  Monument companies are responsible for obtaining permission from the cemetery manager to set monuments or markers. 
(c)  No monument is to extend beyond the boundary line of a plot. 
(d)  All foot markers and slabs must be installed flush with the ground level. 
(e)  Under no circumstances shall any monument or grave marker be moved for access to another gravesite. The cemetery manager may require graves to be dug by hand rather than with mechanical equipment. 
(f)  No trucks or heavy equipment shall be permitted on cemetery roads without appropriate ground protection. Any company or individual causing damage to the cemetery will be responsible for repairing the damage. 
(g)  Monuments and grave markers will be set only during working hours of the cemetery manager. 
(h)  Monument companies are responsible for obtaining permission from the cemetery manager to set monuments or markers. 
(i)  If any memorial or any structure, or any inscription to be placed on a memorial or structure, shall be determined by the cemetery manager, in its sole discretion, to be offensive or inconsistent with the overall plan for the cemetery development, the cemetery manager shall have the right to enter upon such plot and remove, change or correct the offensive or improper objects or inscriptions. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § V, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 6.3-6. - Cremations. 
(a)  Two (2) cremation urns shall be allowed per plot. The top of the urn must be placed at least twenty-four (24) inches below the ground surface. Only one headstone per plot shall be allowed to memorialize the cremations placed in that plot. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § VI, 11-1-10)  
Sec. 6.3-7. - General regulations. 
(a)  No dogs shall be permitted in the cemetery. 
(b)  Bringing food, beer, wine or intoxicating liquors within the cemetery is strictly forbidden. 
(c)  Boxes, shells, toys, glassware, sprinkling cans, bird houses, receptacles and other items of personal property are discouraged but will be permitted on a temporary basis on a grave or plot. The cemetery manager shall have the discretion to remove items on grave sites that have deteriorated or interfere with the maintenance of the cemetery. 
(d)  No wooden or metal bench or chair nor any wooden or metal trellis shall be permitted to be installed. 
(e)  The city is not responsible for theft or damage to anything placed on graves or plots. 
(f)  No person will be permitted to use profane or boisterous language or in any way disturb the quiet and good order of the cemetery. 
(g)  Interment in the cemetery shall be for human remains only. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § VII, 11-1-10)  
Secs. 6.3-8—6.3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 6.3-21. - Selection of members. 
Three (3) of the initial at large members shall serve one-year terms, two (2) of the initial at large members shall serve two-year terms and two (2) of the at large members will serve three-year terms. At the expiration of each term of an initial at large member, the appointment for all following terms shall be three (3) years. The board will meet as needed. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 993, 5-24-10)  
Sec. 6.3-22. - Voting. 
Only the at large members shall be entitled to vote. A quorum shall consist of four (4) at large members and a quorum must be present in order for a vote to occur. Any recommendation to be made by the advisory board to the city council shall require a majority vote of those present who are entitled to vote. 
(Ord. No. 993, 5-24-10)  
Sec. 6.3-23. - Duties. 
The board is advisory only and provides recommendations to the city council on matters concerning long range planning, development, use and improvements of the city cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 993, 5-24-10)  
Chapter 6.6 - CITY HARBOR[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980, adopted July 20, 2009, has been included as §§ 6.6-1—6.6-6 at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 6.6-1. - [Rules and regulations.] 
The following rules and regulations shall apply to the Guntersville City Harbor: 
(1)  Children under twelve (12) . Children under twelve (12) or anyone unable to swim shall be attended by an adult or responsible party in or around the harbor area. 
(2)  Animals . The animal owner is responsible for immediately cleaning up any defecation left by their animal in the harbor area. All animals shall be kept on a leash in the harbor area. 
(3)  Swimming . No swimming or diving is allowed in or around the harbor area. 
(4)  Fishing . Fishing is allowed in designated areas only. The cleaning of fish is not allowed at the harbor or harbor area. Fishing from vessels is allowed as long as it does not interfere with other vessels or individuals. 
(5)  Vessel requirement . All vessels using the harbor shall be seaworthy, properly registered and in compliance with all federal and state regulations. 
(6)  No commercial business . Vessels may not conduct any commercial business while docked in the harbor or operating within the harbor without explicit written permission of the City of Guntersville. The brokering of vessels is not allowed within the harbor unless such activity is specifically licensed by the City of Guntersville. 
(7)  Garbage and trash. Owners of vessels must ensure that all garbage and trash is properly disposed of in receptacles provided. 
(8)  Septic waste. No septic waste shall be discharged in the Guntersville City Harbor. Vessels shall comply with all federal, state and local regulations regarding sewage disposal. 
(9)  Other discharges. The discharge into the harbor of oil or other petroleum products and hazardous materials of any sort is strictly prohibited. Owners of vessels shall comply with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances and regulations regarding disposal of petroleum products and hazardous materials. Owners of vessels shall not discharge contaminated bilge water at anytime. 
(10)  Fueling of vessels. No fueling of vessels in the city harbor or from city harbor property is allowed. 
(11)  Depth of water. The City of Guntersville does not guarantee the depth of the water in the harbor. 
(12)  Speed limit. No vessel shall operate at a speed of more than three (3) miles per hour in or around the harbor or the docking areas. 
(13)  Abandoned vessels . All vessels abandoned at the harbor will be subject to removal and all cost associated with removal will be the responsibility of the owner. 
(14)  Length of stay. Vessels may not spend more than seven (7) nights out of fourteen (14) at the city harbor. 
(15)  Cooking . There shall be no cooking on the harbor docks or on the grounds surrounding the harbor unless licensed by the City of Guntersville. Cooking on vessels is allowed. 
(16)  Maintenance on vessels. No painting, repairs or maintenance beyond emergency repairs needed to get underway or to be towed away are allowed on vessels in the harbor. 
(17)  Passenger car parking. Parking is permitted within designated spaces only. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 6.6-2. - City ordinances. 
All ordinances that apply to the City of Guntersville apply to the Guntersville City Harbor area for all patrons. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 2, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 6.6-3. - Liability. 
The city shall not be held liable for any loss, damage or injury suffered by persons and vessels while staying at Guntersville City Harbor. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 3, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 6.6-4. - [Posting of rules and regulations.] 
The rules and regulations set forth in section 6.6-1 of this chapter shall be posted at the Guntersville City Harbor property located at 201 Blount Avenue, Guntersville, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 6.6-5. - [Violations.] 
Any violation of section 6.6-1 rules and regulations shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 5, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 6.6-6. - [Repayment for damages or expenses.] 
Any person violating the ordinance from which this chapter was derived which results in damages or expenses to the City of Guntersville shall be responsible for repayment of those damages or expenses to the City of Guntersville. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 6, 7-20-09)  
Chapter 7 - COURT AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Establishment of municipal court. 
There is hereby established effective December 27, 1977, a municipal court for the city, pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 12, ch. 14. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 1, 12-5-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1(a).  
Sec. 7-2. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction of all prosecutions for the breach of ordinances of the municipality within its corporate limits and police jurisdiction. This jurisdiction shall also extend to all prosecutions for violations of state laws, not constituting felonies, committed within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction of the municipality where such offenses have been made offenses against the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 2, 12-5-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1(b), (c).  
Sec. 7-3. - Time and place of holding court. 
The municipal court shall be held at such time and place as the governing body may determine, with the advice of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 3, 12-5-77)  
Sec. 7-4. - Municipal judge—Number; appointment; term; qualifications; vacancies; oath; grounds of disqualifications. 
(a)  The municipal court shall consist of one (1) municipal judge to be appointed by a vote of a majority of the members elected or appointed to the municipal governing body. The judge shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. The municipal judge shall be eligible for reappointment upon the expiration of the term. The municipal judge shall hold office until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)  The municipal judge must be licensed to practice law in the state and must be a qualified elector of the state. No judge shall be otherwise employed in any capacity by the municipality during the term of office. 
(c)  The office of the municipal judge shall be vacant if the incumbent dies, resigns, or is removed, and vacancies shall be filled by the municipal governing body in the same manner as original appointments are made. Any person so appointed shall be eligible to serve two (2) years from the date of appointment. 
(d)  The municipal judge shall, before assuming office, take and sign the oath provided by the constitution and a copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state, the administrative director of courts and the clerk of the municipality. 
(e)  The municipal judge shall be subject to all grounds of disqualification from hearing specific cases applicable to circuit court judges. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 4, 12-5-77)  
Sec. 7-5. - Same—Compensation. 
The annual salary of the municipal judge is hereby fixed at twenty-nine thousand dollars ($29,000.00) and shall be payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments. This salary shall not be diminished during the judge's term of office. Any general increase in the compensation of all or substantially all municipal employees shall be applied proportionately to the salary of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 5, 12-5-77; Ord. No. 918, 7-10-06) 
State Law reference— Authority to fix, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-33.  
Sec. 7-6. - Same—Acting. 
In the absence from the city, death, disability, or disqualification of a municipal judge, for any reason, the mayor shall have the authority to designate a person, licensed to practice law in the state and a qualified elector of the state, not otherwise employed in any capacity by the municipality, to serve as acting municipal judge with all power and authority of a duly appointed municipal judge. No such acting judge may serve for more than thirty (30) successive days or a total of sixty (60) days in any calendar year; provided, that when the duly appointed municipal judge is disqualified pursuant to the constitution, the time of service limitations for acting judges shall not apply during such disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 11, 12-5-77) 
State Law reference— Acting judge, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-34.  
Sec. 7-7. - Same—Issuance of warrants. 
The municipal judge is authorized to issue arrest and search warrants upon affidavit for municipal ordinances violations returnable to the municipal court and for violation of state law returnable to any state court. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 9, 12-5-77)  
Sec. 7-8. - Same—Reports. 
(a)  The municipal judge shall report on the proceedings of the municipal court as required by law or rule. 
(b)  The municipal judge shall be required to make a report to the council on the operation of the municipal court every month. 
(Ord. No. 496, §§ 12, 13, 12-5-77)  
Sec. 7-9. - Same—Powers. 
(a)  The municipal judge shall have the power to admit to bail any person charged with the violation of any municipal ordinance by requiring an appearance bond, with good security, to be approved by the municipal judge or judge's designee in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and may, in such judge's discretion, admit to bail such persons on a personal recognizance bond conditioned on the appearance of such persons before the judge on a day named therein to answer the charges preferred against them. 
(b)  The municipal judge shall have the authority to punish any person convicted of violating any municipal ordinance with a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), except as otherwise provided by state law or city ordinance and/or a sentence of imprisonment or hard labor for a period not exceeding six (6) months; provided, however, that no fine or sentence of imprisonment shall exceed the maximum fine or sentence provided by the city ordinance violated nor shall the fine or sentence exceed the maximum fine and sentence provided for violation of a substantially similar offense under state law. The penalty imposed on a corporation shall consist of the fine only, plus costs of court. 
(c)  The municipal judge in such judge's judgment may provide that if a fine and costs are not paid within the time prescribed, the defendant, unless indigent, shall work out the amount of the judgment under the direction of the municipal authority allowing not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each day's service. 
(d)  Costs and charges fixed by law upon conviction in the municipal court for violations of municipal ordinances shall be as follows: 
PURPOSE 	TRAFFIC 	NONTRAFFIC 
City 	$68.00 	$81.00 
Fair trial tax 	  7.00 	  7.00 
Peace officers annuity fund 	  3.00 	  7.00 
Drivers' education 	  2.00 	-0- 
Criminal victim fund 	  2.00 	 10.00 
State general fund 	  5.00 	  5.00 
	      _____       	      _____       
  Total 	$34.00 	$44.00 
 
After September 1, 1995, any increase in municipal court cost, either traffic or nontraffic cases, mandated by the state or any increase in district court costs, either traffic or misdemeanor court costs, shall cause the Guntersville Municipal Court Costs to increase by the same dollar amount. 
(e)  Upon conviction, the court may, upon a showing of inability to make immediate payment of fines and costs, accept defendant's bond with or without surety and with waiver of exemptions as to personalty payable within ninety (90) days, upon nonpayment of which execution may issue as upon judgments in state courts. 
(f)  The municipal judge shall have the authority to continue the case from time to time to permit the fine and costs to be paid, remit fines, costs, and fees, impose intermittent sentences, establish work release programs, require attendance of educational, corrective or rehabilitative programs, suspend driving privileges for such times and under such conditions as provided by law and order hearings to determine the competency of the defendant to stand trial; provided further, that the judge may enter an order authorizing the defendant to drive under the conditions set forth in the order. 
(g)  All cases in municipal court shall be tried by a municipal judge without a jury. 
(h)  The municipal judge may suspend execution of sentence and place a defendant on probation for varying periods of time, not to exceed two (2) years, under the procedures and conditions set out in Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-13. 
(i)  The municipal judge may administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and compel the production of books and papers, punish by fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) and/or imprisonment not exceeding five (5) days any person found and adjudged to be in contempt of court, and shall have power coextensive with the jurisdiction of the district court to issue writs and other process, and to approve and declare bonds forfeited. The municipal judge shall designate any other municipal officers who shall be authorized to approve appearance and appeal bonds. 
(j)  The municipal court shall take judicial notice of the ordinances of the municipality. 
(k)  The sheriff of the county, as required by state law, and all law enforcement officers of the municipality shall obey the municipal judge having legal authority in faithfully executing the warrants and processes committed to them for service according to their mandates. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 6, 12-5-77; Ord. No. 719, §§ 1—3, 9-5-95) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-12; costs authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-14; court costs may be imposed, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-19-153 et seq.; additional costs for peace officers' annuity fund, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-21-67; docket fees in district court and circuit court, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-19-171; fees required to be uniform, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-19-170; fair trial tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-19-250; schedule of fines and costs in summary disposition of traffic cases, Ala. Rules of Judicial Administration (Code of Ala. 1975, Vol. 23), rules 18, 19; discretionary bond schedule, rule 2; required to pay money over to treasurer daily, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-10; authority, Ala. Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 10g.  
Sec. 7-10. - Powers of the mayor. 
The mayor may remit fines and such costs as payable to the municipality and commute sentences imposed by municipal judges of the court to which an appeal was taken for violations of municipal ordinances, and may grant pardons, after conviction, for violation of such ordinances, and shall report such action to the council at the first regular meeting thereof in the succeeding month with such judge's reasons therefor in writing. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 7, 12-5-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-15.  
Sec. 7-11. - Magistrates. 
The municipal judge shall take steps to have a magistrate appointed for the city pursuant to rule 18 of the Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration. The powers of the magistrate shall be limited to: 
(1)  Issuance of arrest warrants; 
(2)  Granting of bail in minor offenses prosecutions; 
(3)  Receiving of pleas of guilty in minor offenses when a schedule of fines has been prescribed by law or rule; 
(4)  Accountability to the municipal court for all uniform traffic tickets and complaints, monies received and records of offenses; and 
(5)  Such other authority as may be granted by law. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 10, 12-5-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-51; the rules of judicial administration are set out in vol. 23 of the state code.  
Sec. 7-12. - Appeals. 
All appeals from judgments of the municipal court shall be taken as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 8, 12-5-77) 
State Law reference— Appeals, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 12-14-70, 12-14-71.  
Secs. 7-13—7-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PRE-TRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM FOR MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Sec. 7-21. - Establishment of a pre-trial diversion program. 
Pursuant to Act No. 2013-353, a pre-trial diversion ("PTD") program is established in the municipal court of the city. The pre-trial diversion program shall be under the direct supervision and control of the presiding municipal court judge in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 2013-353. Participation in the PTD program by the offender shall be voluntary. Admittance to the PTD program shall be at the sole discretion of the court and only upon recommendation by the municipal prosecutor. Upon admittance to the program, the offender shall be required to enter a plea of guilty at which time the case shall be placed on an administrative docket until the offender has completed all requirements of the PTD program. Imposition of any sentence shall be deferred until the offender completes the PTD program or is terminated from the program. In the event the offender does not satisfactorily complete the program and all terms, the court shall impose an appropriate sentence in the same manner as with any guilty plea. Upon successful completion of the program and all terms, the court shall dismiss the case pursuant to the rules established by the court. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 2-3-14)  
Sec. 7-22. - Fees. 
(a)  The offender shall be assessed a non-refundable application fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) when the offender makes application for admittance to the PTD program. 
(b)  An offender shall be assessed a non-refundable administration fee when the offender is admitted to the PTD program. The amount of the assessment for participation in the PTD program shall be in addition to the application fee, any court costs, bonding fee, assessments for the crime victims' compensation fund, department of forensic science assessment, drug, alcohol or anger management treatment and counseling required by law or ordered by the court and any costs of supervision, treatment and restitution for which the offender may be responsible. An applicant may not be denied admission to the PTD program based solely on his or her inability to pay. Pre-trial diversion fees as established in this section may be waived or reduced for just cause including indigency of the applicant, at the discretion of the court. The following administration fees shall be assessed to offenders accepted into the PTD program: 
(1)  Driving under the influence ..... $600.00 
(2)  Traffic offenses except driving under the influence ..... $150.00 
(3)  Misdemeanor offenses ..... $200.00 
(4)  Violations ..... $100.00 
(c)  Additionally, an offender shall pay to the probation services officer a monthly fee for supervision of the case. Supervision fees may be waived or reduced for just cause, including indigency of the offender, at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 2, 2-3-14)  
Sec. 7-23. - Rules, regulations and policies. 
The presiding municipal court judge, acting in consultation with the municipal prosecutor, shall have the power to make such rules, regulations, and policies not inconsistent with state laws and city ordinances for the implementation and the conducting of the PTD program. The permanent rules, regulations, policies, procedures, and guidelines adopted pursuant to this article shall be available for public inspection at all reasonable times at the office of the municipal court clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 3, 2-3-14)  
Sec. 7-24. - Liability. 
(a)  Absent wantonness, gross negligence, or intentional misconduct, the municipality, or its officers, judges, prosecutors, or its employees shall have no liability, criminal or civil, for the conduct of any offender while participating in the PTD program established under this article or any service provider or its agents that are contracted to or who have agreed to provide services to the PTD program. 
(b)  The municipality or its officers, judges, prosecutors, or its employees shall have no liability, criminal or civil, for any injury to or harm to the offender while the offender is a participant in the PTD program administered pursuant to this article. The municipal prosecutor may require written agreed upon waivers of liability as a prerequisite for admittance into the PTD program. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 4, 2-3-14)  
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 31-9-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term "emergency management" means preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces or other federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural cause. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; medical and health services; rescue, engineering, air raid warning services; communications; radiological, chemical and other special weapons of defense; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services (civilian war aid); emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 3-22-61)  
Sec. 8-2. - Emergency management organization—Composition. 
Officers and employees of the municipality, with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who make the agreements on operation of law, charged with duties necessary for the protection of life and property in the city during an emergency, shall constitute the emergency management organization. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 4, 3-22-61)  
Sec. 8-3. - Same—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the emergency management organization, and it is hereby empowered: 
(1)  To develop a municipal emergency management operational plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all resources of the municipality, both private and public. 
(2)  To prepare and recommend for consideration by the council ordinances necessary to implement the operational survival plan. 
(3)  To consider and recommend to the council for approval, all mutual aid plans and agreements. 
(4)  Other (as may be determined locally). 
(Ord. No. 366, § 2, 3-22-61)  
Sec. 8-4. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the municipality, volunteering in service pursuant to compliance with this chapter, shall serve with, or without, compensation. While engaged in such service they shall have the same immunities as officers and employees of the municipality performing similar duties. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 5, 3-22-61)  
Sec. 8-5. - Director. 
There is hereby created the office of the emergency management director. Such officer shall be nominated by the mayor, and approved by the council. The director is hereby charged: 
(1)  To represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  During periods of emergency to direct the services of all municipal emergency management forces. 
(3)  To obtain and utilize cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of all emergency management operational survival plans. 
(4)  During periods of emergency to obtain vital supplies and equipment needed for the protection of life and property of people. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 3, 3-22-61)  
Sec. 8-6. - Conflict of laws. 
Where provisions of this chapter are in conflict with existing local laws or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter will govern. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 7, 3-22-61)  
Chapter 8.5 - ENVIRONMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8.5-1—8.5-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - URBAN FOREST BEAUTIFICATION AND CONSERVATION 
 
Sec. 8.5-11. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Urban Forest Beautification and Conservation Ordinance" of the City of Guntersville, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 809, § I, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 8.5-12. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the beauty and conservation of functional forests and woodlands on lands in the City of Guntersville, Alabama by establishing guidelines for the commercial logging of environmentally and visually sensitive areas. 
(Ord. No. 809, § II, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 8.5-13. - Definitions. 
[For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:] 
Basal area (BA). The cross-sectional area (in square feet) of trees per acre measured at approximately four and one-half (4½) feet from the ground. 
Commercial logging. The harvest of timber from forests with the intent to sell the product. 
Environmentally sensitive areas. Areas, such as steep slopes, stands of mature vegetation, areas of high water table, and areas of rock outcrop, which are easily destroyed causing irreversible loss of cultural, scientific, ecological, and/or aesthetic values. 
Extraordinary tree. A tree that is unique due to its age, species, or historic significance. 
Land clearing. The removal of trees of six (6) inches and greater diameter at breast height (four and one-half (4.5) feet above the natural grade at the base of the tree) or greater. 
Person. Any individual acting on his own behalf, or on behalf of a company, agency, corporation, or other body. 
Public land. Any land belonging to the City of Guntersville; for the purpose of this ordinance, federal and state land is excluded from this category, unless the City of Guntersville has specifically assumed responsibility for its maintenance. 
Professional forester. A person who performs or directs works, services, or undertakings that require specialized knowledge, training, and experience in forestry. Such person must be a registered forester as defined by Section 34-12-1 (3) of the Code of Alabama. 
Semi-public land. Land on which public right-of-way, utility easement, or other public interest has been granted. 
Shoreland zone. The land area located within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of any pond or lake, or river within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet of the normal high-water line of a stream. 
Tree service. Commercial practices including trimming, removal, and other maintenance of trees. 
Utility, public. A service distributed by wire, pipe, or airwaves to customers, and either regulated by the State of Alabama Public Service Commission (as in the case of telephone service) or not regulated by the Public Service Commission, but established as a municipal utility (as in the case of water, electric and gas service). 
Visually sensitive areas. Areas which can be viewed from travel routes and recreational areas which include highways, roads, trails, lakes, and waterways, resorts, campgrounds, and picnic areas. 
(Ord. No. 809, § III, 3-15-99; Ord. No. 811, 6-7-99)  
Sec. 8.5-14. - General provisions. 
(a)  Administration. The building official of the city shall administer this article. 
(b)  Applicability. This provision shall apply to all incorporated lands within the city's jurisdiction for which any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  All landowners, operators or agents who cause or permit forest growth to be cut within the boundaries of the City of Guntersville, Alabama. 
(2)  The building official shall be authorized to determine whether the provisions of this article apply to any specific parcel. 
(c)  Changes in existing and/or conflicting ordinances. 
(1)  License required. Any tree service operator conducting business in the city must obtain a city business license before a permit will be issued. 
(2)  Severability. Should any section, clause, or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole, or parts thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
(3)  Effective date. This article shall be in force and effect after its passage and publication as provided by law. 
(d)  Notification required. 
(1)  Any person is required to notify the building official before they conduct or cause to be conducted a forest harvesting operation encompassing three (3) or more acres. 
a.  No more than one harvesting operation may occur where notification of the building official is not required (less than three (3) acres), in a three-year period without approval. 
b.  In some situations, to comply with the above restriction, a., notification to the building official will be required for harvesting less than three (3) acres. 
(2)  The notification must be submitted at least two (2) weeks before the harvesting operation is started. The notification shall be valid only for the site designated. 
(3)  A notification filed under this article shall expire one year from the date of notification, unless the period is extended by the administrator. 
(4)  For the purposes of this article, notification shall consist of a copy of the "Notification of Intent to Harvest Forest Products" form including the sketch map of the site and a brief description of the harvest technique to be used. The information is to be submitted to the building official. 
(5)  The applicant must comply with the performance standards of section 8.5-15 except as provided in section 8.5-16. 
(e)  Forest alteration permits. 
(1)  Except as provided for herein, no person or corporation shall destroy or significantly alter any forest or woodland through tree damage or removal, clearing, grading, tilling, burning, application of chemicals, or any other means unless they possess a valid forest alteration permit. 
(2)  No person or corporation shall be granted a permit for subdivision, grading, building, or the construction of any improvement on wooded or forested lands unless they possess a valid forest alteration permit. 
(3)  Any alteration of wooded or forested lands shall conform to the conditions and specifications of the forest alteration permit. 
(4)  The building official as the designee of the city of the applicant's notification. 
(5)  Issuance of a forest alteration permit is contingent upon the following requirements: 
a.  The forest management plan (see section 8.5-20) shall be prepared by a professional forester. Plan preparation shall be at the applicant's expense. 
b.  If applicable, the forest management plan (see section 8.5-20) for the subject property must be approved by the building official. 
c.  All reforestation planting required as a condition of approval must be installed at least one year subsequent to the issuance of the forest alteration permit, and must be approved as adequate after inspection by the building official or other designee of the city. 
d.  All other requirements pursuant to city ordinances, and other applicable county, state, and federal laws and regulations must be fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 809, § IV, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 8.5-15. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Not more than a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the basal area of trees shall be removed for any purpose in a twenty-year period. A healthy, well-distributed stand of trees and shrubs and their living, undamaged root systems shall be left in place. 
(b)  Dead, diseased, unsafe or fallen trees or shrubs may be removed. Their removal shall not be used in computing the percentage limitations under subsection (a). 
(c)  All trees cut must be delimbed at or near the cutting site. Roadside delimbing is not permitted. Burning of trees or limbs is not permitted. 
(d)  Forest harvesting operations shall be conducted to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation of waterways. Log landings, yards, tote roads (except stream crossings), and skid trails shall be at least seventy-five (75) feet from the normal high water mark of any water body. 
(e)  Areas of somewhat poorly drained or wetter soils, U.S.D.A. - Soil Conservation Service, Marshall County Soil Survey, are to be harvested during periods when minimal soil disturbance will occur (dry soil conditions). 
(f)  When any forest harvesting operation or phase of the forest harvesting operation is completed landings, yards, skid trails, tote roads and other disturbed areas are to be returned to their approximate original contours. Erodible areas are to be stabilized with mulch and/or vegetation as soon as is feasible or no later than sixty (60) days. 
(g)  Forest harvesting operations occurring in shoreland zones, other regulated areas or in conjunction with other regulated activities also must conform to all applicable local, state and/or federal regulations. All required permits must be secured and copies submitted with the forest harvesting notification. 
(Ord. No. 809, § V, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 8.5-16. - Modifications of waivers of performance standards. 
(a)  The building official may modify or waive any of the notification requirements or performance standards in section 8.5-15 when he or she decides that because of special circumstances of the site that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The ordinance requirements would not be applicable. 
(2)  The proposed action would be considered sound forest management (see section 8.5-20). 
(3)  The proposed action is recommended and supervised by a professional forester (all fees incurred shall be the responsibility of the applicant). 
(b)  The building official may also modify or waive any of the notification requirements or performance standards in section 8.5-15 when the municipal authority decides that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The site is to be converted to a legal nonforest use. For example, construction of a single-family residential structure where such structure is the principal use on an individual lot, are exempted from compliance with the clearing and tree provisions of this article. The exception is that extraordinary trees on such lots will not be exempt. 
(2)  All applicable local, state, and federal regulations are met. 
(3)  All required local, state, and federal permits are secured and copies submitted with the modification or waiver request. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the applicant for the modification or waiver to notify the abutting landowners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the area affected by the modification or waiver. Such notification will include the date, time and place of the city council meeting during which the modification or waiver will be reviewed. 
(d)  The city through the building official reserves the right to ask for an opinion from a professional forester of the city's choice before deciding on a modification or waiver request (all fees incurred shall be the responsibility of the applicant). 
(Ord. No. 809, § VI, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 8.5-17. - Tree maintenance and protection. 
(a)  Trees on public land shall be maintained by the department having jurisdiction over such lands, either by city crews or by crews under contract to the city, in accordance with adopted standards. 
(b)  Trees on, or affecting the use of semi-public lands (see definitions, section 8.5-13) are the property of the current owner of the land from which the rights-of-way, easements, etc., were granted, in the absence of other specific provisions by prior binding agreement; such ownership entails: 
(1)  That such owner is responsible for the general maintenance, at his own expense, of such trees, including removal of deadwood and treatment of disease and/or insect infestation. 
(2)  That when such tree(s) become hazardous to person or property, it is the owner's responsibility to remove it (or them) at his own expense. 
(3)  That tree maintenance required for the protection and proper operation of public utilities, safe public use of rights-of-way, etc., shall be done by or under the supervision of the appropriate public office or public utility, in accordance with adopted standards. 
(4)  That any tree maintenance done on behalf of private utilities, beyond that required by public utilities and municipal services, requires prior consent of the owners of tree concerned, and shall be done in accordance with adopted standards. 
(5)  That unsafe conditions involving utilities, rights-of-way, etc., arising between normal periodic tree-maintenance cycles, may be reported by adjacent landowner's or other persons to the building inspector, for referral to the appropriate agency. 
(6)  That conditions of serious tree disease, insect infestation, storm damage or disintegration posing a hazard, credible in the approving authority's judgement, may be reported by persons or agencies for referral to the appropriate landowner, for remedy at the landowner's expense, with[in] sixty (60) days of notification. 
(7)  That any public department or utility desiring to remove a tree from semi-public land do so in accordance with standards adopted by the council in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Trees on private land are the property and responsibility of the landowner, and the public interest in such trees is described as follows: 
(1)  The building official shall have the right to cause the treatment or removal of any tree that is dead, or is infected by disease or infested by insects, when such tree constitutes a hazard to person or property, credible in the judgement of the council, or when such disease or insect problem constitutes a threat to other trees in the city in the judgement of the city council. The building official will notify in writing the owner of such tree; treatment or removal shall be done by said owner (or at his or her own expense) within sixty (60) days after the date notification is served. In the event of failure of the owner to comply with these instructions, the city shall have the authority to treat or remove such trees, and to charge the cost to the owner, either for direct payment or through obtainment of a lien. 
(2)  Trees on undeveloped land are the property and responsibility of the owner of such land. Yet such trees also have public usefulness and value in energy conservation in moderating extremes of temperature and humidity; in reducing noise, glare, and air pollution; in reducing soil erosion; and in improving the city's aesthetic character. To encourage conservation of this resource the Guntersville City Council is empowered to take the following measures: 
a.  Provide information and technical referral service to landowners, developers, builders, and other interested parties, including persons and private and public agencies, in protecting trees during planning and construction; 
b.  Cooperate with interested public and private parties in conservation efforts such as an Arbor Week observance, plant digs, community tree-planting, etc.; 
c.  Participate in cooperative community projects as authorized and directed elsewhere in this article. 
(d)  Protection of trees on public and semi-public lands from wanton, malicious, and negligent harm. In relation to any tree on public or semi-public land, the following acts shall be illegal: 
(1)  To break, injure, mutilate, burn, kill, remove, or destroy any tree without authority to do so as set forth in this article; 
(2)  To knowingly permit any leak to exist in any gas pipe or main, within the root zone of such tree or shrub; 
(3)  To permit any toxic chemical, either solid or liquid, to pass, drain, or be emptied on or about any such tree or shrub; 
(4)  To knowingly permit any wire designed to carry electrical current to be attached to any tree or shrub, except in accordance with adopted standards; 
(5)  To excavate any tunnel, ditch, or to lay any driveway, sidewalk, or pavement through or across the root zone of any such tree or shrub, except in accordance with adopted standards; 
(6)  To attach any wire, rope, cable, poster, sign, nail, or other fastener to such tree or shrub, except in accordance with adopted standards; 
(7)  To place, deposit, or store any stone, brick, sand, earth, other material so as to impede the passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any such tree or shrub, except in accordance with adopted standards; 
(8)  To move any building or other large object along any street in such a manner as to damage any tree or shrub that is maintained in accordance with adopted standards; 
(9)  To undertake to build any structure, pavement, utility, or other construction without prior consideration of such trees and shrubs in accordance with adopted standards; 
(10)  To prevent, delay, or interfere with the city council or any of its agents engaging in or about the planting, maintenance, or removal of any tree or shrub on public, or private lands as authorized in this article; 
(11)  To conduct commercial tree service practices in the city without current licensure by the state. 
(Ord. No. 809, § VII, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 8.5-18. - Civil violations. 
(a)  Violations and enforcement. 
(1)  Any person violating or failing to comply with an of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum sufficient to restore any damage resulting from the violation, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per tree or shrub damaged, and may be required to make such restitution in goods and/or labor as may be determined by the proper court of law, or may be sentenced to any combination of these penalties. 
(2)  The city or the building official upon finding that any provision of this article is being or has been violated is authorized to start legal proceedings to enjoin violations of this article. It shall be the duty of the municipal authority to enforce the provisions of this article. If it is found that any provision of this article is being violated, or has been violated the person responsible for such violation shall be notified in writing by the municipal authority. If this action does not result in correction or abatement of the violation, the municipal authority is authorized and directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions and the imposition of fines that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this article in the name of the municipality. 
(b)  Fines. A person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a civil violation and, if corrective action is not taken within fourteen (14) days, on conviction shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per offense and for each day such violation continues. Such person(s) shall be liable for court costs, professional forester fees, and attorney fees incurred by the municipality. 
(c)  Corrective action. If the city decides that a violation has occurred, they shall order necessary correctional actions. A person who violates a provision(s) of this article or the condition(s) of a permit shall consult at the applicant's expense with a professional forester, designated by the municipal authority to decide what corrective action is necessary and follow exactly the recommendations of this professional. Such corrective action shall commence within fourteen (14) days after the violator receives written notice of the violation from the municipal authority. 
(Ord. No. 809, § VIII, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 8.5-19. - Appeals. 
(a)  When it is claimed that the true intent of and meaning of the ordinance has been misconstrued or wrongfully interpreted, the applicant or persons aggrieved may appeal the decision to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days from the building official's final decision and further to the proper court of law. 
(b)  In deciding any appeal, the board of adjustment may: 
(1)  Interpret the provisions of the ordinance; 
(2)  Go along with the denial of the permit based on the municipal authority's decision; 
(3)  Grant a variance based on undue hardship and considering the recommendation of the professional forester designated by the municipal authority. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall notify the building official, the petitioner, and adjoining landowners of any hearing. Such persons may be present at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 809, § IX, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 8.5-20. - Forest management plan. 
(1)  The purpose of the forest management plan (FMP) is to establish specific methods to conserve existing and potential woodland resources. The FMP shall be submitted by the applicant. 
(2)  The FMP shall provide that a project meets the retention and reforestation standards of this provision through any, or a combination of the following methods or in accordance with Alabama's Best Management Practices for Forestry, whichever is more stringent. 
(a)  Minimizing the extent of the development and siting it to avoid impacts on existing woodlands. 
(b)  Clustering development on a portion of the project area to retain continuous stands of trees in the nondeveloped portion. Transfers of development density from nondeveloped portions of the project area may be allowed only if nondeveloped portions meet the criteria for developable land. 
(c)  Providing for reforestation of equivalent sites within or outside of the project area that will not be subject to future development. Where reforestation is used to replace existing woodlands removed for development, estimated basal area twenty (20) years after planting shall be used to calculate the equivalent basal area provided. 
(d)  Public acquisition of title to or permanent conservation easements on the developable lands with equivalent woodland resources located outside of the project area. Total area, basal area, woodland type, and habitat value shall be considered in determining whether off-site resources are equivalent to those of the project site. 
(3)  Methods that protect and enhance existing woodlands shall be given precedence over those that restore nonwooded lands. Protection of woodlands within the project area shall be given precedence over off-site acquisition. The location of off-site mitigation areas is subject to the approval of the approving authority. 
(4)  The building official shall prescribe the format and content requirements for the forest management plan and maintain a list of acceptable foresters to prepare the forest management plan. 
(Ord. No. 809, App., 3-15-99)  
Secs. 8.5-21—8.5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 963, §§ I—XIII, adopted March 17, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article III, sections 8.5-31—8.5-43 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 8.5-31. - Title. 
This article will be known as "stormwater management." 
(Ord. No. 963, § I, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations is to protect the surface water, ground water and other natural resources by ensuring that the stormwater runoff peak discharge rates, volumes and pollutant loadings are managed to minimize the adverse impacts of erosion, sedimentation, flooding and water pollution in the city. 
(Ord. No. 963, § II, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-33. - Relationship to other stormwater management requirements. 
In addition to meeting the requirements of this article, the design and performance of all stormwater management systems shall comply with the Alabama Water Pollution Control Act (AWPCA). In all cases, the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply. The city will condition final development orders to restrict the commencement of development activity until all applicable stormwater permits from the state department of environmental management (ADEM) have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 963, § III, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-34. - Exemptions. 
Requirements for stormwater discharge set out in this article are waived for the activities listed below. 
(1)  Construction of a single-family dwelling unit on a lot or parcel of record, provided that the single-family dwelling unit is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale or a site determined by the building official to require a stormwater permit. 
(2)  Construction of one duplex provided that the duplex is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale or a site determined by the building official to require a stormwater permit. 
(3)  Construction of one multi-family residential structure, provided that the structure is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale or a site determined by the building official to require a stormwater permit. 
(4)  Construction of a storage building, shed, swimming pool or other accessory structure to (1), (2), (3) above or a site determined by the building official to require a stormwater permit. 
(5)  Performance of maintenance work on existing drainage ditches, utilities or transportation systems provided such maintenance work does not alter the purpose, historical utilization and intent of the drainage system as constructed. 
(6)  Maintenance to an existing structure. 
(7)  Bona fide agricultural activity, including forestry, provided farming activities are conducted in accordance with "Agriculture Bumps Field Office Technical Guide" (latest edition) published by the Soil Conservation Service, and forestry activities are conducted in accordance with the "Alabama's Best Management Practices for Forestry" (latest edition) published by the state division of forestry. 
(Ord. No. 963, § IV, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-35. - Stormwater management requirements. 
The following local design criteria shall be used in the city: 
(a)  Performance standards. 
(1)  Discharge. A storm event of 24-hour duration and 25-year return frequency shall be used in computing allowable off-site discharge. Off-site discharge shall be limited to pre-development levels unless an engineering analysis using professionally accepted methodologies or site-specific circumstances demonstrates that a differing discharge rate should be used. 
In requiring a lesser rate of discharge, the burden of analysis shall be the responsibility of the city. In requesting a larger rate of discharge, the burden of analysis shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
(2)  Stormwater facilities. All development shall provide stormwater facilities that provide retention, or detention, of the increase in runoff from the pre-development runoff. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  The standards set forth in § 335-6-7, Alabama Administrative Code, shall be used in the design and construction of stormwater management facilities. 
(2)  Dredging, clearing of vegetation, deepening, widening, straightening, stabilizing or otherwise altering natural waters shall be minimized. If the stream is considered a "blue-line" by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a permit from the army corps shall be required. 
(3)  Natural surface waters shall not be used as sediment traps during or after development. 
(4)  A thirty-foot vegetated buffer shall be retained or created along the shores, banks or edges of all man-made or natural surface waters. 
(Ord. No. 963, § V, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-36. - Dedication or maintenance of stormwater management. 
(a)  Dedication. If a stormwater management system approved under this article will function as an integral part of the city-maintained system, as determined by the city engineer, the facilities shall be dedicated to the city. 
(b)  Maintenance by an acceptable entity. 
If the stormwater management system is not dedicated to the city, the property owner shall submit: 
(1)  A written statement describing the actions, including periodic inspections, to be taken to maintain the facility; and 
(2)  Bond or other assurance of continued financial capacity to operate and maintain the facility. 
(Ord. No. 963, § VI, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-37. - Drainageways. 
(a)  No more than fifty (50) percent of drainageways shall be developed. 
(b)  The remaining fifty (50) percent shall remain as permanent open space. Stripping of vegetation, or filling is permitted in these areas provided that: 
(1)  The time of concentration of stormwater flows remains unchanged or is lengthened; 
(2)  Stormwater and groundwater storage capacity are unchanged or increased; 
(3)  Natural vegetation is installed; or 
(4)  The resultant new drainage way has less velocity than preexisted or reduced stream bank erosion through the provision of erosion-control measures. 
(Ord. No. 963, § VII, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-38. - Stormwater permit application and approval process. 
(a)  After July 1, 2008, unless a particular activity is exempted by these regulations, a person may not disturb land without an approved sediment and stormwater management plan from the appropriate plan approval agency. A grading or building permit may not be issued for a property unless a sediment and stormwater management plan has been approved by the city building official or city engineer. 
(b)  A sediment and stormwater management plan, or an application for a waiver, shall be submitted to the city by the developer for review and approval for a land disturbing activity, unless otherwise exempted. The sediment and stormwater management plan shall contain supporting computations, drawings, and sufficient information describing the manner, location, and type of measures in which stormwater runoff will be managed from the entire development. The city shall review the plan to determine compliance with the requirements of these regulations prior to approval. The approved sediment and stormwater management plan shall serve as the basis for water quantity and water quality control on all subsequent construction. 
(c)  The sediment and stormwater management plan shall not be considered approved without the inclusion of an approval stamp with signature and date on the plans by the city building official. 
(d)  All sediment and stormwater management plans shall contain certification by the owner or developer of the right of the city or delegated inspection agency to conduct on-site inspections. 
(e)  A grading or building permit issued by a local jurisdiction may be suspended or revoked after written notice is given to the permittee by the responsible delegated agency or the city for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violations of the conditions of the sediment and stormwater management plan approval; 
(2)  Changes in site runoff characteristics upon which a waiver was granted; 
(3)  Construction not in accordance with the approved plans; 
(4)  Noncompliance with correction notice or stop work order issued for the construction of the sediment control practices or the stormwater management facilities; 
(5)  An immediate danger exists in a downstream or upstream area in the opinion of the city; or 
(6)  Failure to submit stormwater management "As Built or Record Document" plans, when required, at the completion of the project. 
(f)  Approved plans remain valid for one (1) year from the date of an approval, unless specifically extended or renewed by the appropriate plan approval agency. The basis for extension or renewal may include, but is not limited to, the following items: 
(1)  Failure to initiate the approved project for reasons acceptable to the city such as funding or other agency permit delays; or 
(2)  Time duration for a type of activity that typically exceeds one (1) year. 
(g)  Projects which have been approved prior to July 1, 2008 and where site clearing has not been initiated on the project within two (2) years, shall be resubmitted to the city for review and approval subject to the requirements of these regulations. 
(h)  Upon receipt of a completed application for sediment and stormwater management, the city shall accomplish its review within thirty (30) calendar days, and have either the approval or review comments transmitted to the applicant. If that 30-day time frame cannot be met, the city shall notify the applicant of the reasons for delay, and an expected time frame not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days, when that review will be accomplished. 
(i)  At the discretion of the building official or the city engineer a performance bond may be required as a condition of issuing a permit. The amount of the bond shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the entire cost, as estimated by the applicant and approved by the city. 
(j)  If a stormwater permit is required by this article, the applicant must obtain the permit as a condition to obtaining a business license for the premises on which the stormwater permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 963, § VIII, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-39. - Specific design criteria and minimum standards and specifications. 
(a)  General submission requirements for all projects requiring sediment and stormwater management approval include the following information: 
(1)  A vicinity map indicating north arrow, scale, and other information necessary to locate the property or tax parcel; 
(2)  A plan at an appropriate scale accompanied by a design report and indicating at least: 
a.  Name and address of: 
1.  The owner of the property where the project is proposed; 
2.  The land developer; and 
3.  The applicant. 
b.  The existing and proposed topography, as required on a case-by-case basis; 
c.  The proposed grading and earth disturbance including: 
1.  Surface area involved; and 
2.  Limits of grading, including limitation of mass clearing and grading whenever possible; 
d.  Stormwater management and stormwater drainage computations, including: 
1.  Pre- and post-development velocities and peak rates of stormwater discharge at all existing and proposed points of discharge from the site; 
2.  Site conditions around points of all surface water discharge, including vegetation and method of flow conveyance from the land disturbing activity; and 
3.  Design details for structural controls. 
e.  Erosion, sediment control, and stormwater management provisions including: 
1.  Provisions to preserve topsoil and limit disturbance; 
2.  Details of site grading; and 
3.  Design details for structural controls which include diversions and swales. 
(3)  Federal Emergency Management Agency flood maps and federal- and state-protected wetlands, where appropriate. 
(4)  The city shall require that plans and design reports be sealed by a qualified design professional that the plans have been designed in accordance with approved sediment and stormwater articles, regulations, standards and criteria. 
(5)  Additional information necessary for a complete project review may be required by the city as deemed appropriate. This additional information may include items such as public sewers, water lines, septic fields, wells, etc. 
(b)  Specific requirements for the erosion and sediment control portion of the sediment and stormwater management plan approval process include, but are not limited to, the following items. The city may modify the following items for a specific project or type of project. Modification for a specific type or project will require the concurrence of the city before that modification may be applied and that modification shall be subject to public review and comment prior to adoption. 
(1)  All plans shall include details of temporary and permanent stabilization measures including placement of the following statement on all plans submitted for approval: "Following soil disturbance or redisturbance, permanent or temporary stabilization shall be completed within fourteen (14) calendar days as to the surface of all perimeter sediment controls, topsoil stockpiles, and all other disturbed or graded areas on the project site." 
(2)  These requirements do not apply to those areas which are shown on the plan and are currently being used for material storage, or for those areas on which actual earth moving activities are currently being performed. 
(3)  All erosion and sediment control plans shall comply with the Alabama Handbook for Erosion Control, Sediment Control and Stormwater Management on Construction Sites and Urban Areas and approved supplements. The supplements shall be subject to public review and comment prior to their incorporation in the handbook. 
(4)  A sequence of construction shall be contained on all plans describing the relationship between the implementation and maintenance of sediment controls, including permanent and temporary stabilization, and the various stages or phases of earth disturbance and construction. The sequence of construction shall, at a minimum, include the following activities: 
a.  Clearing and grubbing for those areas necessary for installation of perimeter controls; 
b.  Construction of perimeter controls; 
c.  Remaining clearing and grubbing; 
d.  Road grading; 
e.  Grading for the remainder of the site; 
f.  Utility installation and whether storm drains will be used or blocked until after completion of construction; 
g.  Final grading, landscaping, or stabilization; and 
h.  Removal of sediment controls. 
(5)  Unless an exception is approved on a case-by-case basis or an exception is approved for a specific type of activity by the city, not more than five (5) acres may be cleared at any one time. Once grading is initiated in one (1) five-acre section, a second five-acre section may have stumps, roots, brush, and organic material removed. This will necessitate the phasing of construction on sites in excess of five (5) acres to minimize areas exposed of ground cover and reduce erosion rates. Grading of the second five-acre section may not proceed until temporary or permanent stabilization of the first five-acre section is accomplished. 
(c)  Specific requirements for the permanent stormwater management portion of the sediment and stormwater management plan approval process include, but are not limited to, the following items. The city may modify the following items for a specific project or type of project. Modification for a specific type of project will require the concurrence of the state department of environmental management before the modification may be applied and the modification for a type of project shall be subject to public review and comment. 
(1)  It is the overall goal of the city to address stormwater quantity and water quality solution to the specific watershed problems. 
(2)  Stormwater management requirements for a specific project shall be based on the entire area to be developed, or if phased, the initial submittal shall control that area proposed in the initial phase and establish a procedure and obligation for total site control. 
(3)  Water quantity control is an integral component of overall stormwater management. Control of peak discharges will, to some extent, prevent increases in flooding. The following design criteria for peak flow control is established for water quantity control purposes, unless a waiver is granted based on a case-by-case basis: 
Watersheds that have well-documented water quantity problems may have more stringent, or modified, design criteria that are responsive to the specific needs of that watershed. Modified criteria for that watershed must receive approval from the city, and all projects reviewed and approved by the city shall meet or exceed the modified criteria. Proposed modification of criteria for a watershed shall be subject to public review and comment prior to implementation. 
(4)  Water quality control is also an integral component of stormwater management. Control of water quality on-site will prevent further degradation of downstream water quality. The following design criteria are established for water quality protection, unless a waiver or variance is granted on a case-by-case basis: 
a.  In general, the preferred option for water quality protection shall be ponds. Ponds having a permanent pool of water must be considered before a pond having no permanent pool. Infiltration practices shall be considered only after ponds have been eliminated for engineering or hardship reason as approved by the city. 
b.  Water quality ponds having a permanent pool shall be designed to release the first one-half (½) inch of runoff from the site over a twenty-four-hour period. The storage volume of the normal pool shall be designed to accommodate at least one-half (½) inch of runoff from the entire site. 
c.  Water quality ponds not having a normal pool shall be designed to release the first inch of runoff from the site over a twenty-four-hour period. 
d.  Infiltration practices, when used, shall be designed to accept at least the first inch of runoff from all streets, roadways, and parking lots. 
e.  Other practices may be acceptable to the city if they achieve an equivalent removal efficiency of eighty (80) percent for suspended solids. 
(5)  Any pond utilized for water supply purposes, or for irrigation, must obtain approval from the city for that use. 
(6)  Where existing wetlands are intended as a component of an overall stormwater management system, the following criteria shall be adhered to: 
a.  The only disturbance to the wetland, for the purposes of these regulations, shall be that disturbance caused by the stormwater management pond embankment placement and construction, unless: 
1.  The applicant can demonstrate that the intended or functional aspects of the stormwater management facility and wetlands are maintained or enhanced, or the construction in the wetland for stormwater management is the only reasonable alternative. 
b.  All other necessary state and federal permits shall be obtained. 
(7)  Designs shall be in accordance with standards developed or approved by the City of Guntersville, which are subject to public review and comment. 
(8)  Ease of maintenance must be considered as a site design component. Access to the stormwater management structure must be provided for in the design, and land area adjacent to the structure must be set aside for disposal of sediments removed from the structure when maintenance is performed. 
(9)  A clear statement of defined maintenance responsibility shall be established during the plan review and approval process. 
(10)  All ponds shall have a fore bay or other design feature to act as a sediment trap. A reverse slope bench must be provided one (1) foot above the normal pool elevation for safety purposes and all embankment ponds, having a normal pool, shall have a drain installed to facilitate maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 963, § IX, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-40. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city building official or the city engineer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The building official or the city engineer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 963, § X, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-41. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the city or its agent, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Civil penalties. Any person violating any provisions of this article, permitting conditions, or stop-work order shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars ($500) per day, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding sixty (60) days in jail or both fine and jail or work alternative. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 963, § XI, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-42. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any article; or the refusal to issue a permit by the city shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the city after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the circuit court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 963, § XII, 3-17-08)  
Sec. 8.5-43. - Effectivity, severability and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 1st day of July 2008. 
(b)  Severability. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clause and phrases of this article are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such ruling shall not affect any other paragraphs and sections, since the same would have been enacted by the municipality council without the incorporation of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(c)  Liability. Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city for damage to any person or property. 
(Ord. No. 963, § XIII, 3-17-08)  
Chapter 9 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Mayor and councilmember compensation, § 2-6; business license taxes, § 6-2 et seq.; sales and use taxes, § 6-30 et seq.; cigarette tax, § 6-60 et seq.; motor fuel tax, § 6-70 et seq.; transient occupancy tax, § 6-90 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - City depository. 
The AmSouth Bank, First Alabama Bank, SouthTrust Bank, and "The Home Bank," are hereby designated as the depositories for all municipal funds. 
(Ord. No. 215, § 1, 4-5-37)  
Sec. 9-2. - City purchases; purchasing agent. 
(a)  All purchases for the city for its ordinary needs shall be made by the city clerk for and on behalf of the city. 
(b)  The city clerk is hereby constituted the purchasing agent for the city; provided, however, that all purchases aggregating less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall require approval of the city clerk, and all purchases aggregating three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more and less than the open bid amount, shall require approval of the mayor, such approvals to be obtained before the making of such contract. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall keep at all times in such agent's office a record of all purchases made and shall keep on file a copy of all orders given for the city or on its behalf. 
(Ord. No. 246, § 1, 8-18-41) 
State Law reference— Required competitive bidding, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-16-50.  
Sec. 9-3. - Assessment, equalization and collection of ad valorem taxes—Assessment. 
The tax assessor of the county is hereby authorized and directed to assess all taxes levied or to be levied by the city by its governing body for municipal purposes on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city, for each year. Such assessments shall be made on the state and county assessments returned in such assessor's office on such property as lies or is located within the corporate limits of the city, in the manner provided by the constitution and laws of the state relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 1, 11-22-32)  
Sec. 9-4. - Same—Collection. 
The tax collector of the county is hereby authorized and directed to collect all ad valorem taxes on real and personal property levied or to be levied by the city by its governing body for municipal purposes on real and personal property within the corporate limits, for each year on assessments made as hereinabove provided, along with and in the same manner the tax collector collects the state and county taxes, after such taxes may have become due, and such collector is hereby required to make settlement of city taxes collected by paying the same over to the city treasurer on the first day of each month and the city treasurer will issue to the tax collector a receipt for all such monies as may be paid into the treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 2, 11-22-32)  
Sec. 9-5. - Same—Adoption of state law. 
The city, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of sections 9-3 and 9-4, does hereby approve and adopt all the laws of the state so far as they are applicable to the purposes of such sections 9-3 and 9-4 to provide for the assessment, equalization and collection of taxes levied by and due to the city by the officers and boards provided by the Code of Alabama, and the machinery therein provided for the assessment, equalization and collection of state and county taxes, the enforcement of such collection, the sale of property for the collection of taxes and the redemption from sales shall be applicable to the assessment and collection of such municipal taxes, the sale of property for the collection of such municipal taxes, and the redemption of such sales, which tax laws applicable hereto are hereby approved, referred to and made a part hereof as fully and as completely as if the same had been copied verbatim herein, and fully set forth. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 3, 11-22-32) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-3-1 et seq.  
Sec. 9-6. - Same—Costs and fees. 
For the services of the tax assessor and tax collector rendered each year in the matter of the assessment and collection of the municipal ad valorem taxes, it is hereby provided that they shall be paid out of the general funds of the city the sum of one-half of one (1) percent, each respectively, and for an enforced collection, all such incidental costs and fees incident thereto, shall be paid out of the general funds of the city as for the same services allowed by law for the enforcement and collection of the state and county taxes, collected by levy, sale or execution. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 4, 11-22-32)  
Sec. 9-7. - Ad valorem tax levies—General. 
A general tax of one-half of one (1) percent is hereby levied for municipal purposes on all property, real, personal or mixed, subject to taxation, located and taxable in the city for each year. 
(Ord. No. 234, § 1, 11-6-39)  
Sec. 9-8. - Same—Additional for school purposes. 
There is hereby levied and shall be collected an additional annual ad valorem tax at the rate of three-fourths of one (1) percent of the value of taxable property situated in and subject to taxation by the city, as such property shall be assessed for state taxation for the year ending on the thirtieth day of September next succeeding the levy, for a period of twenty-five (25) years duration, the period commencing with the levy for the municipal tax year beginning October 1, 1982 (for which year taxes will become payable on October 1, 1982), the proceeds of such tax to be used solely for the following public school purposes in the city in the following order: 
(1)  For payment of principal and interest which will mature during the fiscal year of the city in which such tax may be collected on indebtedness which may hereafter be incurred by the city for acquiring, providing, constructing or equipping public school buildings in the city and for which the tax may be pledged, in the order in which such pledges may hereafter be made; and 
(2)  To the extent to which the proceeds of such special tax collected during any fiscal year of the city may be in excess of the amount required to pay the principal of and interest on all such indebtedness which will mature during the same fiscal year, for the purpose of acquiring, providing, constructing or equipping public school buildings or public school rooms in the city and for the purpose of paying the expenses of operating and maintaining the public schools in the city. 
(Ord. No. 417A, 10-25-67)  
Sec. 9-9. - Same—Additional for city and school purposes. 
(a)  As authorized by subsection (e) of Amendment 373 to the Alabama Constitution of 1901, there is hereby levied for each municipal ad valorem tax year in addition to all ad valorem taxes previously levied by the municipality, an additional ad valorem tax on all real property and personal property and intangibles situated within the corporate limits of the city, and which is subject to municipal ad valorem taxes by the city under the constitution and laws of the state, at an annual rate of two and one-half (2.5) mills, of which the city will receive one (1.0) mill and the city school system will receive one and one-half (1.5) mills. This millage is not more than twenty (20) percent of the millage rate imposed by this city on property situated in the corporate limits of the city for the ad valorem tax year which began on October 1, 1977. 
(b)  The mayor shall certify and deliver to the tax assessor of the county a copy of this section and the tax assessor of the county shall be the person designated to assess and the tax collector of the county shall be the person designated to collect such additional taxes. The tax collector and the tax assessor shall receive a commission for assessing and collecting such taxes as heretofore established by an ordinance for taxes presently in effect. 
(Ord. No. 518, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-79)  
Chapter 10 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1039, adopted May 13, 2013, amended Ch. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-49, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Parades not to interfere with firefighting equipment, § 13-25(5). 
State Law reference— Rendering false fire alarm, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-8. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Adoption of fire code. 
Certain documents, one (1) copy of each which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, including appendix chapters B, C, D, E, F, and G as published by the International Code Council, the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code (NFPA 101), 2003 edition, and any subsequent codes of the International Code Council and the National Fire Protection Association, adopted by the state fire marshal, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating, governing, and the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulars, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2009 edition published by the International Code Council, and the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code (NFPA 101), 2003 edition are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-2. - Bureau of fire prevention—Establishment, supervision and personnel. 
(a)  A bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city is hereby established and shall be operated under the supervision of the fire chief and shall consist of one (1) or more persons appointed by the fire chief. 
(b)  The bureau of fire prevention is responsible for investigating fires and conducting fire code inspections as well as any duties deemed necessary for fire prevention. The fire chief may from time to time detail members of the fire department to assist the bureau of fire prevention in activities as part of the detailed fire department members' regular duties, without compensation other than regular pay as a firefighter. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-3. - Enforcement of rules and regulations. 
All rules and regulations, whether set out in a code or ordinance now or hereafter adopted, pertaining to the prevention of fire, shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention, ordinance enforcement officer or any police officer. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-4. - Appeals. 
Any person, firm or corporation who disagrees with any decision of the bureau of fire prevention may appeal to the mayor and city council by giving written notice to the city clerk within five (5) business days of the issuance of the decision in writing by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-5. - Procedure. 
Whenever the fire chief or his designee shall disapprove an application, or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for under any fire prevention code now or hereafter adopted by reference, or when it is claimed that the provisions of such codes do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire chief or his designee to the mayor and city council. The mayor and council shall hold a public hearing concerning the appeal with the fire chief or his designee, the appellant and all concerned parties having been given at least ten (10) days' notice to be present. Notice to appellant may be given by United States postal service standard mail to the address provided with the appellants written notice of appeal. The mayor and council will have the authority after a hearing to uphold or modify the decision appealed from, or to direct a modification of any portion of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Secs. 10-6—10-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 10-21. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Combustible means capable of undergoing combustion; i.e., burning; capable of burning; capable of combustion. 
Fire code official means the fire chief or his designee. 
Live, as applied to cinders and other discharge from burning material, means any such material which is burning or which is hot enough to cause a blaze or set fire to easily combustible material. 
Noxious means any gases or by-products emitted into the air as a result of burning that is offensive or harmful to include refuse and petroleum or its by-products. 
Definitions not provided herein shall have the meaning as provided in Chapter 2 of the International Fire Code herein adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-22. - Preserving order, guarding property, and investigation. 
(a)  In case of a fire, it shall be the duty of the fire chief, or any member of the fire department, or any police officer present to preserve order and to guard any property that may have been removed from any place in order to prevent its destruction. Any police officer shall arrest any person interfering in any manner with such property or interfering in any manner with any work that is being done in order to prevent the spread of fire or investigate the origin and cause of any fire. 
(b)  Any person who shall, upon command by a fireman or peace officer identified to him as such, intentionally disobey a reasonable order or regulation made in relation to the conduct of persons in the vicinity of a fire shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-6. 
(c)  Any person who shall attempt to steal, destroy, tamper with or interfere with any property removed from any burning building or building threatened with fire, or who shall molest or interfere with any firefighter or police officer engaged in so removing such property preventing the spread of such fire, or investigating such fire shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-2. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-23. - Demolition or removal of building to prevent spread of fire. 
The fire chief, or anyone delegated to act as incident commander at a fire scene, shall have full power to pull down or destroy any building or fence or other combustible structure, when, in such officer's opinion, it is necessary to do so to prevent the spread of fire. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-24. - Fire hydrants; requirements for new or replacements. 
All new commercial and residential construction shall install fire hydrants in compliance with the International Fire Code, and the American Water Works Association. It shall be mandatory that all new or replaced fire hydrants be approved by the fire chief or his designee prior to installation. All new hydrants shall be of a design meeting specifications of the Guntersville Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-25. - Unauthorized tapping or interference with fire hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a regularly appointed firefighter or agent of the city, to tap a fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever or in any way to interfere with the same without permission of the city authorities. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-26. - Riding on vehicle by unauthorized person. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the fire department to ride on a fire fighting apparatus except as authorized by the fire chief for special events including but not limited to ceremonies and parades. Exceptions for special events shall be at the discretion of the fire chief. Only persons authorized by the city shall drive, operate, or maintain any fire department vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-27. - Obstructing fire hydrants, fire department connection (FDC), stand pipe connection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any vehicles within fifteen (15) feet of any public fire hydrant or fire plug. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow any manmade or natural obstruction within three (3) feet of any public fire hydrant or fire plug. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-28. - Emergency entry; system required. 
All new commercial buildings or alterations to a commercial building that require the services of an architect shall install a Knox Box entry system on the outside of the building in a place prescribed by the fire chief or his designee. The purchase of a Knox Box entry system shall be coordinated through the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-29. - Nuisance alarms; violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or aid or abet in the commission of such act. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate offense. (Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-8.) 
(b)  No person or business shall allow a fire alarm system to be kept in disrepair such that it causes false alarms. Any person who maintains or owns a system which causes more than two (2) false alarms within a thirty-day period shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each false alarm caused beyond two (2) per thirty-day period. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-30. - Open burning; permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to openly burn without obtaining a conditional open burn permit from the fire department prior to burning. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, whether done by oneself or through an agent or employee acting within the line and scope of employment, to discharge or to cause, permit or allow the discharge into the open air from any residence or business establishment either within or without the corporate limits of the city, of which such person is the owner, proprietor or manager, or of which such person has control, direction or management, of any live, hot or burning sparks, cinders or embers or other burning material or noxious odors or smoke generated by petroleum or its by-products in or upon any public street or other public place or in or upon the premises or dwelling of another to the extent that it is a nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to burn household garbage or waste products, treated lumber or any materials other than natural debris in the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city. 
(d)  The escape of any live, hot or burning matter to or upon any public street or other public place or upon the premises of another is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by any fire department member or by any police officer of the city. 
(e)  Any fire department member or police officer of the city is hereby authorized to enter upon any private premises upon which a nuisance described in this section is being created and abate or cause to be abated such nuisance by extinguishing the fire. It shall be unlawful for any person, by word or act, to resist, obstruct, interfere with or in any manner impede any such member of the fire department or police officer in the exercise of such authority. 
(f)  The owner, or any person at the time being in immediate control of the premises, who fails to abate such nuisance immediately when directed to do so by any fire department member or police officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, be punished by a fine of no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and up to one (1) year in jail. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-31. - Accumulations of combustible material. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow combustible material to accumulate in or upon any building or lot in the city so as to endanger any building whether adjacent to or otherwise, and such is a violation of the International Fire Code, Chapter 3, Section 304. It shall be the duty of the fire chief or his designee to order the same removed within a reasonable time and any failure to comply with such order shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-32. - Overcrowding. 
(a)  Buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with a means of egress system as required by Chapter 10, Means of Egress, of the International Fire Code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control to permit overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the approved capacity, as set out in Chapter 10 of the International Fire Code. 
(c)  Whenever the fire chief or his designee determines that a violation of International Fire Code, Chapter 10, Means of Egress, has occurred, such official shall issue an order to the owner or person in control of the premises to disperse or reduce the number of occupants. If the owner or person in control of the premises fails to promptly comply with the order, or after complying with the initial order from the fire chief or his designee, subsequently violates any of the above provisions of this subsection, the fire chief or designee may determine that the violation poses a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants and order the establishment closed for a period of time not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-33. - Penalty for violation of fire codes. 
Any person, who shall violate any of the provisions of the codes hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of no less than one dollar ($1.00) and no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and up to one (1) year in jail. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. Repeated violations of the provisions of this section shall be grounds for revocation of business license after a hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Secs. 10-34—10-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE AND PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 10-51. - Application of article. 
The rules, regulations, and standards set out in this article shall apply to and shall govern the installation and maintenance of master fire alarm boxes and interior fire alarm systems in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 10-52. - Fire alarms. 
(a)  Installation and maintenance. Persons and companies performing programming, testing, installation, alterations, additions, maintenance, testing and/or repair of fire alarms shall be permitted through the office of the state fire marshal. Owners of fire alarm systems shall maintain all records which apply to the system installation, alterations and additions indefinitely, in a place accessible to city officials. Owners shall maintain all records of the fire alarm system tests and repairs on site, in a place accessible to city officials, for a period not less than two (2) years. Owners of alarm systems shall have an agreement or contract with a company who is permitted through the office of the state fire marshal to periodically inspect and test the system as specified in the fire code. 
(b)  Fire alarm connection; prohibited. Fire alarms systems are not permitted to connect directly to city services. 
(c)  Location of alarm boxes. All new installations of fire alarm control panels (FACP) shall be located as prescribed by the fire chief or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13) 
State Law reference— State fire marshal's permit; application; competency test, Code of Ala. 1975 § 34-33A-5.  
Sec. 10-53. - Sprinkler system requirements; general. 
(a)  Approved system of automatic sprinklers. When sprinklers are required by the International Fire Code or other building code, they shall also be installed and maintained in accordance with industry standards and the International Fire Code. 
(b)  Sprinkler system plans required in this section shall be stamped and signed by a qualified fire protection engineer and shall be submitted to the fire chief or his designee for approval prior to installation. 
(c)  Persons and companies performing testing, installation, alterations, additions, maintenance or repair of fire sprinkler systems shall be permitted through the office of the state fire marshal. Owners of fire sprinkler systems shall maintain all records which apply to the system installation, alterations and additions indefinitely, in a place accessible to city officials. Owners shall maintain all records of the fire sprinkler tests and repairs on site, in a place accessible to city officials, for a period not less than two (2) years. Owners of fire sprinkler systems shall have an agreement or contract with a company who is permitted through the office of the state fire marshal to periodically inspect and test the system as specified in the fire code. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Secs. 10-54—10-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTION FOR BUSINESS LICENSE 
 
Sec. 10-71. - Business license; inspection required. 
(a)  All new businesses, changes of business ownership, or relocation of existing businesses shall be inspected by the fire prevention bureau to ensure all fire and life safety codes as adopted by the city are met before being issued a business license. 
(b)  Upon application of any new business license, the city clerk shall provide the applicant with the general fire and life safety code requirements. The city clerk shall notify the fire prevention bureau of the name of the business, the address of the business, name of the person applying for license and contact information, within two (2) business days following submission of the business application. Once this information is received by the bureau of fire prevention, the fire chief or his designee shall contact the applicant and with the coordination of the applicant, set a time for inspection of the business premises. Once the bureau of fire prevention has completed the inspection(s), and has insured that the business meets the fire and life safety codes as adopted by the city, the city clerk shall be notified in writing or electronically after which a business license may be issued. 
(c)  Businesses who do not meet the fire and life safety code shall be re-inspected at a time prescribed by the bureau of fire prevention after completion of required modifications. 
(d)  A business license shall not be approved nor issued until all fire and life safety code requirements as adopted by the city are met and approved by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Secs. 10-72—10-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY PLANS REVIEW 
 
Sec. 10-91. - New construction; building alteration; plans review required. 
(a)  All architect's plans for new construction or alterations of commercial property requiring an architect's drawing pursuant to building or fire code, shall be reviewed by the bureau of fire prevention, to ensure adopted fire and life safety code requirements are met. 
(b)  One (1) stamped, signed copy of all architect's plans shall be provided by the architect to the bureau of fire prevention. 
(c)  Once certificate of occupancy is issued by the city building official, the architect's plans will be available to the owner of said construction for a period of thirty (30) days, after which all plans still in the possession of the bureau of fire prevention will be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Secs. 10-92—10-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FEES 
 
Sec. 10-111. - Fire report; business license reinspection; fees to be paid. 
(a)  Generally . The bureau of fire prevention provides fire incident reports and inspection reports. These reports are available to involved parties as provided herein. 
(b)  Fees for the issuance of fire reports will be as follows: 
(1)  Residential fire report: 
Initial report for the property owner and/or lessee or renter: No charge 
Each additional report: Ten dollars ($10.00) 
(2)  Commercial fire report: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) each. 
(3)  Fire reports for insurance companies and other interested parties: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) each. 
All fees for fire reports shall be paid at the city clerk's office prior to release of reports. Receipts shall be presented to the City Fire Station No. 1, fire prevention bureau, during normal business hours Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., in order to receive the report. In emergency cases, arrangements can be made after hours by calling City Fire Station No. 1. 
(c)  Business inspection fees. There shall be no fees for an initial fire and life safety code inspection and the first re-inspection. Fees for each subsequent re-inspections of the same business, for the purpose of obtaining a license shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per additional inspection. Fees provided in this section shall be paid in addition to the required business license fee at the time the business license is issued. 
(d)  The above referenced fees shall be distributed to the fire prevention bureau by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 5-13-13)  
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Grease interceptors at restaurants, § 12-65. 
State Law reference— Authority and powers of municipality generally, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-45-1, 11-45-8(c)6, 11-47-30—11-47-140, 11-53-2, 22-1-2; jurisdiction of county health officer, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 22-3-2, 22-3-5; abatement of nuisances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-117. 
 
ARTICLE I. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— At the city's instruction, Ord. No. 1012, adopted July 18, 2011, was added to Art. I as additional provisions to the article. In order to maintain the established numbering system in the article, the provisions supplied by Ord. No. 1012 have been redesignated as §§ 11-4—11-13 to read as set out herein. 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Noises—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person to make, create or maintain any unreasonable, loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise or noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to life, health, comfort or repose of any individual, within the city or its police jurisdiction.  
Sec. 11-2. - Same—Enumeration. 
The following noises, among others, are prohibited under the terms of section 11-1: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc.: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device by a motorist when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, musical instruments, phonographs, etc.: It is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud or excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the comfort, health, or safety of other persons within the jurisdiction of the city. 
a.  It is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful to operate or play any radio, musical instrument, phonographs, or similar devices whether from a motor vehicle or by a pedestrian, in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the player or operator of the device at a distance of ten (10) feet in the case of a motor vehicle or ten (10) feet in the case of a pedestrian. 
b.  It is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful to operate or play any radio, television, phonograph, musical instruments, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound, whether from a business or a residence, or a park or a beach, in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet to any person in a commercial residential, multifamily dwelling, or other public place. 
c.  Violation of this section shall be a violation and punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
d.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit special performances by a band or an orchestra in a hall, building, or in the open air after proper permits have been obtained from the chief of police. 
e.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the ringing of bells or chimes by churches within the city. 
f.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any noises or sounds produced by street sweepers, radios, sirens, or other equipment attached to, or being operated by, any police, fire, rescue, or other emergency vehicles or personnel. 
g.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the conducting of live remote broadcasts by duly licensed radio stations upon business premises, at the request of the owner of the business. Said live remote broadcasts shall be limited to daylight hours only. 
h.  Each violation shall be a separate offense. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, etc.: The use or operation of any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building, product, service, merchandise or political candidate, or allowing such use or operation, except as authorized by the governing body. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc.: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals, birds, etc.: The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles: The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises. 
(9)  Loading, unloading and opening boxes, etc.: The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers on Sundays, Christmas, New Year's or Thanksgiving or before 7:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m.; provided, however, that under emergency conditions the city may grant exceptions thereto. 
(10)  Adjacent to schools, courts, churches, hospitals, etc.: The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, church or court street. 
(11)  Hawkers, peddlers, etc.: The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Drums, etc.: The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(13)  Firearms and fireworks: The explosion of firecrackers, skyrockets, Roman candles, pinwheels or any other form of fireworks or the unnecessary shooting of any firearms, except as specifically authorized by law or the proper official. 
(14)  Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns: The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along the streets and other public places upon vehicles or in any other manner so loaded as to cause noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet on such streets or other public places. 
(15)  Operation of public transportation buses: The causing, permitting or continuing of any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a public transportation bus. 
(16)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc.: The operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, except on written permission of the city prescribing the locality where and the hours during which such operation is permissible. 
(17)  Blowers: The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan, or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(18)  Air conditioning units: Self-contained, one-room air conditioning units up to one-ton capacity attached to the outside walls or windows of buildings within the city, and operated for the comfort of the occupants of such buildings, shall not be deemed in violation of this article where proof is established that such units are maintained in good mechanical condition. Air conditioning units of more than one-ton capacity may not be operated within the city except where remote compressors are housed in soundproof rooms, or where attached or immediately adjoining compressors are sound treated or baffled, and cooling coil and condensation water is disposed of, as prescribed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 699, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 810, 5-3-99) 
Cross reference— Noise in alcoholic beverage establishments, § 3-29; noisy dogs and cats, § 4-27.  
Sec. 11-3. - Same—Tests and standards. 
(a)  Factors to consider: The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of section 11-1 or section 11-2 exists shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The volume of the noise. 
(2)  The intensity of the noise. 
(3)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual. 
(4)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural. 
(5)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any. 
(6)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities. 
(7)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(8)  The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(9)  The time of day or night the noise occurs. 
(10)  The duration of the noise. 
(11)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant. 
(12)  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(b)  Tables: 
TABLE I—LIMITING LEVELS FOR USE DISTRICTS 
Octave band 	     Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure 
Center frequency 	     (Level in Decibels re 0.0002 Microbars) 
Cycles Per Second 	Residential 	Use District 
Commercial 	Manufacturing 
Below 75 	65 	79 	80 
75—150 	60 	74 	75 
150—300 	55 	66 	70 
300—600 	55 	59 	64 
600—1200 	45 	53 	58 
1200—2400 	45 	47 	53 
2400—4800 	40 	41 	49 
Above 4800 	40 	49 	46 
 
If the noise is not smooth and continuous, one (1) or more of the corrections in Table II below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table I. 
TABLE II—TYPE OF OPERATION IN CHARACTER OF NOISE 
(Correction in Decibels) 
Noise source operated less than 20% of any one-hour period; plus 5*. 
Noise source operated less than 5% of any one-hour period; plus 10*. 
Noise source operated less than 1% of any one-hour period; plus 15*. 
Noise of periodic character (hammering, etc.): minus 5. 
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.): minus 5. 
*Apply one (1) of these corrections only. 
If the noise occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or a holiday, seven (7) shall be subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table I. 
(c)  Motorized vehicles: It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle within the city limits which creates a noise or sound which exceeds the noise level limits set out in Table III below. 
TABLE III—LIMITING NOISE LEVELS FROM VEHICLES 
Trucks and buses: 
Over 10,000 pounds: 
93 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
97 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
Under 10,000 pounds: 
80 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
86 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
Passenger cars: 
78 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
84 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
Motorcycles, including other vehicles: 
87 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit 
93 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit  
Sec. 11-4. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number includes the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Ambient noise means the all encompassing noise that is normally associated with a particular environmental surrounding, usually being made up of a composite of sounds. This is sometimes referred to as background noise. 
Average level means the average of the sound level over some stated period of time. 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dBA. 
C-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the C-weighted network. The level so read is designated dBC. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit for describing the amplitude of sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the referenced pressure, which is twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter. 
Holiday weekend means the following weekends which include Easter, Memorial Day, 4th of July and Labor Day. It shall also include the day of New Year's Eve and the day of July 4th even if those days do not fall on a weekend. 
Noise for the purposes of this article refers to the primary noise for which the city has received a complaint and is limited to sounds made by live or recorded musical instruments and/or live or recorded voices which annoy or disturb humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the United States, the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
Property line means an imaginary line along the surface and its vertical plane extension which defines the boundary of the real property owned, rented or leased by one (1) person from that owned, rented or leased by another person. Intra-building real property lines are excluded. 
Receiver means the location or land use category of a location, where persons are located that are annoyed by noise or sound they hear coming from another property. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces. The description of sound may include any characteristics of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
Sound level means the A-weighted or C-weighted sound pressure level, usually measured with a sound level meter (SLM). 
Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time average, output meter and weighing networks used to measure sound pressure levels. 
Sound pressure level means twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure level to the reference of twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter. 
Source means the location of and the activity which emits noise or sound which is audible outside the source owner's property line. 
Weekend means Friday 5:00 p.m. through Sunday 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-5. - Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful, except as expressly permitted herein, to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which exceeds the limits set forth in this article for the use occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-6. - Measurement of sound. 
(a)  The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with the city's sound level meter which shall meet the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). The instrument shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used at all times. If the background noise interferes with the primary noise being measured the primary noise being measured shall be limited to a level which is the greater of either the Table 1 value, or where combined with the ambient sound, a level which is three (3) decibels above the level of the ambient sound level measurement alone. 
(b)  Depending upon the characteristics of the sound being measured, the measurement of sound or noise shall be made using the slow meter response of the city's sound level meter if measuring the A-weighted sound level and the fast meter response of the city's sound level meter if measuring C-weighted sound level. A sound level meter with a level averaging circuit may be used. 
(c)  The measurement shall be made at or up to fifty (50) feet beyond the property line of the property on which such noise is generated. In the event of a complaint, the measurement shall be made at or up to fifty (50) feet beyond the property line of the property on which such noise is generated in the direction of the complainant location. Any measurement shall be at least one (1) minute in duration. 
(d)  In the case of an elevated or directional sound or noise source, compliance with the noise limits shall be maintained at any elevation at the boundary. 
(e)  The ambient sound level measurement shall be measured at the same location that the primary noise is measured as set forth in section 11-3(c), while the primary noise being measured is inoperative. If the primary noise being measured cannot be turned off, is not turned off or if additional sound is created to distort the ambient sound level measurement, the ambient sound level measurement will be estimated by performing a measurement in the same general area of the noise being measured. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-7. - Classification of use occupancies. 
For purposes of defining "use occupancies," all premises zoned as a residential category shall be considered residential use. All premises containing transient commercial sleeping quarters legally permitted shall be considered tourist use. All premises containing business where sales, professional or other commercial use is legally permitted shall be considered commercial use. Hospitals, nursing homes, schools, libraries and church uses shall be considered residential uses. In other cases of multiple use zones, the more restrictive zoned use category shall prevail. Any area not otherwise classified shall conform to commercial standards. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-8. - Maximum permissible sound levels by use occupancy. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any use occupancy in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in the use occupancy category in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Use Occupancy Category 	Time 	Sound Level Limit 
dBA/dBC 
Residential (non-holiday weekends) 	6 a.m.—10 p.m. 
10 p.m.—6 a.m. 	60 
55 
Residential (holiday weekends) 	6 a.m.—12 a.m. 
12 a.m.—6 a.m. 	60 
55 
Luxury motor home resort 	6 a.m.—10 p.m. 
10 p.m.—6 a.m. 	75 
55 
Commercial or tourist (weekdays) 	6 a.m.—10 p.m. 
10 p.m.—6 a.m. 	70 
65 
Commercial or tourist (weekends) 	6 a.m.—12:00 midnight 
12:00 midnight—6 a.m. 	70 
65 
Commercial or tourist (New Year's Eve—New Year's Day) 	10 a.m.—1:00 a.m. 	70 
 
  
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-9. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations: 
(1)  Nonamplified crowd noises; 
(2)  Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefore has been granted by the city in accordance with section 11-7. Regulation of noises emanating from operations under permit shall be according to the conditions and limits stated on the permit and contained in section 11-7; 
(3)  Noises made by persons having obtained a permit to use the streets; 
(4)  Noises of bells and chimes of churches; and 
(5)  City-sanctioned events and school sporting and/or band events. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-10. - Special permits. 
Applications for a special permit for relief from the maximum allowable noise level limits designated in this article may be made in writing to the city building official or his designee. Any special permit granted by the city building official or his designee hereunder must be in writing and shall contain all conditions upon which said special permit shall be effective. The city building official, or his designee, may grant the relief as applied for under the following conditions: 
(1)  The city building official or his designee may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements as deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood, including use of screens or other sound-attenuating devices. 
(2)  Special permits for entertainment. Special permits may be granted for the purpose of entertainment under the following conditions: 
a.  The function can take place on either public or private property. 
b.  The function must be staged between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on weekends. 
c.  The function must not be an ordinary event in the affairs of the applicant. 
d.  A special permit for entertainment may be issued for no longer than three (3) consecutive days and is nonrenewable. 
e.  If the function is to recur, it shall not recur more than four (4) times each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-11. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  No acts proscribed by this article shall be deemed a violation thereof, unless and until the city building official, his designee or member of the police department has issued a written warning to the offender. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(c)  Any person or persons, including an owner or manager of a business, entitled to lawfully possess or who claims lawful possession of such property at the particular time involved shall each be responsible for compliance with this article and each may be punished for its violation as may the person actually causing such sound. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to a revocation of the business license issued to the person or his business for the business location on which the violation occurred or a revocation of any special permit issued. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-12. - Additional remedies. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions hereof which endangers the comfort, repose, health and peace of residents in the area is declared to be a public nuisance and the City of Guntersville is authorized to pursue any and all remedies therefore. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit any private right of action. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-13. - Repeal of prior ordinance. 
This article shall be used for the regulation of sounds made by live or recorded musical instruments and/or live or recorded voices which annoy or disturb humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse or psychological or physiological effect on humans as it pertains to those noises which are produced on real property. To the extent that the ordinance from which this article was derived is in conflict with prior ordinances of the city, the provisions of those prior ordinances which are in conflict are hereby repealed as it pertains to noise as defined by the ordinance from which this article was derived. However, the ordinance from which this article was derived shall not affect any pending cases that were filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 7-18-11)  
Secs. 11-14—11-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste disposal system, § 12-80 et seq. 
State Law reference— Criminal littering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-29; littering from watercraft, Code of Ala. 1975, § 33-6-1 et seq.; authority of city as to littering, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-135, 22-27-3, 22-27-5. 
 
Sec. 11-20. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Aircraft is an contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Authorized private receptacle is a litter storage and collection receptacle with a lid, or so designed as to prevent litter from being strewn, blown or distributed therefrom; except by proper emptying. 
City is the City of Guntersville, Alabama. 
Commercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; or 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit, but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; PROVIDED, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Garbage is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Litter is "garbage", "refuse", and "rubbish" as said terms are defined and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Newspaper is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Non-commercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
Park is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Private premises is any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings. 
Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Vehicle is every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 2, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-21. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 19, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-22. - Litter on occupied private property. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 18, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-23. - Litter on vacant lots. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 20, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-24. - Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 5, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-25. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 6, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-26. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle operating, standing, or parked on any street, alley, road or highway in the city or in its police jurisdiction to cause, or allow to be caused, the throwing, scattering, or casting of any litter, trash, or refuse, upon any street, alley, road, or highway in the city or its police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 7, 2-7-77; Ord. No. 582, § A, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 700, § A, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 11-27. - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 16, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-28. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 4, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-29. - Litter in public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 3, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-30. - Truck loads causing litter. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place, Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit on any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 8, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-31. - Litter in parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 9, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-32. - Litter in lakes and fountains. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 10, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-33. - Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any non-commercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 11, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-34. - Placing commercial and non-commercial handbills on vehicles. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a non-commercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 12, 2-7-77) 
Cross reference— Attaching advertisements to poles, etc., § 13-3.  
Sec. 11-35. - Depositing commercial and non-commercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 13, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-36. - Distributing commercial and non-commercial handbills at inhabited private premises. 
(a)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this article, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(b)  Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined herein) except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 15, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-37. - Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or non-commercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign hearing the words: "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No Advertisement", or any similar notice, indicating in any matter that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 14, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-38. - Posting notices prohibited. 
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 17, 2-7-77)  
Sec. 11-39. - Clearing of litter from open private property by city. 
(a)  Notice to remove. The health inspector, building inspector, or chief of police or their respective representatives are hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the city or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety, or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address. 
(b)  Action upon non-compliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to public health, safety or welfare with fifteen (15) days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection (a) above, or within twenty (20) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the city Post Office Department because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the health inspector, building inspector, or chief of police or their respective representatives are hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the city. 
(c)  Charge included in tax bill. When the city has effected the removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six (6) per cent per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and said charge shall be due and payable by said owner as the time of payment of such bill. 
(d)  Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner with thirty (30) days after the disposal of such litter, as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, then, and in that case, the health inspector, building inspector, or chief of police or their respective representatives, shall cause to be recorded in the Marshall County probate office a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on which said work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property, and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty as provided by law in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 21, 2-7-77)  
Secs. 11-40—11-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 833, § 10, adopted Apr. 20, 2001, repealed art. III, §§ 11-50—11-56, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment art. III, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 447, §§ 1—7, adopted May 3, 1971. 
 
Sec. 11-50. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this article: 
Approved, enclosed, covered structure shall mean any building, garage, accessory structure, or other structure, having four enclosing walls and a roof, built according to and in compliance with all applicable building, zoning, fire, or other codes of the city. 
Automobile graveyard shall mean any establishment or place of business which is duly licensed and operated in accordance with all applicable laws and/or ordinances of the city and which is maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling of wrecked, ruined, damaged, or dismantled motor vehicles or parts thereof. 
Commercial property shall mean any lot, tract parcel, land, or other property located within the city, that is zoned or designated for uses other than residential purposes. 
Inoperable shall mean incapable of being used for the manufactured, designed or intended purpose. 
Inoperable vehicle shall mean any vehicle in a state of disassembly, or in the process of being stripped, dismantled, or overhauled: or undergoing body work; or any other condition that renders the vehicle inoperable or incapable of being used for its designed or intended purpose. Any vehicle that is not currently licensed as required by law is also defined as an inoperable vehicle. 
Junk shall mean and include all metals, whether ferrous or nonferrous, including, but not limited to any used or second hand parts of machinery; plumbing fixtures, or parts thereof; parts of an automobile truck, bus, motorcycle, water craft, or other motor vehicle; gas or electrical appliances or fixtures, or parts thereof; household hardware or furnishings; wire; cable; bearings; valves; pipes and pipe fittings; building materials; wood; or any other used or secondhand metal articles, including inoperable motor vehicles to constitute a public hazard. This definition shall not apply to building materials stored temporarily for use on the same real property within a period of twelve (12) months, when said materials are neatly stored at least eighteen (18) inches above the ground. 
Junk or salvage yard shall mean any premises, establishment or place of business which is duly licensed and operated in accordance with all applicable laws and/or ordinance of the city and which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping or dismantling of junk and salvage, but shall not include the place of business or premises of a scrap processor as herein defined. 
Owner or owners of property Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or person last assessed for payment of ad valorem taxes; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person shall mean any individual, owner, title holder, agent, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or organization of any kind. It shall include, but not be limited to, any tenant, lessee, manager, operator, occupant, executor, executrix, administrator, guardian, trustee, bankruptcy trustee, or other person in charge of, care of, possession of, or control of any real or personal property. 
Premises shall mean any lot, yard, plot, tract, parcel, or other piece of land or property located within the city. 
Residential property shall mean any lot, tract, parcel, land, or other property located within the city on which single or multifamily structures used as a residence or for human habitation exists, or any property that is located within an area that is zoned for residential uses by the city. 
Scrap metal yard shall mean any establishment or place of business which is duly licensed and operated in accordance with all applicable laws and/or ordinances of the city and which is maintained, used, or operated solely for the processing or preparing of scrap metals for remelting by steel mills and foundries. 
Scrap processor shall mean any person who is duly licensed and operating in accordance with all applicable laws and/or ordinances of the city and is engaged primarily in the purchase and collection of scrap metallic (e.g. manufacturing by-products, obsolescent machinery, and vehicles) for the specific purpose of processing into scrap materials for the metals recovery industry, such as steel mills, foundries, smelters, and refineries, and having machinery and facilities designed for such processing and making regular shipments of such materials in the normal course of business. 
Street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Vehicle shall mean any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported, carried, or drawn from one place to another, and shall include but not be limited to, motor vehicles, boat trailers, utility trailers, horse trailers, bicycles, carts, tractors, or other similar devices. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 1, 4-2-01)  
Sec. 11-51. - Abandonment of vehicles. 
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city. It shall be presumed that any vehicle which has been left at any place on a street or highway within the city for a period of seventy-two (72) hours consecutively is an abandoned vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 2, 4-2-01)  
Sec. 11-52. - Leaving of wrecked, non-operating vehicle on street. 
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, inoperable, wrecked, or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city, except only so long as may be necessitated and required by a wreck, breakdown or other such emergency and subject to the provisions of the preceding section. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 3, 4-2-01)  
Sec. 11-53. - Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles. 
No person, as defined in section 11-50, in charge or control of any residential or commercial property within the city shall allow any partially dismantled, inoperable, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than thirty (30) days, and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any residential or commercial property within the city for a longer time than thirty (30) days, except that this article shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an approved, enclosed, covered structure; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate automobile graveyard or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 4, 4-2-01)  
Sec. 11-54. - Impounding. 
The chief of police of the city or any member of his department designated by him is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this article or lost, stolen, or unclaimed, and the city police department's removal prior to the effective date of this ordinance of all such vehicles whose removal would be authorized hereunder is hereby ratified and approved and such vehicles previously so removed and now stored by the city as well as those which shall hereafter be removed and stored by the city pursuant to this article, shall be disposed of in the manner hereinafter provided. Any vehicle so taken up and removed shall be stored in a suitable place provided by the city to protect it from deterioration. A permanent record giving the date of the taking of each vehicle, the place where found and taken, and a description of the vehicle shall be kept by the chief of police of the city. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 5, 4-2-01)  
Sec. 11-55. - Sale. 
At least every six (6) months, the chief of police of the city shall sell at public auction to the highest bidder for cash the vehicle or vehicles herein authorized to be removed and taken up and which shall have been taken up and stored for a period of three (3) months or more, the sales to be made after notice of the time and place therefore shall have first been given by publication once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. The first publication shall be at least twenty (20) days before the sale. Each vehicle shall be sold separately and a notation in the storage record book shall be made of the amount received for each vehicle. The person making the sale shall have the right to reject any and all bids if the amount bid be unreasonably low and shall have the right to continue the sales from time to time if no bidders are present. After deducting and paying all expenses incurred in the removal, taking up, storing, maintaining and selling, of the vehicle or vehicles, the balance, if any, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 6, 4-2-01)  
Sec. 11-56. - Redemption. 
The owner of any vehicle taken up and stored as herein provided may redeem the same at any time prior to its sale by paying the reasonable expense of taking the vehicle in charge, its maintenance and storage and a pro rata of the cost of publication. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 7, 4-2-01)  
Sec. 11-57. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 8, 4-2-01)  
Secs. 11-58—11-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OVERGROWN GRASS AND WEEDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 844, adopted March 18, 2002, repealed ch. 11, art. IV, §§ 11-60—11-67, in its entirety. Former art. IV pertained to weeds and derived from Ord. No. 435A, §§ 2—9, adopted March 2, 1970. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1013, adopted July 18, 2011, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 11-60—11-67, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 844, adopted March 18, 2002. 
 
Sec. 11-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Grass and weed nuisance means any abundance of overgrown grass weeds within the city, which is injurious to the general health, safety and welfare by providing breeding grounds and shelter for rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes and other vermin, insects and pests; or attaining such heights and dryness so as to constitute a fire threat or hazard; bearing wingy or downy seeds, when mature that cause the spread of weeds and, when breathed, irritation to the throat, lungs and eyes of the public; or hiding debris, such as broken glass or metal, which could inflict injury on any persons going upon the property; or being unsightly, or any growth of grass or weeds, other than ornamental growth, which exceeds a height of eight (8) inches growing upon any lot or parcel of land within any platted, subdivided, or improved residential, commercial or industrial subdivision, and any growth of grass or weeds, other than ornamental growth, which exceeds a height of ten (10) inches on property adjacent to a platted, subdivided, or improved residential, commercial or industrial subdivision. 
Improved subdivision means a division of a tract of land or acreage into tracts or parcels, and the improvement by construction of streets, water lines and where applicable, sewer lines to serve the subdivided property. 
Natural condition means uncultivated and unseated land, still in a state of nature; but any growth on land once it has been cleared or plowed is not a natural condition, even though it has not been planted or cultivated by anyone. 
Owner of property means the legal title holder, or lessee, or occupant of property, or agent of legal titleholder or lessee, in charge, possession or control of the property, or owner of the property as the information appears on record in the office of the tax assessor. 
Officer means the Code Enforcement Officer for the City of Guntersville, or any other city official duly authorized to act on behalf of the City of Guntersville in matters relating to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1013, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-61. - Exceptions. 
Excepted from the requirements of this article are: 
(1)  Any property which is in its natural condition. Any growth on land once it has been cleared or plowed is not a natural condition, even though it has not been planted or cultivated by anyone. 
(2)  Any property which is located outside any improved subdivision and is located more than two hundred (200) feet from any boundary of any lot or parcel of real estate upon which any dwelling is located and more than two hundred (200) feet from any commercial enterprise. 
(3)  Cultivated row crops and garden plants in their respective growing seasons. But this exception applies only to growing crops and garden plants and shall not be construed to permit any crops or gardens to become overgrown with grass and weeds in violation of the remaining terms of this article. 
(4)  Ornamental shrubbery and ground cover, provided that such uses are part of a landscaping theme and not associated with a general deterioration of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1013, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-62. - Overgrown condition prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance, in violation of this article, for the owner of any real property situated within the corporate limits of the city to allow such real property to become overgrown with tall grass, or with any weed or plants such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, cocklebur or other weed of like kind, or any weed or plant bearing wingy or downy seeds, or any weed or plant that is otherwise noxious, dangerous harmful or poisoning. 
(Ord. No. 1013, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-63. - Maintenance of grass, weeds. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any real property located within the city to maintain any grass or weeds growing upon the property in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  The duties and obligations of the owner of any real property located within the city extend to and include any such real property situated within a dedicated right-of-way or easement burdening the property, except to the extent that it may be impracticable to do so because of public facilities located there. Such rights-of-way and easements must be maintained by the owner in a manner consistent with the maintenance of the owner's remaining property and within the requirements set forth in this article, except to the extent it may be impracticable to do because of public facilities located there. 
(Ord. No. 1013, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-64. - Maintenance practices of City of Guntersville and of public utilities. 
The dedication and existence of a right-of-way for a public road and of an easement for drainage or for public utilities represents the grant of only a limited interest in property and does not change the actual ownership of the property upon which the right-of-way easement is located. The public authority maintains rights-of-way and easements only to the extent necessary to maintain the public facility and to maintain safety. The owner of the burdened property continues to control the property, except to the extent that such control interferes with the public use. The public authority does not cut grass, weeds and other growth upon rights-of-way or easements, except to the extent necessary for operations and safety purposes. All other maintenance is the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the right-of-way or easement is located. 
(Ord. No. 1013, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-65. - Enforcement. 
If the owner of real property located within the corporate limits of the city shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article, the code enforcement officer or other duly authorized city official may cause to be served upon such owner, in person or by first-class mail, notice requiring such owner to comply with this article within ten (10) days of the notice or to appear for an administrative hearing before the officer or other duly authorized city official as designated by the code enforcement officer to determine whether the owner is in violation of this article. The notice shall apprise the owner of the facts of the claims against him and shall name a particular date, time and place for such hearing. The notice shall also be conspicuously posted on the property at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. The officer and the owner shall have the right to bring witnesses on his own behalf at such hearing. If no written objections are filed with the city clerk at least five (5) days before the hearing and the owner does not appear in person or through his or her representative to contest the officer's finding, it shall be presumed that the person accepts the notice as fact and waives any rights he or she may have to contest the removal of the weeds. 
If after the hearing the officer finds that this article has been violated and a nuisance exists, the owner shall have five (5) days from the hearing date or five (5) days from the date of notice by personal service or by first class mail of the officer's determination, whichever is the later date, to comply with this article; otherwise, the officer may thereafter institute the following enforcement procedures: 
(1)  a.  The officer may cause the abatement of the nuisance by cutting of the offending grass or weeds. The officer shall keep an account of the costs of the cutting of the grass or weeds and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council, setting forth the costs of cutting the grass or weeds. 
b.  The owner shall be notified by first class mail at least thirty (30) days in advance of the time fixed by the officer for the council to receive and consider the report at a public hearing. The notice shall contain an itemized report of costs of cutting the grass or weeds on the property and shall describe the property by street address or by legal description. The notice shall also be conspicuously posted on the property at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. Notice shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the municipality once per week for two (2) consecutive weeks, or if no newspaper is published in the municipality, notice shall be posted in three (3) public places, including the county courthouse and the location of the hearing for at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO ASSESS COSTS OF ABATEMENT OF WEED NUISANCE 
Notice is hereby given that on the 7th day of July, 2011 at 6:00 p.m. in the Guntersville Town Hall at a regularly scheduled council meeting, the Council of the Municipality of Guntersville will consider a resolution regarding the assessment of the cost of abatement of a weed nuisance upon or in front of the property located at ________, in the Municipality of Guntersville; and at that time and place will determine the cost of abatement and removal, which cost shall be assessed upon the lots and lands from which or in front of which the weeds were removed, and the cost shall be added to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and lands for municipal purposes. The costs shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected. The costs shall be subject to the same commissions and fees and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
If no objections are filed with the municipal clerk at least five (5) days before the meeting of the council and unless the person appears before the council in person or through his or her representative to show cause, if any, why his or her objection should be sustained, it shall be presumed that the person accepts the notice as fact and waives any rights he or she may have to contest the removal of the weeds and the action of the council shall be final unless good and sufficient cause can be otherwise shown. 
Dated this 7th day of July, 2011. 
________________________ 
City of Guntersville 
________________________ 
Betty Jones, City Clerk 
c.  The owner may appear at that time and present any objections to the report. If no objections are filed with the municipal clerk at least five (5) days before the meeting of the council and unless the person appears before the council in person or through his or her representative to show cause, if any, why his or her objection should be sustained, it shall be presumed that the person accepts the notice as fact and waives any rights he or she may have to contest the removal of the weeds and the action of the council shall be final unless good and sufficient cause can be otherwise shown. 
d.  At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the council shall hear the report, together with any objections which may be raised by any of the owners whose property is liable to be assessed for the work and thereupon make such modifications in the report as they deem necessary after which by motion or resolution the report shall be confirmed. 
The amounts of the cost for abatement of the nuisance by cutting and removing the grass or weeds mentioned in the report shall hereafter be referred to as "weed liens," and shall constitute a weed lien on the property for the amount of the weed liens, respectively. After confirmation of the reports, a copy shall be given to the tax collector or revenue commissioner of the county who, under the "Optional Method of Taxation," is charged with the collection of the municipal taxes pursuant to Article 1, Division 2, Chapter 51, of Title 11, of the Alabama Code. It shall be the duty of the county tax collector or revenue commissioner to add the costs of the respective weed liens to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land subject to a weed lien and thereafter the costs shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency; provided, however, that if the foreclosure and sale is the result of a delinquency caused by a weed lien, the municipality shall reimburse the county tax collector or revenue commissioner for all costs associated with the foreclosure and sale unless the costs are collected at the time of sale as part of the sale. 
(2)  The officer may issue a citation to the owner of the property, requiring the owner to appear in the municipal court to answer charges for the violation of this article. Such citation shall name the party charged, the address of the property where the alleged violation is located, and the nature of the offense or violation. It shall also apprise the owner of the date, time and place at which to appear for court. Upon a finding of guilty in the municipal court, the owner is subject to the same penalty as provided for violation of city ordinances in section 11-8. Such citation, returnable to the municipal court shall be served on the owner of the property by any enforcement officer, who shall forthwith appear and make oath as to the alleged offense before a magistrate of the municipal court. This provision for the issuance of a citation to municipal court shall not prevent any such officer from appearing before a municipal court magistrate and making oaths as to the facts and applying for a summons or warrant with respect to any alleged offense, in lieu of issuing a citation. 
(3)  The officer may institute both enforcement procedures set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. The institution of one (1) procedure does not preclude the subsequent or simultaneous institution of the other procedure, provided the criminal procedure is not used to collect any outstanding civil assessments against the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 1013, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-66. - Satisfaction of liens. 
Upon payment of the itemized accounts arising under this article, any liens or assessments filed under this article may be marked "satisfied" and "paid in full" and said satisfaction filed with the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 1013, 7-18-11)  
Sec. 11-67. - Emergency action. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the City of Guntersville shall have authority to enact, and authorize the appropriate city official to initiate immediate abatement of weed nuisance when, in the opinion of the official so designated, such emergency action is required due to imminent and immediate danger to human life or health. The cost of the emergency action shall be fixed by the city council and shall be assessed as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1013, 7-18-11)  
Secs. 11-68—11-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SMOKING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 955, §§ 1—13, adopted December 3, 2007, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article V, sections 11-71—11-83 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 11-71. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Enclosed smoking area means an area within a building that has physical barriers such as walls and doors extending from floor to ceiling that prohibits smoke from entering a non-smoking area within such building. All common areas, such as lobbies, restrooms, waiting areas, common hallways and the like, shall be located in the non-smoking area of a building unless the building provides for separate and distinct common areas being provided in both the non-smoking and enclosed smoking areas of the building. 
Healthcare facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms and wards within healthcare facilities. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a childcare, adult daycare or healthcare facility. 
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purposes, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, gaming facilities, healthcare facilities, hotels and motels, Laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters and waiting rooms. A private club is a "public place" when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guest or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form. 
Sports arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 1, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-72. - Application to city-owned facilities. 
All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased or operated by the city, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-73. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including but not limited to, the following places: 
(a)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums. 
(b)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, banks, Laundromats, professional offices and retail service establishments. 
(c)  Childcare and adult daycare facilities. 
(d)  Convention facilities, except as specified in sections 11-77(e) and 11-77(f) below. 
(e)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(f)  Elevators. 
(g)  Healthcare facilities. 
(h)  Hotels and motels, except as specified in sections 11-77(e) and 11-77(f) below. 
(i)  Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(j)  Polling places. 
(k)  Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general public is invited, except as specified in sections 11-77(e) and 11-77(f) below. 
(l)  Restaurants, except as specified in sections 11-77(e) and 11-77(f) below. 
(m)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and other common-use areas. 
(n)  Retail stores. 
(o)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of any agency, board, commission, committee or council of the sixty or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(p)  Service lines. 
(q)  Shopping malls. 
(r)  Playgrounds and sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas, except as specified in sections 11-77(e) and 11-77(f) below. 
(s)  Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals or other similar performances. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 3, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 989, 3-1-10)  
Sec. 11-74. - Prohibition of smoking in place of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment except as listed in section 11-73 above. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of the article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 4, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-75. - Prohibition of smoking in seating areas at outdoor events. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the seating areas of all outdoor arenas, stadiums and amphitheaters, as well as in bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other public events. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 5, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-76. - Reasonable distance. 
Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of fifteen (15) feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter those areas. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 6, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-77. - Where smoking is not regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 11-73 and 11-74: 
(a)  Private residences, except when used as a childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility. 
(b)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guest and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than twenty (20) percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one (1) or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the provisions of sections 11-75 and 11-76. 
(e)  Enclosed smoking areas as described in section 11-71. 
(f)  Clearly identified smoking facilities as defined in section 11-78. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 7, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-78. - Declaration of an establishment as a smoking facility. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, proprietor or other person in control of an establishment may declare that the entire facility is a smoking place. Such establishment must be clearly designated by signage as described in section 11-79 or the establishment will be subject to the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 8, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-79. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "No smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of the area. 
(d)  The owner or proprietor of a smoking facility as defined in section 11-78 shall post signs at all entrances to such buildings stating, "This is a smoking facility." 
(Ord. No. 955, § 9, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-80. - Designation of smoking areas. 
If a smoking area is designated, each smoking areas shall: 
(1)  Be located in an unenclosed area of the premises (out of doors) and away from any general public entrance or exit to the building, or 
(2)  Be located within an enclosed area (indoor) with a separate HVAC system which services only that area or utilizes an appropriate air flow control, exhaust and/or air filtration system designated such that tobacco smoke, chemicals and fumes shall not enter or be returned into the non-smoking area. Any such smoking area must be physically separated in its entirety by walls, which extend from floor to the ceiling above, and have doors, which can be closed. 
(3)  In the case of restaurants, smoking is permitted in a separate area under the following conditions: 
a.  The restaurant smoking area is physically separated in its entirety by walls which extend from floor to ceiling above, except for the sharing of a common ingress/egress between the smoking an non-smoking area; 
b.  Operates a separate HVAC system which services only that area, or 
c.  Utilizes an appropriate air flow control, exhaust and/or air filtration system designed such that tobacco smoke, chemicals and fumes shall not enter or be returned into the non-smoking area. Such system(s) must be in operation during all hours when food or beverages are served. 
d.  As it relates to subsections b. and c. above, the air handling system serving the restaurant smoking area must be wired in series with the air handling fan control of the restaurants dining area. 
e.  An initial airflow test and balance certificate substantiating compliance shall be provide to the city on or before opening any establishment operating a restaurant smoking area with an enclosed (indoor) smoking area. Test and balance certifications issued within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this article may be accepted in lieu of a new certification, provided there have been no changes to the air handling system or interior structure; thereafter, airflow test and balance certificates shall be required when changes are made to the air handling system or interior structure, or in the event of non-compliance with section 11-74. During any non-complaint period, the restaurant will remain smoke free pending the presentation of a new airflow test and balance certificate to the city. 
(4)  All such smoking areas must be designated by appropriate signs as provided in section 11-75 which are clearly visible to patrons in or entering the area; and 
(5)  Contain ashtrays, containers or other facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 10, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-81. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Provisions of this article regarding structures and signage shall be enforced by the code enforcement division of the city planning and building department. Provisions related to individuals shall be enforced by the city police department. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(c)  Planning and building department, fire department or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(d)  An owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action in the city municipal court to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 11, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-82. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who willfully smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public place or places of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year. 
(c)  In addition to the fines establish by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 12, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 11-83. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or constructed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 13, 12-3-07)  
Chapter 11.5 - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 11.5-1. - Purpose. 
The Federal Trade Commission ("FTC") has adopted Identity Theft Rules, 16 C.F.R. Part 681, which implement Section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, that require every financial institution and creditor to establish certain policies to assist in the detection, prevention and mitigation of identity theft. The FTC's regulations require creditors, as defined by 15 U.S.C. § 681.2(b)(5), to adopt policies to prevent and mitigate identity theft with respect to covered accounts, as defined by 16 C.F.R. § 681.2(b)(3). The FTC regulations require creditors to establish and adopt an identity theft prevention program tailored to its size, complexity, and nature of its operations, which will use "red flags" to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft related to information used in covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 976, 5-11-09)  
Sec. 11.5-2. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this program, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Guntersville, Alabama. 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identifying information means any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person, including name, address, telephone number, social security number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, or computer's internet protocol address or routing code. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identify theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 976, 5-11-09)  
Sec. 11.5-3. - The program. 
The city establishes an identity theft prevention program to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft. The program shall include reasonable policies and procedures to: 
(1)  Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those red flags into the program; 
(2)  Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program; 
(3)  Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and 
(4)  Ensure the program is updated periodically to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 976, 5-11-09)  
Sec. 11.5-4. - Identification of red flags. 
In order to identify relevant red flags, the city considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous experiences with identity theft. All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account, or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Notification or alert from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indicators of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or consumer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquires; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the person presenting the document; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the city, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identifying information. 
a.  Personal identifying information that is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer (example: inconsistent birth dates); 
b.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with other sources of information (example: an address not matching an address on a credit report); 
c.  Personal identifying information, phone number or address that is associated with fraudulent applications or activities; 
d.  Other information provided is consistent with fraudulent activity, such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address; 
e.  The social security number provided is the same as that provided by another applicant or customer; 
f.  An address or phone number is provided that is the same as that of another person; 
g.  A person fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete; and 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the city. 
(4)  Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account. 
a.  Change of address of an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name or add authorized users to the account; 
b.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account (examples: payments cease when there is not history of late or missed payments; very high account activity); 
c.  Mail sent to the customer is repeatedly returned as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account; 
d.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statement; 
e.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account; 
f.  Breach in the city's computer system security; and 
g.  Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information. 
(5)  Alerts from others. 
a.  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft; 
b.  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 976, 5-11-09)  
Sec. 11.5-5. - Detection of red flags. 
(a)  New accounts . In order to detect any of the red flags identified above associated with the opening of a new account, city personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account: 
(1)  Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification; 
(2)  Verify the customer's identity (for insurance, review a driver's license or other identification card); 
(3)  Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity; and 
(4)  Independently contact the customer. 
(b)  Existing accounts . In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for an existing account, city personnel will take the following steps to monitor transactions with an account: 
(1)  Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email); 
(2)  Verify the validity of requests to change billing addresses; and 
(3)  Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment purposes. 
(Ord. No. 976, 5-11-09)  
Sec. 11.5-6. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
The program shall provide for appropriate responses to detected red flags to prevent and mitigate identity theft. The response shall be commensurate with the degree of risk posed. Appropriate responses may include: 
(1)  Monitor the following covered accounts for evidence of identity theft: 
a.  Accounts for garbage collection service; 
b.  Accounts for use, rental, and services of the Trussville Civic Center; and 
c.  Taxpayer accounts (licenses, permits, taxes, and other user fees). 
(2)  Contact the customer; 
(3)  Change any passwords, security codes or other security devices that permit access to a covered account; 
(4)  Not open a new covered account; 
(5)  Close an existing covered account; 
(6)  Reopen a covered account with a new account number; 
(7)  Notify law enforcement; or 
(8)  Determine that no response is warranted under the circumstances. 
In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring with respect to city accounts, the city will take the following steps with respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information: 
(1)  If payments are accepted on the city's website, ensure that the city's website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure; 
(2)  Ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and computer files containing customer information; 
(3)  Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after a set period of time; 
(4)  Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information; 
(5)  Request only the last four (4) digits of social security numbers, if any; 
(6)  Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and 
(7)  Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for city purposes. 
If the city accepts payment by credit card, the city will take the following steps to protect personal identifying information: 
(1)  In the event that credit card payments are made over the internet and processed by a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments; 
(2)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account; and 
(3)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 976, 5-11-09)  
Sec. 11.5-7. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the program in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In doing so, the city council will consider the following factors in considering whether the program should be updated: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Changes in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Changes in methods to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Changes in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; 
(5)  Changes in the city's business arrangements with other entities; and 
(6)  Changes in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 976, 5-11-09)  
Sec. 11.5-8. - Program administration. 
(a)  Oversight . The mayor will be responsible for oversight and implementation of the program, and for reviewing reports prepared by city personnel regarding compliance with red flag requirements. The mayor will make recommendations regarding material changes to the program, as necessary in his opinion, to address changing identity theft risks and to identity new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council. 
The mayor will report to the city council at least annually the city's compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(1)  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(2)  Service provider agreements; 
(3)  Significant incidents involving identity theft and the city's response; and 
(4)  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(b)  Staff training . The city clerk will be responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(c)  Service provider arrangements . In the event the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more accounts, the city will take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activities in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft. 
(1)  Require, by contract, that service providers have such policies and procedures in place; and 
(2)  Require, by contract, that service providers review the city's program and report any red flags to the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 976, 5-11-09)  
Sec. 11.5-9. - Duties regarding address discrepancies. 
The city hereby adopts the following policies and procedures designed to enable the city to form a reasonable belief that a credit report relates to the consumer for whom it was requested if the city receives a notice of address discrepancy from a nationwide consumer reporting agency indicating the address given by the consumer differs from the address contained in the consumer report. 
The city may reasonably confirm that an address is accurate by any of the following means: 
(1)  Verification of the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Review of the consumer's records; 
(3)  Verification of the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Other reasonable means. 
If an accurate address is confirmed, the city shall furnish the consumer's address to the nationwide consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy if: 
(1)  The city establishes a continuing relationship with the consumer; and 
(2)  The city, regularly and in the ordinary course of business, furnishes information to the consumer reporting agency. 
(Ord. No. 976, 5-11-09)  
Chapter 12 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Damaging or obstructing drainage ditches, § 16-5; discharge of water onto sidewalks, § 16-6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Grant of electricity franchise to board. 
(a)  The words "the city" as used herein shall mean the City of Guntersville in the State of Alabama as it may at any time be constituted. The words "the board" as used herein mean Electric Board of Guntersville, a public corporation organized under the provisions of Act No. 175 adopted at the 1951 Regular Session of the Legislature of Alabama. 
(b)  There is hereby granted to the board the right, privilege, power and franchise to acquire, construct, own, maintain and operate in the city a system for the distribution of electricity for heat, light and power to the city and to its inhabitants and any person, firm or corporation within or outside of the city for public or private uses, and the consent of the city is hereby granted to the board to use the streets, avenues, alleys and other public ways and public places in the city for the aforesaid purposes. There is hereby further granted to the board the right, privilege and power at any time and from time to time, without any requirement as to permit or fee therefor, to repair, renew, extend, enlarge, add to and improve the said system and to construct in, over, along and under any street, avenue, alley or other public way or public place in the city all poles, towers, guy wires, cross arms, wires and cables and other parts used or useful as a part of or in connection with the system, and to make all necessary excavations therefor. 
(c)  The board shall, and by accepting this franchise agrees, that it will upon making any excavations of the streets, avenues, alleys, public ways and public places in the city, restore the surface or paving at the point of such excavation in substantially the same condition as before such work was done, all as may be practicable and within a reasonable time thereafter. 
(d)  The rights, privileges, power and franchise herein granted may be exercised by the board or any successors and assigns of the board, all subject nevertheless to the conditions and obligations herein contained. 
(e)  The rights, privileges, power and franchise herein granted shall remain in full force and effect for a period of thirty (30) years from the effective date of this ordinance. 
(f)  This article shall be published as required by law in a newspaper publication and having general circulation in the city and shall become effective in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 663, §§ 1—6, 1-7-91) 
Cross reference— Excavation permit, § 16-4.  
Sec. 12-2. - Grant of gas franchise to district (Reserved).  
Sec. 12-3. - Grant of water works and sewer franchise to board. 
(a)  The word "city" as used herein means the City of Guntersville, Alabama, as it is now constituted and as it may hereafter be extended or enlarged. The words "the board" as used herein mean the water works and sewer board of the city, a public corporation under the laws of the state. 
(b)  There is hereby granted to the board the right, privilege, authority and franchise to acquire, own, operate, construct, enlarge and improve in the city a water works plant and distribution system, and a sanitary sewer system, or either of them, for the purpose of supplying water and sanitary sewer service in the city and the surrounding territory and to the inhabitants thereof, and to use the streets, avenues, alleys and public ways and places in the city for such purposes. 
(c)  The city hereby grants to the board the right, privilege, authority and franchise at any time and from time to time during the period covered by this franchise and without any requirement as to permit or fee therefor, to lay construction and maintain pipes and mains and other conductors, fixtures and related appurtenances in, along, across and under the streets, avenues, alleys and other public places in the city, and to repair, renew, relay and extend such pipes and mains, conductors, fixtures and related appurtenances and to make all excavations necessary therefor. 
(d)  The board shall, and by accepting this franchise agrees that it will, upon making any excavation in the streets, avenues, alleys, public ways and public places of the city, restore the surface or paving at the point of such excavation in substantially the same condition as before such work was done, all as promptly as may be practicable and within a reasonable length of time thereafter. 
(e)  The rights, privileges, franchises and authorities hereby granted may be exercised by the board or any successor or assign of the board and may be mortgaged and conveyed in trust by the board as security for any bonds or other obligations hereafter issued by it, all subject, nevertheless, to the conditions and obligations herein contained. 
(f)  The franchise granted hereby shall be effective for a period of thirty (30) years. 
(Ord. No. 524, §§ 1—6, 3-3-80) 
Cross reference— Excavation permit, § 16-4.  
Secs. 12-4—12-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - USE OF SEWERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 12-20. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
ADEM: The Alabama Department of Environmental Management. 
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations. 
EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system. 
OSHA: Occupational safety and health administration. 
P.L.: Public law. 
POTW: Publicly owned treatment works. 
SS: Suspended solids. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1.01, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-21. - Definitions. 
The following terms, wherever used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Act or the act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (P.L. 92-500), as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-217) and as further amended. 
Authorized representative of industrial user: An authorized representative of an industrial user shall be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president if the industrial user is a corporation. 
(2)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade (sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit) expressed in terms of weight and volume (milligrams per liter). 
Board: The water works and sewer board of the city. 
Building sewer or house connection: The connecting pipe from a building to the sanitary sewer. 
Combined sewer: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater. 
Cooling water: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Direct discharge: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Domestic wastewater: All liquid and waterborne pollutants, exclusive of "unpolluted wastewater" as defined herein or wastewater or wastes from processes or operations of "industrial users" as defined herein. 
Environmental protection agency or EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
Holding tank waste: Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum-pump tank trucks, and septic tank haulers. 
Indirect discharge: The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the act into the sewerage system (including holding tank waste discharged into the sewerage system). 
Industrial user: Any user of the sewerage system who is a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the act. (A user who discharges industrial waste into the sewerage system.) 
Industrial waste: The liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business or from the development of natural resources. 
Manager: The administrative officer of the water works and sewer board of the city, who is charged with administrative control of all operations of the board and is responsible directly to the board. As used herein, it may also include any other board employee delegated to act for the board by the manager or by the board. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system or NPDES permit: A permit to discharge wastewater issued pursuant to section 402 of the act. 
Pollutant: Any solid waste, chemical waste, biological material, radioactive material, thermal waste, or industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution: The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of water. 
Private wastewater disposal system: Any facilities for wastewater treatment and disposal not maintained and operated by the city. 
Properly shredded garbage: The organic wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles being greater that one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights, and which is controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW: Treatment works as defined by section 212 of the act which are owned in this instance by the water works and sewer board of the city. This definition includes the wastewater treatment plant and any sewers that convey wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant (sewerage system). 
Receiving stream: That body of water, stream, or watercourse receiving the discharge from a wastewater treatment plant or that body of water, stream, or watercourse formed by the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewage: Sewage excluding process wastes from industrial users. 
Sanitary sewer: A public sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility that carries liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage: A combination of water-carried wastes from residences and industrial users (wastewater). 
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater. 
Sewerage system: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater (POTW). 
Significant industrial user: Any industrial user of the city sewerage system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average work day. 
(2)  Has a discharge which is greater than five (5) percent of the hydraulic flow or organic design capacity of the city sewerage system. 
(3)  Has a discharge which contains toxic pollutants or priority pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the act or state statutes and rules and regulations. 
(4)  Is found by the water works and sewer board, the approval authority or EPA to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the sewerage system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the sewerage system. 
Storm sewer or storm drain: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Storm water: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Suspended solids: The total solid matter that either floats on the surface of or is suspended in water or liquid waste and which is removable by laboratory filtration. 
Unpolluted wastewater: Any wastewater which is substantially free of pollutants and is discharged from the following: 
(1)  Rain downspouts and drains. 
(2)  Footing drains. 
(3)  Storm and surface water drains. 
(4)  Cooling water systems. 
Unpolluted wastewater shall contain, by definition, none of the following: 
a.  BOD in excess of ten (10) mg/l. 
b.  Suspended solids in excess of ten (10) mg/l. 
c.  Free or emulsified greases or oils. 
d.  Acids or alkalies. 
e.  Phenols or other substances imparting taste or order to receiving waters. 
f.  Toxic or poisonous substances. 
g.  Noxious or odorous gases. 
h.  Any wastewater with a temperature which exceeds sixty (60) degrees centigrade (one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit) at its introduction into a storm sewer or which exceeds forty (40) degrees centigrade (one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit) at its introduction into a receiving stream. 
User: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewerage system. 
Wastewater: Sewage. 
Wastewater treatment plant: The facilities of the city for treating and disposing of wastewater. 
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Water works and sewer board or board: The water works and sewer board of the city, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the manager or other duly authorized official of the board. 
Waters of the state: All bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, within the boundaries of the state. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1.02, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-22. - Protection of equipment. 
No person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface, tamper with, or remove any equipment or materials which are a part of the sewerage system or any equipment or materials used by the board or ADEM for the purpose of making waste examinations and waste flow measurements and left upon the premises of a user discharging wastes into the sewerage system. Only persons authorized by the board or ADEM will be allowed to uncover, adjust, maintain, and remove such equipment and materials. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 5, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-23. - Violations and penalties. 
A violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article, including the wilful furnishing of false information relative to same for the use of the sewerage system, shall be and hereby is declared to be a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, any person in violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article or the use by any person of the sewerage system in violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and otherwise punished as provided in section 1-8, for each violation. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation hereunder. Every person concerned in the violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with same, or who furnishes false information relative to such person's use of the sewerage system aforesaid, whether such person directly commits the acts or aids and abets same, and whether present or absent, shall be proceeded against and held as a principal. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 6, 2-7-83)  
Secs. 12-24—12-29. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
Sec. 12-30. - Unsanitary deposit of waste on property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, any human excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 2.01, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-31. - Discharge of untreated waste to outlet other than sanitary sewer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any outlet other than a sanitary sewer, within the corporate limits of the city, any domestic or industrial wastes except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article and regulations of the waterworks and sewer board and where an appropriate NPDES permit has been obtained from ADEM pursuant to section 402 of the act. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 2.02, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-32. - Discharge of cooling water to storm sewer. 
Where a storm sewer is adjacent to a property, cooling water which meets the requirements of unpolluted wastewater definition, shall be discharged into the storm sewer in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article, provided that the city determines that sufficient capacity of such storm sewer and where an appropriate NPDES permit has been obtained from ADEM pursuant to section 402 of the act. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 2.03, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-33. - Connection to sanitary sewer—Required after ninety-day notice. 
The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or any other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located within two hundred (200) feet of such property a public sanitary sewer of the city that discharges to the city wastewater treatment plant, are hereby required at the owners' expense to connect such facilities directly with the proper sanitary sewer in accordance with provisions of this article and regulations of the board within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so. These connections shall be made in accordance with provisions of division 4 of this article and regulations of the board. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 2.04, 2-7-83) 
Cross reference— Connection permit, § 12-41.  
Sec. 12-34. - Same—Performance by city after ten-day notice. 
In the event the owner of any property available to a public sanitary sewer does not cause the required connection of such property to the sewerage system to be made, the city clerk shall give written notice to such owner to connect such property to the sewer system. In the event that such owner fails or refuses to connect such property to the sewerage system within ten (10) days following such date that the notice is given, the city may make such connection, or cause such connection to be made, by condemnation if necessary, at the expense of such owner. The cost of making such connection shall constitute a lien upon such property in favor of the city, prior and superior to all liens other than liens for taxes, to be collected as other debts are collected and liens enforced. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 2.05, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-35. - Same—Constructive service of notice. 
(a)  In the event the owner of any property to whom the notice provided in section 12-34 is required to be given to a nonresident, notice shall be given to such owner by publication once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city, by mailing a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, of such notice to such owner at such owner's last known address, and by delivering a copy of such notice to the agent or occupant of such property. 
(b)  Whenever any notice to a resident owner of property available to sewers is returned "not found," the city clerk may prescribe alias notices to be served as in the case of the original notice; two (2) returns of "not found" to such a resident owner shall authorize the city clerk to proceed to give notice to such resident owner in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section for nonresident owners of property available to sewers. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 2.06, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-36. - Same—Collection of cost. 
In the event property available to sewers is connected to the sewerage system by the city pursuant to the provisions of section 12-34, the city council shall thereafter adopt a resolution assessing the cost or expense of making such connection against such property. Promptly after the adoption of such resolution, the city clerk shall prepare a statement in writing, setting forth the name of the owner of such property and a description of such property and stating the cost of connecting such property with the sewerage system. Such statement shall be filed with the probate judge for record in mortgage records of the county. The filing of such statement shall operate as notice of such lien from the date of its filing. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 2.07, 2-7-83)  
Secs. 12-37—12-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Required connections, § 12-33 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-40. - Private system authorized. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 12-33, such toilet and other facilities necessary for the discharge of domestic and/or industrial wastes shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the requirements of the state, county and city, including the provisions of the city building code. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 3.01, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-41. - Permit. 
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owners shall first obtain a written permit from the appropriate regulatory authority and furnish a copy thereof to the city. The copy of the permit shall be accompanied by such supplementary data as deemed necessary by the city to maintain an accurate file of such private wastewater disposal systems to facilitate the planning of future public sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 3.02, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-42. - Compliance as to type, capacity, location and layout. 
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system, including methods of sludge disposal, shall comply with all requirements of the state, county and city. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 3.03, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-43. - Connection to public sewer when available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available within two hundred (200) feet of a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within ninety (90) days in compliance with this article and regulations of the board. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 3.04, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-44. - Operation and maintenance in sanitary manner. 
The owners shall operate and maintain any private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 3.05, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-45. - Discharge of waste accumulation to public system. 
No person shall discharge any holding tank wastes or septic tank wastes from private systems into the sewerage system without an appropriate permit from the board. All such discharges shall be in accordance with regulations of the board. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 3.06, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-46. - Additional requirements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by federal or state agencies. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 3.07, 2-7-83)  
Secs. 12-47—12-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTIONS AND PERMITS 
 
Sec. 12-50. - Work permit required. 
No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the board. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.01, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-51. - Bearing of expenses; indemnification of city. 
(a)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owners. 
(b)  The owners shall indemnify the city from any loss and damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.02, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-52. - Separate and independent building sewer. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that, where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer for the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility from damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.03, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-53. - Use of existing building sewer. 
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the board to meet all the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.04, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-54. - Construction requirements generally. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and back-filling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the city building code or other applicable rules and regulations of the board. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.05, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-55. - Elevation. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.06, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-56. - Connection requirements generally. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the city building code and other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in the appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.07, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-57. - Notice of readiness for inspection and connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the board when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the board. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.08, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 12-58. - Excavations. 
(a)  All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. 
(b)  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the board. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.07, 2-7-83) 
Cross reference— Excavation permit, § 16-4.  
Sec. 12-59. - OSHA compliance. 
All construction activities shall conform to all applicable OSHA regulations. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 4.10, 2-7-83)  
Secs. 12-60—12-64. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - GREASE INTERCEPTORS AT RESTAURANTS 
 
Sec. 12-65. - Definitions. 
As used in these definitions the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Enforcement officer: The building inspector. 
Food: All articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether simple, mixed or compound, and all substances or ingredients used in the preparation thereof. 
Grease interceptor: That device which collects grease or fatty substances before they are introduced into the sewage disposal system. 
Restaurant: Any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, drug store, and soda fountain serving food, and all other eating or drinking establishments, as well as kitchens or other places in which food or drink is prepared for sale elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 1, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 12-66. - Enforcement. 
This division shall be enforced by the city building inspector or any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 7, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 12-67. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit for the operation of a grease interceptor from the city building inspector. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 2, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 12-68. - Installation of grease interceptors. 
(a)  All restaurants which exist or which are constructed, reconstructed, or extensively altered, or which shall be licensed, shall install grease interceptors in accordance with the requirements of this division before a business license is issued for the operation of a restaurant. Properly prepared plans for the installation of the grease interceptors shall be submitted to the water and sewer board before work is begun. 
(b)  All such grease interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the city plumbing code. 
(Ord. No. 639, §§ 5, 6, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 12-69. - Inspection of restaurants. 
At least once every six (6) months, the building inspector shall inspect every restaurant located within the city. In the event such inspector discovers the violation of any item required for the proper disposal of grease or fatty substances in a proper grease interceptor, such inspector shall give to the restaurant owner or operator a reasonable amount of time for the defect to be remedied. Upon the reasonable time having expired, and the building inspector finding that the violation has not been corrected, the inspector may issue a citation to the restaurant owner or operator for violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 3, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 12-70. - Access to premises. 
The person operating the restaurant shall upon the request of the building inspector permit access to all parts of the establishment for purposes of permitting the building inspector to make inspections. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 4, 3-6-89)  
Secs. 12-71—12-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1003, adopted Oct. 18, 2010, amended Ord. Nos. 546, 645, and 760, from which Art. III, §§ 12-80—12-96 derived, in their entirety to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Littering, unlawful accumulations, § 11-20 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-80. - Purpose. 
The city is hereby authorized and directed to operate and manage garbage, rubbish and other solid waste collection and disposal in accordance with all applicable state and federal laws including, but not limited to, the solid waste disposal act, set out in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-1 et seq. The city is further authorized to provide for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of cost of collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and other solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 1, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 1, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-81. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Business/commercial establishments shall mean each person, firm, corporation or association licensed to do business in the City of Guntersville and having a location therein generating refuse including, but not limited to: nursing homes, schools, libraries, governmental organizations and buildings, hospitals, hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, churches, marinas, or restaurants. 
City's contractor as the case may be, shall be taken to mean third parties to whom the City of Guntersville has contracted for the performance of any portion or all of the services otherwise to be rendered by the sanitation or public works departments as provided in the ordinance from which this article was derived, and shall also include persons authorized by the city to haul refuse within the City of Guntersville. 
Dumpster or special container shall mean a metal container of substantial construction and size suitable for garbage and refuse collection and disposal to be specially equipped for mechanical dumping of garbage and refuse into sanitation vehicles. 
Garbage/refuse includes all waste accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storage of meat, fowl, fish, fruits, or vegetables and any other materials or substances, regardless of definition, presently collected by the sanitation department. 
Garbage can means a watertight receptacle of substantial construction having a capacity of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty-two (32) gallons, with a tight-fitting lid or cover, with not less than one handle on the lid or cover, and two (2) handles on the receptacle, by which same may be conveniently lifted or moved. No garbage can in excess of thirty-two-gallon capacity or weighing over fifty (50) pounds will be serviced. 
Garbage dump means a place for dumping or disposing of refuse, operated by the City of Guntersville, Alabama or such other place as may be designated and approved by the county health officer of Marshall County, Alabama. 
Hazardous waste means any substance defined as a hazardous material by the Environmental Protection Agency or the State Department of Environmental Management. The four (4) properties that constitute hazardous waste are ignitability, corrosiveness, reactivity, and toxicity. 
Residential premises means any dwelling, flat, rooming house, apartment house, mobile home, or vessel with normal kitchen facilities and having water or electric service. 
Rubbish includes nonrotten organic matter, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as yard waste, crockery, wood shavings, cloth and materials made up of metallic construction such as refrigerators, stoves, metal furniture, etc. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 2, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 2, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-82. - Littering, sweepings, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw or otherwise deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse or rubbish into or on any public street, alley, gutter, tunnel, sidewalk, park, lot vacant or occupied, or property which is in the possession of another person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit or cause to be permitted any refuse or rubbish to accumulate in such manner that it may be carried and deposited into or on any of the above places by action of the rain, wind or snow. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to impede or cause to be impeded the flow of water in the gutters, along the streets, sidewalks or the storm drainage systems. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to cause any refuse or rubbish to become an obstruction to traffic or pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 3, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-83. - Unkempt premises as nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge or control of any premises to keep, or cause to be kept or allow the keeping on any premises of refuse in such manner that it will become offensive or deleterious to health or likely to cause disease, and the same is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(b)  The county health officer, his authorized representatives, the superintendent of sanitation or such other fully authorized inspectors as may be designated by the governing body are hereby authorized to inspect any premises for the purpose of seeing that the requirements of this chapter are being complied with, and it shall be unlawful for any person whomsoever to resist or interfere with such representative by work, deed or act in the performance of such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 4, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 4, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-84. - Collection of building debris, dirt, stumps, tree trunks from private property. 
(a)  The city shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of rubbish, trash, limbs, brush or other debris from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to construction of whatever type prior to occupancy. Said material shall be removed by the owner of said property or the contractor responsible for the accumulation of the same. 
(b)  Building debris such as scrap lumber, plaster, roofing, concrete, brickbats, sheetrock, shingles and sanding dust resulting from the construction, repair or remodeling of any building or appurtenances on private property, will not be removed by the public works department or the city's contractor. The owner must remove or cause to be removed by private contractor this waste within seven (7) days upon receipt of notice from the public works department. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of all fence companies, tree surgeons, nurseries, and landscape contractors or any individual or company doing work on private property to remove from premises all residues and rubbish resulting from said work. 
(d)  Reserved for schedule/charges in case we can provide rolloff service. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 5, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 5, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-85. - Animals. 
(a)  Dead animals will be picked up by the sanitation department. In no event shall any person having a dead animal on premises occupied or under the control of such person allow it to remain undisposed of for a period of longer than twelve (12) hours. In the event the dead animals must be disposed of on a day other than the regular designated collection day, the sanitation department shall be notified. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of places of business making a business of treating, handling, keeping or disposing of animals to remove all dead animals from their premises to a designated dump site. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 6, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 6, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-86. - Use of garbage cans for disposal of garbage. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any premises where garbage is created or accumulated and in case of multiple dwellings, multiple occupancy, trailer parks or marinas the owner of the premises, at all times to keep or cause to be kept a sufficient number of garbage cans (at least one garbage can for each family or other unit but not to exceed three (3) cans per family) for the deposit therein, and lids or cover of such garbage cans shall be kept tightly closed at all times other than when garbage is being deposited therein or removed therefrom. 
(b)  Garbage cans and dumpsters used for the deposit of garbage for collection by the city sanitation department or the city's contractor shall be in good condition so that collection therefrom shall not injure the person collecting the contents thereof. Cans or dumpsters having ragged, sharp edges, rusted bottoms or other defects or not meeting the standard size requirements must be promptly replaced or repaired upon the receipt of notice from the sanitation department and if not so replaced or repaired within ten (10) days of receipt of such notice, such nonconforming or defective cans may be collected by the sanitation department and disposed of as waste. Defective dumpsters may be repaired and reasonable cost of repairs assessed to the owner. 
(c)  Subject to the approval of the superintendent of the sanitation department, persons charged in this section with the duty of providing suitable receptacles may arrange for the refuse to be deposited in dumpsters or special containers, approved by the superintendent or his agent. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 7, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 7, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-87. - Placement of containers. 
(a)  All garbage cans and approved dumpsters to be emptied by the sanitation department or the city's contractor shall be placed at places to be determined by the sanitation department. Garbage will be collected on the days and between the hours designated by said department. 
(b)  All garbage cans and approved dumpsters shall be situated so that they cannot be overturned by wind or animals. 
(c)  All garbage cans and approved dumpsters shall be placed and maintained so as to be fully accessible and convenient to workers emptying the same, and so as to accommodate the equipment used in the performance of such service. 
(d)  Where garbage collections are made from private alleys and access ways, said approaches shall be maintained in such a manner as not to be a hazard to sanitation personnel or equipment. 
(e)  No garbage, rubbish or other solid waste shall be picked up inside of any dwelling garage, porch, patio, carport or fenced area of any residence, commercial business or industrial establishment, except as provided for in subsection (h) as listed below. 
(f)  All vicious animals shall either be confined or garbage receptacles placed at a point where collectors may empty same without attack from said animals. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of any person planning to construct any apartment house, multiple unit, business place or industrial building to submit plans showing the location of garbage cans or dumpsters and/or pickup points for the approval of the sanitation department prior to obtaining a building permit. 
(h)  In the event the property owner locates a dumpster or container visible from any street, roadway, etc., and said dumpster is deemed to be unsightly the property owner may be required to build a fence or enclosure for the dumpster. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 8, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 8, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-88. - Public trash receptacles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed from any street or sidewalk in the city any receptacle furnished by the city for the deposit of trash. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sit upon or deface any such receptacle or dumpster of cause it to be used in any way which will make it not accessible for the receipt of trash. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place trash or any other material near any such receptacle or dumpster, in such manner as to interfere with or preclude the use of any such receptacle, for the purpose which it is intended to serve. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 9, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 9, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-89. - Removing garbage from cans or dumpsters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than those removing the entire contents thereof for disposal, to remove any garbage or other like materials from any garbage can or dumpster after it has been placed therein. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 10, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 10, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-90. - Pick-up of leaves, shrubbery, and bulky waste. 
(a)  Leaves and grass clippings shall be bagged and placed for pickup on the collection day determined by the public works department. During the period October first to May first of each year, leaves and grass clippings in quantities greater than three (3) bags may be placed in a loose pile at the edge of the owners property, in no instance shall leaves or grass clippings be placed on public right-of way or a city street, nor shall they be placed in a city gutter, ditch or alley. 
(b)  Shrubbery clippings, limbs, bulky waste, and other small miscellaneous vegetation including garden vegetation, may be placed in a loose pile at the edge of the owners property, in no instance shall the materials be placed on public right-of-way or city street, nor shall they be placed in a city gutter, ditch or alley. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any icebox, refrigerator or other container, including garbage or trash containers large enough to enclose a human being, which have a snap lock or other device thereon, without first removing said snap lock or doors, or without providing a device which will allow the door or doors to be operated from the inside of said container. 
(d)  Rubbish deposited in fifty-five-gallon drums will be picked up only on a special call to the public works department. These drums will be picked up on a special truck and will not be returned. 
(e)  Additional pickup over normal service could be subject to additional charge. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 11, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 11, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-91. - Charges for collection from residences. 
(a)  Residential/household solid waste, garbage, refuse collection will be one time per week at each residence at a rate established by the ordinance from which this article was derived of fourteen dollars ($14.00) per month. 
(b)  Mobile homes or trailers, whether located in a designated park or situated on a private plat of property, shall be considered as an individual residence and the rate for solid waste, garbage or refuse collection for each shall be established by the ordinance from which this article was derived of fourteen dollars ($14.00) per month for each. 
(c)  Each apartment or unit of multiple occupancy shall be considered as an individual residence and the rate for solid waste, garbage or refuse collection for each shall be established by the ordinance from which this article was derived of fourteen dollars ($14.00) per month for each unit. 
(d)  Boats or vessels with usual and normal kitchen facilities shall be considered as an individual dwelling and the rate for solid waste, garbage, or refuse collection for each shall be established by the ordinance from which this article was derived of fourteen dollars ($14.00) per month for each unit. 
(e)  All bills for service shall be rendered monthly on the same statement rendered by the water board for water service. In the event water service is not available, the water board will prepare a billing for sanitation services based on listing for electric services. 
(1)  Each resident shall pay the established rate for one month prior to commencement of services. 
(2)  Each bill shall be due when rendered and shall become delinquent if not paid within ten (10) days thereafter. If any such bill shall not be paid within five (5) days after it becomes delinquent, both the furnishing of water service and refuse service shall thereupon be discontinued to the dwelling. 
(f)  The Guntersville Water Board is hereby designated as the agent for collection of said sanitation fees. 
(1)  The water department shall remit the sanitation fees to the city clerk each month. 
(2)  The water department each month shall submit a listing of each billing showing amount paid and any balance of sanitation fees that may be delinquent. 
(3)  The city clerk or designated agent is hereby authorized to collect any delinquent fees. 
(4)  The mayor and city council shall determine the disposition of any uncollectable fees. 
(g)  Failure to pay the charges herein provided shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 12, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 12, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-92. - Garbage service for business establishments. 
(a)  The minimum commercial rate for each business, generating less than two (2) cubic yards of solid waste per week on a one-time per week collection schedule, shall be established by the ordinance from which this article was derived at thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per month. In the event pickups beyond the scheduled service become necessary, additional charges of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per each extra pickup are to be billed. 
(b)  Upon every person operating a business establishment generating garbage in excess of two (2) cubic yards per week, a service fee per month per business establishment shall be determined by the following schedule. Business establishment classified as restaurants, lounges, manufacturers of grain feeds, distributors of feed and feed ingredients, and other concerns such as may be determined by the superintendent of sanitation to generate solid waste in excess of normal weights established for dumpsters, the service fee per month shall be listed in the following schedule as excessive weight. 
Size Per 
Cubic 
Yard 	Number of 
Pickups/ 
Week 	Current Charge 	Normal Weight Dumpster Charge 	Excessive Weight Dumpster Charge 
		Own 	Rental 	Own 	Rental 	Own 	Rental 
4 	1 	$65.00 	$85.00 	$75.00 	$95.00 	$95.00 	$115.00 
6 	1 	 70.00 	 95.00 	 80.00 	105.00 	100.00 	125.00 
8 	1 	 80.00 	110.00 	 90.00 	120.00 	110.00 	140.00 
4 	2 	130.00 	150.00 	150.00 	170.00 	190.00 	210.00 
6 	2 	140.00 	165.00 	160.00 	185.00 	200.00 	225.00 
8 	2 	160.00 	190.00 	180.00 	210.00 	220.00 	250.00 
4 	3 	195.00 	215.00 	225.00 	245.00 	285.00 	305.00 
6 	3 	210.00 	235.00 	240.00 	265.00 	300.00 	325.00 
8 	3 	240.00 	270.00 	270.00 	300.00 	330.00 	360.00 
4 	4 	260.00 	280.00 	300.00 	320.00 	380.00 	400.00 
6 	4 	280.00 	305.00 	320.00 	345.00 	400.00 	425.00 
8 	4 	320.00 	350.00 	360.00 	390.00 	440.00 	470.00 
4 	5 	325.00 	345.00 	375.00 	395.00 	475.00 	495.00 
6 	5 	350.00 	375.00 	400.00 	425.00 	500.00 	525.00 
8 	5 	400.00 	430.00 	450.00 	480.00 	550.00 	580.00 
4 	6 	390.00 	410.00 	450.00 	470.00 	570.00 	590.00 
6 	6 	420.00 	445.00 	480.00 	505.00 	600.00 	625.00 
8 	6 	480.00 	510.00 	540.00 	570.00 	660.00 	690.00 
 
(1)  Normal weights for dumpsters shall be established as follows: 
a.  Four (4) cubic yard dumpster: four hundred (400) pounds 
b.  Six (6) cubic yard dumpster: six hundred (600) pounds 
c.  Eight (8) cubic yard dumpster: eight hundred (800) pounds 
(2)  The superintendent of sanitation shall determine the size dumpster and the number of pickups per week needed for each business establishment in order to keep the premises clean and sanitary, and to handle all refuse generated by such business establishment upon which the monthly charge shall be based. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the determination of service needed by the superintendent of sanitation shall have the right to appeal to the council, or to a committee which may be established by the council for the purpose of hearing such appeals, by filing with the city clerk a written application requesting resurvey of the refuse generated by such establishment and the service needed. 
(4)  Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of sanitation to promptly resurvey the premises and report his findings to the council or designated committee. The council, or designated committee established for such purpose, may make such adjustments as it may determine from the evidence made for the month in which said application is filed. 
(5)  The superintendent of sanitation shall have the right at any time to recheck and resurvey any premises, and to reduce or increase the size dumpster needed and the number of pickups required for the following months according to the volume of refuse or found to be produced or accumulated upon said premises. 
(c)  The superintendent of sanitation is to allow, in specific instances, the sharing of dumpsters by groups of business establishments, where in his judgment, such promotes economy and does not impede the performance of service provided for in this chapter. In the event of such dumpster sharing, the superintendent of sanitation shall fix and determine the proportion of the aforesaid service fee due to be paid by each such participating business establishment, which sum shall be billed and collected as provided in this chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, dumpsters furnished by the city shall be used only by the business establishment designated for use thereof. 
(d)  All bills for service shall be rendered monthly on the same statement rendered by the water department for water service. In the event of multiple establishments having water service provided by the building owner, a separate billing for sanitation service shall be rendered by the water board based on listing for electric services from the Guntersville electric board or listings of businesses with City of Guntersville privilege licenses. 
(1)  Each commercial account shall pay the established rate for one month prior to commencement of services. 
(2)  Each bill shall be due and rendered and shall become delinquent if not paid within ten (10) days thereafter. If any such bill shall not be paid within five (5) days after it becomes delinquent, the furnishing of both water service and refuse service shall thereupon be discontinued to the business establishment with respect to which such bill so delinquent. 
(e)  The water department is hereby designated as the agent for collection of said refuse fees. 
(1)  The water department shall remit the sanitation fees to the City Clerk each month. 
(2)  The water department each month shall submit a listing of each billing showing amount paid and any balance of sanitation fees that may be delinquent. 
(3)  The city clerk or designated agent is hereby authorized to collect any delinquent fees. 
(4)  The mayor and city council shall determine the disposition of any uncollectable fees. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 13, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 13, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-93. - Hauling of refuse. 
Any person hauling refuse shall do so with a covered or enclosed vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 14, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 14, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-94. - Hazardous waste. 
(a)  Industrial/commercial hazardous material prohibited. No hazardous material shall be placed for collection or be collected from any business, industry or commercial establishment. 
(b)  Materials classified as hazardous and generated by households will be collected on special pickup dates to be duly advertised and noted by the sanitation department. 
(c)  Household hazardous materials shall include but not be limited to: ammunition, ammonia based cleaners, antifreeze, disinfectants, drain openers, flea repellents, furniture polishes, oven cleaners, paints and strippers, pesticides, photographic chemicals, pool chemicals, roach and ant killers, and used motor oil. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 15, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 15, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-95. - Violations and penalties. 
That the violation, of the provisions, of the ordinance from which this article was derived and regulations promulgated under the authority of the ordinance from which this article was derived by the City of Guntersville, Alabama, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and any person, firm or corporation found guilty of such misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 16, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 16, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 12-96. - Authorization to inspect. 
The City of Guntersville Public Works Director, Superintendent of Sanitation, Recycling Coordinator and Ordinance Enforcement Officer (added September 18, 2017) are authorized inspectors for the City of Guntersville and are hereby authorized to inspect any premise for the purpose of complying with the ordinance from which this article was derived. They have the authority to issue citations for violations of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 18, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1003, § 18, 10-18-10; Ord. No. 1087, § 1, 10-2-17)  
Secs. 12-97—12-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RECYCLING 
 
Sec. 12-101. - Purpose and declaration of article. 
This article has been created due to the great public interest in preserving the environment by reducing the amount of refuse sent to landfills and incinerators. Because of the solid waste disposal problems and potential solution to some of these problems provided by recycling, it shall be the policy of the city to require recycling of recyclable materials to the fullest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 1, 4-18-94)  
Sec. 12-102. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:] 
Aluminum cans: Cans used to hold beverages. All-aluminum cans are molded without seams. They are soft with a rounded base and indented top. 
Commercial establishment: Any nonresidential building or establishment, for profit or nonprofit, including but not limited to, those used for retail, wholesale, industrial, manufacturing, dining, offices, professional services, automobile service, hotels and motels, restaurants, or shipping and receiving areas. 
Corrugated cardboard: Paper in which a portion has been made to have a wavy surface (alternating ridges and groves) and is placed between two (2) flat surfaces for the sake of strength and which is commonly used to form cartons. 
Glass container: Any unbroken glass bottle or jar of any size or shape used to package food or beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption. 
High-grade paper: Computer paper, tab cards, white letterhead, ledger, and nonglossy copier paper. 
Metal container: Bi-metal, steel, tin-plated steel, or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape used to package food or beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption. 
Newspapers: Newsprint-grade paper, the common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp, which is printed and distributed. This does not include magazines, slick paper, and telephone books. 
Nonprofit organization: An establishment, organization or foundation dedicated to public service or culture including, but not limited to, religious, education, and health care functions. Federal, state and local government establishments are considered nonprofit organizations for purposes of this article. This term shall include civic clubs, youth groups, and extracurricular school organizations. 
Nonrecyclable material: Garbage, debris, and any other materials which are not designated as recyclable materials by the city. 
Occupier of land: Any residential dwelling, commercial establishment, or nonprofit organization which shall hold title to or shall be in possession of any property in the city, whether as owner, lessee, or tenant. 
Plastic bottles, jugs and containers: Plastic milk jugs and plastic bottles made of P.E.T. (polyethylene terephthalate). 
Processing facility: Building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of materials in one (1) or more of the following manners: bailing, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning and restructuring. 
Recyclable materials: Any type of refuse designated by the city within this article to be separated for recycling. 
Residential dwelling: Any housing structure with at least one (1) unit, including, but not limited to, single-family homes, mobile homes, and multifamily dwellings. 
Waste oil: Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion engines. 
Waste paper products: All uncontaminated paper material such as magazines, slick paper, books, paper, food cartons, cardboard boxes, wrapping paper, bags, and discarded letters and envelopes. This does not include newspaper or high-grade paper. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 2, 4-18-94)  
Sec. 12-103. - Mandatory separation of recyclable materials. 
On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be mandatory for each occupier of land in the city to separate all designated recyclable materials from other refuse, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 3, 4-18-94)  
Sec. 12-104. - Collection of recyclable materials. 
(a)  The materials designated for recycling in section 12-106 shall be placed in see-through green trash or garbage bags. All recyclable materials may be placed in one (1) bag, or each type of refuse, as designated below, may be placed in separate bags. 
(b)  Recycling bags shall be allotted to each occupier of land in appropriate quantities and shall be distributed from the recycling center, Guntersville Public Library and the recycling office in recreation center. 
(c)  Recycling bags shall be placed at curbside for collection on days specified in the city. Collections shall be made by the city, or its agents, on those days. 
(d)  The city will coordinate transportation and final disposition of recyclables. 
(e)  The city will inform the general public about the recycling initiatives with a support program of information and education. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 4, 4-18-94)  
Sec. 12-105. - Scavenging and unauthorized collections. 
(a)  Recyclable materials placed at curbside for collection or in any recycling receptacle placed by the city at various locations are property of the city or its authorized collection agent. It is a violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the city to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable materials or receptacles. 
(b)  Nothing in this section is intended to prevent any occupier of land from donating or selling recyclable materials from its own refuse. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, locate, establish, maintain, erect, leave or otherwise make available any unattended recycling receptacle which is in public view in the city for the purpose of collecting discarded recyclable materials; provided, however, that in the case of undertakings sponsored by and located on a site owned by a bona fide nonprofit organization, the city shall be authorized to issue temporary permits for the location and use of recycling receptacles. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 5, 4-18-94)  
Sec. 12-106. - Recyclable materials. 
(a)  The following types of refuse are designated as recyclable materials by the city. It shall be unlawful for any occupier of land to dispose of recyclable materials in violation of this article. These materials shall be separated from other refuse and placed in recycling receptacles or at collection facilities in the manner described: 
(1)  Aluminum materials shall be rinsed and either securely bundled or placed in a recycling bag. Aluminum cans may be crushed prior to placement in receptacles or bags. 
(2)  Corrugated cardboard may be flattened, bundled, tied with cord, placed beside the recycling bag, or in a trailer dump site. 
(3)  Glass shall be emptied, rinsed and placed in a recycling bag. All tops, caps, and lids shall be removed and placed with nonrecyclable materials. Labels do not have to be removed. 
(4)  High-grade paper may be separated from all other types of paper or placed in a recycling bag. 
(5)  Motor oils shall be poured in a suitable container such as a clean plastic milk jug, sealed tightly and placed at curbside. Oil should not be mixed with other substances such as gasoline, paint removers or pesticides. 
(5)  Newspaper shall be bundled and wrapped with string and placed in a recycling bag. Newspaper may also be placed in a brown paper bag. On rainy days newspaper shall not be placed at curbside. 
(6)  Plastic bottles, jugs and containers shall be emptied, rinsed and placed in a recycling bag. All tops, caps and lids shall be removed and placed with nonrecyclable materials. Labels do not have to be removed. 
(7)  Steel and bi-metal cans shall be emptied, rinsed and placed in a recycling bag. Lids shall be removed and placed with nonrecyclable materials. Labels do not have to be removed. 
(9)  Waste paper products shall be placed in recycling bags or receptacles. 
(b)  In response to development in the scrap materials market and development in materials handling capability and processing technology, the city will revise, from time to time, the list of those materials required to be presorted for residential waste. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 6, 4-18-94)  
Sec. 12-107. - Nonrecyclable materials. 
(a)  All garbage and refuse, not herein designated as recyclable materials, shall be placed in containers and disposed of as outlined in 12-80 et seq. 
(b)  Nonrecyclable materials shall not be mixed with recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 7, 4-18-94)  
Sec. 12-108. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city police department and public works department are hereby authorized to enforce all provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any occupier of land who violates any provisions of this article, or any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a monetary fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  Each and every day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 8, 4-18-94)  
Chapter 13 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Order on premises of alcoholic beverage licensee, § 3-29(a); lewdness on alcoholic beverage premises, § 3-29(b); offenses at scene of fire, § 10-2(b). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - State law offenses adopted as city ordinance offenses. 
(a)  Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted, to be a misdemeanor, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted, to be a violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(c)  Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, as defined by the Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2 (the state criminal code), which offense is not declared by a law of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted to be a felony, misdemeanor or violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(Ord. No. 552, §§ 1—3, 8-15-83) 
Cross reference— Adoption of state traffic laws, § 17-1. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court of such offenses, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1(c).  
Sec. 13-2. - Failure to return library books, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully detain or fail to return any book, periodical, or any property of the Guntersville Public Library for thirty (30) days after notice is given to return the same. 
(Ord. No. 460, § 1, 2-5-73)  
Sec. 13-3. - Advertisements; attaching to poles, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste, tack or paint or otherwise attach any sign, signboard, handbill, advertisement or other paper to a pole of any telegraph, telephone, electric light, power or utility company or to any tree, tree guard or to any fixed object on city-owned property or to any fixed object in any street or public right-of-way in the city or the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste, tack, paint or otherwise attach any sign, signboard, handbill or advertisement to any pole of a telegraph, telephone, electric light, power or utility company or to any tree, tree guard or to any fixed object on privately owned property in the city or the police jurisdiction thereof without first obtaining the permission of the owner of the property. 
(c)  However, any civic, religious or charitable organization may be exempted from the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, by first obtaining the consent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 412A, § 3, 11-8-66) 
Cross reference— Distributing handbills so as to create litter, § 11-33 et seq.  
Sec. 13-4. - Repetitive discharge of firearms prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge or cause the discharge of any firearm in a repetitive or constant manner within the city limits or the police jurisdiction of the City of Guntersville except as provided herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain or operate any form of outdoor shooting range or club, outdoor skeet range or club or shooting gallery within the city limits or the police jurisdiction of the City of Guntersville except as provided herein. 
(c)  An indoor shooting range shall be allowed provided that, prior to the operation of the shooting range, the facility shall be approved by the city building official as being soundproof and bulletproof. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to or be construed to prohibit the lawful discharge of firearms in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The execution of the law or performance of duties by law enforcement officer; 
(2)  Military parade or ceremony by a proper military officer; 
(3)  Occasional discharge for protection or in legal defense of person or property, and occasional discharge as otherwise allowed by law on a person's own real property; 
(4)  Game hunting as otherwise allowed by law; 
(5)  Upon a duly licensed hunting preserve with a license issued by the State of Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources for hunting one (1) or more types of game, including birds and deer, and containing a minimum of four hundred (400) contiguous acres owned by the licensee; 
(6)  At functions known as turkey shoots with shotguns only whose dates, times, and locations are advertised and held by civic, community, or charitable groups in furtherance of their civic, community, or charitable purposes and held no more often than two (2) times per week, nor more often than twenty-five (25) times per year; 
(7)  At skeet shoots held by private clubs on property owned by the private club held no more than twenty (20) days per year between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow any action which otherwise would be considered a nuisance pursuant to state law or other city ordinances, or a violation under the noise ordinance in effect at this time and as it may be amended. 
(f)  Each violation of this section shall be a separate offense. Anyone who is found in violation of this section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense and/or sentenced to thirty (30) days in jail. 
(g)  Severability clause. If any court shall determine that any word clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph or subsection of this article is unconstitutional as worded, the court shall first attempt to construe or interpret such unconstitutional provision so as to enable the same to be constitutional as so narrowed or construed. If the court cannot so limit or construe such word or provision narrowly so as to render same constitutional; it shall strike or modify only the minimum number of words, phrases, clauses, sentences, or paragraphs as will be absolutely necessary to render the remainder constitutional. In no case shall subordinate word, clause, or phrase render its attached major section or provision unconstitutional, but instead shall be severed therefrom entirely, unless such severance renders the remainder wholly meaningless or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 1021, §§ 1—7, 5-15-12; Ord. No. 1028, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 1041, 6-3-13)  
Secs. 13-5—13-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARADES 
 
Sec. 13-20. - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Applicant: Any person who shall have filed a written application for a parade permit. 
Parade: Any march, procession, motorcade, or promenade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof, having a common purpose, design, destination or goal, upon any street, park or public place in the city, which parade, march, procession, motorcade, or promenade does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulation or control. 
Parade permit, permit: A permit as required by this article. 
Permittee: The person to whom a parade permit is granted pursuant to this article. 
Sidewalk: That portion of a street between the curblines, or lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Street: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 1, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-21. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to funeral processions; students going to and from school classes or participating in education activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or a governmental agency acting in the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 2, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-22. - Permit application—Filing. 
(a)  A person seeking the issuance of a permit shall file an application in person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays (legal holidays excepted) with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer. 
(b)  An application for a permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than five (5) days, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays excluded, nor more than thirty (30) days before the date upon which the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 3, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-23. - Same—Contents. 
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date on which the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(9)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly areas; 
(10)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on such person's behalf; 
(11)  Whether or not marshals will be provided, and if so, their duties and identification; 
(12)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 4, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-24. - Same—Action thereon. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a permit within two (2) days after the filing thereof, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays excluded. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 6, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-25. - Issuance of permit—Facts upon which decided. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, such officer finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous of its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance services to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(8)  The conduct of the parade will not interfere or conflict with any other parade; 
(9)  No other parade permit has been granted, or is under consideration for any portion of the time sought by the applicant, nor shall a permit be granted for a parade which will commence after sunset; 
(10)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 5, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-26. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time and time of conclusion; 
(2)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(3)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(4)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article, including a copy of the application for which such permit is granted, which shall form a part thereof, except as otherwise noted. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 10, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-27. - Same—Transmission of copies. 
Immediately after the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the mayor, and to any other public officials affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 9, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-28. - Denial of permit—Authorizing alternate permit. 
(a)  The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of a parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. 
(b)  An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police thereof at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the time of commencement thereof. 
(c)  An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 8, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-29. - Same—Appeal therefrom. 
(a)  Any applicant aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the mayor. 
(b)  The appeal shall be taken within two (2) days after notice of denial, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays excluded. 
(c)  The mayor shall act upon the appeal within two (2) days after its receipt, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 7, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-30. - Revocation of permit. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon violation of the standards for issuance as herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 13, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-31. - Compliance with requirements; carrying permit on the person. 
(a)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions, all application commitments, and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit on the person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 11, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-32. - Interference by nonparticipants. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in the parade. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising the parade. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 12(a), (b), 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-33. - Control of vehicle parking on parade route. 
The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along the highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of the parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park, or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 12(c), 4-21-80)  
Sec. 13-34. - Stopping or rerouting parade. 
Notwithstanding the parade permit granted, when in the judgment of the superior law enforcement officer of the city on the scene, an imminent threat to life or property exists, such officer shall have the authority to stop such parade or to reroute it. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 12(d), 4-21-80)  
Secs. 13-35—13-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING DISCRIMINATION 
 
Sec. 13-40. - Definition. 
(a)  "Real estate broker" is defined to mean any person who holds an appropriate license from this state therefor, who sells, rents, or leases real estate in the city for residential or commercial purposes. 
(b)  Any real estate broker not licensed by the city who shall exercise any function of a real estate broker within the city shall be deemed a broker hereunder, and subject to all applicable provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 510, §§ 2, 3, 1-22-79)  
Sec. 13-41. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any real estate broker: 
(1)  To make any distinction, discrimination or restriction against any person in price, terms, conditions or privileges of any kind relating to the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any real estate used for residential or commercial purposes in the city, or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith predicated upon race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry of the prospective or actual buyer or tenant thereof. 
(2)  To publish, circulate, issue or display or cause to be published, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign, or writing of any kind relating to the sale, rental, or leasing of any residential or commercial real property within the city which would indicate or express any limitation or discrimination in the sale, rental, or leasing of such residential or commercial real estate predicated upon the race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry of any such prospective buyer, lessee, or renter of such property. 
(3)  To refuse to sell, lease, or rent real estate for residential, or commercial purposes within the city because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry of the proposed buyer or renter. 
(4)  To discriminate or to participate in discrimination in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any residential or commercial housing unit or housing accommodation of the city because of the race, religion, sex, color, or national origin or ancestry of such person. 
(5)  To cheat, exploit, or overcharge any person for residential or commercial housing purposes accommodation in the city because of the race, color, religion, sex, or national origin or ancestry of such person. 
(6)  To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for sale or lease, any residential or commercial real estate within the city on the ground of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person of any particular race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry. 
(7)  To distribute or cause to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner of residential or commercial real estate in the city to sell or lease such person's property because of any present or prospective change in the race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry of persons in the neighborhood. 
(8)  To deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of any leasing of residential or commercial real estate within the city to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 1-22-79)  
Sec. 13-42. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved in any manner by any violation of any provision of this article may file a written complaint setting forth such person's grievance with the city clerk. The complaint shall state the name and address of the complainant and of the person against whom the complaint is brought, and shall also state the alleged facts surrounding the violation of this article. 
(b)  The police chief is hereby fully authorized immediately to investigate every such complaint thus filed. If the police chief determines that the respondent has not engaged in an unlawful practice, such officer shall state such officer's findings of fact in writing. If the police chief determines after such investigation that probable cause exists for the allegation made in the complaint, the police chief will notify the mayor, for further legal or conciliatory action. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 5, 1-22-79)  
Secs. 13-43—13-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TELEPHONIC ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 13-50. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
False alarm: The transmission of any telephonic message which indicates the need for police department or fire department assistance, and being responded to by either of the respective departments and the responding department finds no evidence of fire or crime. 
Telephonic alarm system: Any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed to operate automatically through the use of public telephone facilities to transmit a signal, message or warning to another location. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 2-20-89)  
Sec. 13-51. - Permit—Required. 
No person shall operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system which automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to any city police department or fire department telephone line, without first obtaining a permit as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 2, 2-20-89)  
Sec. 13-52. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Applications for permits to install, maintain or operate a telephonic alarm system which is intended to automatically transmit a signal, message or warning to any city police department or fire department telephone line shall be filed with the chief of the concerned department on forms supplied by the city. Such application shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of both the installer of the system and the person or business on whose premises the system will be installed, as well as the description and the location where it is proposed to be installed. 
(b)  The chief of the concerned department shall approve such application if such officer finds: 
(1)  The use of such alarm system to transmit a signal, message or warning to a designated city police department or fire department telephone line will not interfere with the orderly conduct of city business. 
(2)  The person installing the system maintains an adequate service organization to repair, maintain, and otherwise service telephonic alarm systems sold or leased by such entity. 
(c)  The police chief or fire chief may impose reasonable conditions on the exercise of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 3, 2-20-89)  
Sec. 13-53. - Same—Revocation. 
The chief of the concerned department may revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, after giving written notice to the permit holder and an opportunity for the permit holder to be heard, if such holder determines that the telephonic alarm system installed pursuant to the permit has been installed, maintained or operated in violation of the provisions of this article or any terms or conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 8, 2-20-89)  
Sec. 13-54. - Right of inspection. 
The chief of the concerned department, either police or fire, shall have the right to inspect any telephonic alarm system on the premises where it is intended to function prior to the issuance of any permit for its operation and may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any time after the issuance of a permit to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 4, 2-20-89)  
Sec. 13-55. - Restricted number of alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system which automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to any city police department or fire department telephone line, except to such number as designated by the permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 5, 2-20-89)  
Sec. 13-56. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, turn in or cause a false alarm of fire or of need for police or aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(b)  The receipt of two (2) or more false alarms by the police department or fire department within any calendar month from any "telephonic alarm system" operated by any person shall be deemed to be an offense against the city. Each false alarm receipt in excess of two (2) in each calendar month shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall on conviction be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 638, §§ 6, 7, 2-20-89)  
Secs. 13-57—13-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PRESENCE AND CONDUCT OF MINORS ON STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 697, adopted June 7, 1993, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 18-107—18-110. For purposes of classification, said Ord. No. 697 has been codified as art. V, §§ 13-71—13-74, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 13-71. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Minor: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Parent: Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands in loco parentis, or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court. 
Public place: Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort to business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, lounge, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, pool room, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above-described public place. 
Time: When referred to herein, time is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings Time, observed during that time of the year in the city. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 18-107, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 13-72. - Curfew for minors; exceptions to curfew. 
It is unlawful for any minor to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place, unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Friday night and Saturday night the effective hours between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or other adult having lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or adult having lawful care and custody of such minor. 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance. 
(4)  When the minor is going to or returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in such place during the proscribed period of time. 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion. 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parent consent for normal travel. (Interstate and intrastate travel through the city is excepted in all cases from the curfew.) 
(Ord. No. 697, § 18-108, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 13-73. - Parental duty. 
It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any minor to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be in or upon the public streets, or any other places listed in section 13-72, within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day; provided, however, that on Friday night and Saturday night the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsections (1) through (6) of section 13-72. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 18-109, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 13-74. - Police procedures. 
(a)  Any police officer, upon finding a minor suspected of being in violation of section 13-72, shall question the minor, under constitutional safeguards, to determine the relevant facts as to name, age, address and the reason for the minor's presence. In the absence of convincing evidence, such as a birth certificate or driver's license, a police officer shall use his or her best judgment in determining age. 
(b)  Upon a first violation, the police officer shall warn the minor that he or she is in violation of curfew and shall direct the minor to proceed at once to his or her home or usual place of abode. 
(c)  If the minor refuses to heed such warning or direction or refuses to give the police officer his or her correct name and address, or if the minor has been warned on a previous occasion that he or she is in violation of curfew, the minor shall be taken to the police department. The minor's parent, guardian or person having lawful custody or control of the minor shall immediately be notified to come for the minor. If a parent, guardian or other adult person cannot be located, the minor shall be released to juvenile authorities. If a parent or legal guardian is contracted and fails to come or make arrangements to have a competent adult come and take charge of the minor, they will be cited and summoned to municipal court, and the minor shall be released to juvenile authorities. 
(d)  Police procedure shall constantly be refined in the light of experience and may provide that the police officer may deliver a minor to a parent under appropriate circumstances; for example, if the minor is of tender age, near his or her home, and the minor's identity and address may readily be ascertained or is already known. 
(e)  In any event the police officer will file a written report with the chief or his designee before the end of the officer's shift in regard to the curfew violation. 
(f)  When a parent has come to take charge of the minor and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be released to the custody of the parent. If the parent cannot be located, or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with police procedures, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of the parent, assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival of the parent. 
(g)  In case of a first violation by a minor, the chief of police or his designee shall send by certified mail to a parent, guardian or person having lawful custody or control of the minor written notice of such violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance, including enforcement of parental responsibility and applicable penalties. 
(h)  Upon a second violation of this section within twelve (12) months, a parent shall be given a warning citation. Upon further violations within twelve (12) months, the parent will be summoned to municipal court and, if convicted, may be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or sentenced for up to six (6) months in jail. Upon further violations, a minor shall be subject to and dealt with under proper procedure in juvenile court pursuant to state law. Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 18-110, 6-7-93)  
Secs. 13-75—13-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LOITERING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 698, adopted June 7, 1993, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 18-111, 18-112. For purposes of classification, said Ord. No. 698 has been codified as art. VI, §§ 13-91 and 13-92, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 13-91. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory, to linger, to stay, to saunter, to delay, to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
Public place shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right to business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate areas of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(Ord. No. 698, § 18-111, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 13-92. - Police order to disperse; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand, or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place including a public park for any unlawful purpose or for any purpose other than the intended use of the facility or public place in which the person is located. It shall further be unlawful for any person to remain on the premises of any public park for any purpose after the designated operating hours of the park. 
Any person who violates these provisions shall be subject to a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day continued. 
(Ord. No. 698, § 18-112, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 1053, § 1, 7-21-14)  
Secs. 13-93—13-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SKATE BOARD PARK REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Rules and regulations. 
(1)  This is an unsupervised park. Use it at your risk. 
(2)  Skateboarding or rollerblading can be hazardous activities. Use of the skateboard park may result in death, concussion, brain damage, broken bones and other serious injury. 
(3)  All participants must sign a waiver and release form. Participants [under] eighteen (18) years old must have their form signed by parent/guardian. On completion of the release form, an identification card will be issued to the skater. Cards will be issued at the Guntersville Recreation Center. 
(4)  Safety equipment must be worn at all times. This includes helmet, kneepads, and elbow pads. Shirt and shoes must be worn at all times. 
(5)  Twelve (12) year olds and under require adult supervision at all times. 
(6)  No food or drink allowed in skate park. 
(7)  No loitering after park is closed. 
(8)  Unauthorized ramps, jumps, or other obstacles cannot be used inside or outside the skate park area. 
(9)  Alcohol, drugs, and cigarette smoking are not allowed on the premises. 
(10)  The park will be open during designated hours only. 
(11)  Accident insurance is not provided for any injury that may be sustained as a result of this activity. The financial responsibility of any medical claim will be upon the participant. 
(Ord. No. 863, § I, 9-15-03)  
Sec. 13-102. - Enforcement and penalties. 
No one will be allowed in the park without an identification card. Each fine for unauthorized use will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 863, § II, 9-15-03)  
Secs. 13-103—13-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PROHIBITED HUNTING AREA OF LAKE GUNTERSVILLE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1030, §§ 1—5, adopted Sept. 17, 2012, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 13-121—13-124. 
 
Sec. 13-121. - [Prohibited hunting area established.] 
A prohibited hunting area of Lake Guntersville is hereby established within the city limits and the police jurisdiction of the City of Guntersville, Alabama. This area where hunting is prohibited on Lake Guntersville is defined as the area lying inside the lines created by connection of the following GPS coordinates: 
Point 1: 	N 34º.36 	  
	W 86º.26 	
Point 2: 	N 34º.22 	
	W 86º.18 	
Point 3: 	N 34º.19 	
	W 86º.20 	
Point 4: 	N 34º.34 	
	W 86º.25 	
Point 5: 	N 34º.30 	
	W 86º.34 	
Point 6: 	N 34º.31 	
	W 86º.30 	
Point 7: 	N 34º.34 	
	W 86º.25 	
 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 13-122. - [Unlawful to hunt in prohibited area.] 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hunt, trap, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl within the prohibited hunting area of Lake Guntersville described herein. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 13-123. - [Unlawful to hunt within one hundred yards of dwelling; exceptions.] 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hunt, trap, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl within one hundred (100) yards of any dwelling without the permission of the owner or lessee or discharge a firearm while hunting so that any projectile strikes any dwelling or building used for human occupation, or any commercial vessel, without the permission of the owner or lessee. This prohibition shall not apply to a landowner or member of his/her immediate family hunting on his/her own property provided that no projectile strikes the above property of another without the permission of the owner or lessee. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 3, 9-17-12)  
Sec. 13-124. - [Penalty for violation of article.] 
Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and up to thirty (30) days in jail for each violation. 
Each violation of this article shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1030, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-12)  
Secs. 13-125—13-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - REGULATION OF SHORT-TERM RENTAL DWELLINGS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 13-131. - Regulations. 
The following regulations apply to short-term rental of dwellings in districts zoned residential in the city limits. These regulations do not apply in districts in which commercial lodging is permitted. 
(1)  For purposes of this article, "short-term rental" (STR) means the rental of a dwelling unit for less than thirty (30) consecutive days per rental period and the rental unit itself. 
(2)  The property owner of the STR must have a renting and leasing business license from the city before a property owned by the property owner can be advertised or operated for STR. In addition the property owner must submit a STR annual permit application to the city and obtain and maintain a STR annual permit for each STR unit at a cost of twenty dollars ($20.00) per permit per year. 
(3)  The property owner must provide with the STR permit application the name, address and telephone number of an emergency contact that will respond within one (1) hour to complaints about the condition or operation of the STR or conduct of renters or their guests. The emergency contact must be able to respond on-site within twelve (12) hours if requested by the city. The emergency contact must answer calls twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week for the duration of each short-term rental period. Prior to any change to the emergency contact, the owner must submit the revised contact information to the city building official. 
(4)  The STR may only be rented for lodging use. The STR may not be rented for weddings, parties, concerts or similar events or used for such events during any short-term rental period. 
(5)  Insurance . All STR owners must obtain and maintain vacation rental property insurance that covers the lodging use of the site. Proof of insurance must be provided within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the STR permit. Proof of insurance must be resubmitted each year for renewal of the STR permit. 
(6)  Occupancy . The dwelling may not be rented to more than one (1) party simultaneously. Occupancy is limited to no more than two (2) persons plus two (2) persons per bedroom. To be considered a bedroom, the room must meet the minimum requirements of the International Building Code adopted by the city as it pertains to a bedroom. 
(7)  The number of bedrooms are to be determined by the city building official as part of the STR permit application process. The city building official may inspect the dwelling to verify information submitted with the STR permit application. 
(8)  The property owner must, by written agreement with the renter, limit overnight occupancy of the STR to the maximum occupancy approved with the STR permit. 
(9)  No on-premises signage legible from any right-of-way may advertise the STR. 
(10)  The STR property owner and all occupants of the STR must comply with all applicable city ordinances and regulations including, but not limited to, building construction, fire safety, noise, mandatory recycling and garbage collection and disposal. 
(11)  The STR must have adequate off-street parking to accommodate all occupant parking needs. All occupant vehicles must park off the street and on the STR property. No recreational vehicles, buses, boats or trailers may be stored on the street or forward of the front property line of the STR property. 
(12)  No food may be prepared or served to rental occupants by the STR property owner. 
(13)  A copy of this article, the STR permit, emergency contact information and house rules that comply with this article must be posted in a conspicuous place in the STR. The STR rental party must sign a document indicating it received all of these documents. 
(14)  Upon notification that a renter or a renter's guest has violated any provisions of this article or any noise, garbage or other provisions of city ordinances and regulations, the STR owner or emergency contact must promptly notify the renter of the violation and take such action as is necessary to prevent a reoccurrence. 
(15)  Notice . Each owner must, upon issuance of an STR permit or upon changes to an existing STR permit, provide written notice to all owners of residentially zoned property who own property adjacent to the STR property, which notice includes the following information: 
a.  The names and telephone numbers of the owner and emergency contact (if not the owner). 
b.  The city telephone number by which members of the public may report violations. 
c.  The maximum number of renters permitted to stay in the unit. The permit application shall include the name and address of all property owners who own residential property adjacent to the STR property. 
(16)  Taxation . The property owner is responsible for collecting and reporting taxes from any rental arrangement that is not subject to an established collection agreement with the city. 
(17)  Garbage fees and garbage container storage . The property owner is responsible for paying an additional rate as set forth by the city for any garbage containers exceeding two (2) thirty-two-gallon containers. In addition all garbage containers shall be stored out of sight of the street on the days not scheduled for garbage pickup by the city. 
(18)  Definition of vehicles . Vehicles shall include cars, trucks, and motorcycles and off road vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1097, § 1, 12-3-18)  
Sec. 13-132. - Violations. 
The following procedures shall apply in the event a violation of this article occurs: 
(1)  If, after investigation, the city determines that any provisions of this article have been violated, the city will notify the property owner in writing stating the provisions violated, necessary corrective action and a compliance due date, as applicable. In addition the city will use best efforts to immediately contact the property owner or emergency contact by telephone of any reported violation. Upon receipt of notice by telephone, the property owner or emergency contact shall have the obligation to immediately contact the renter concerning such violation and request the renter to immediately take action in order to end the violation. Any violations of this article by renters shall be considered a violation by the property owner. 
(2)  Fines . In addition to the other remedies set out in this section, violations will be subject to fines as follows: 
a.  Violation warning . The city may, in an exercise of discretion, issue a warning to the person responsible for the violation if that person has not been previously warned or cited for violating a provision of this article. 
b.  First violation . The first time a person is found to have violated one (1) of the provisions of this article, the person is subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
c.  Second and subsequent violations . Any second or subsequent time a person is found to have violated the provisions of this article, the person is subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent violation. 
(3)  If a violation of building, fire safety or property maintenance regulations has not been corrected by the compliance date, the city may cause the STR permit to be temporarily suspended. When a first time violation has been corrected, the permit shall be re-instated for the remainder of its current approval period. The city may approve an extension of the compliance date if substantial progress toward compliance has been made provided that the public will not be adversely affected by the extension. 
(4)  Recurring violations . When noise, occupancy, parking, trespass or other violations concerning the conduct at the STR or by its renters or their guests are found to have occurred more than once in the same license year or within any six-month period, or if a fine assessed against a STR property owner is not paid within thirty (30) days of delivery of notice of the fine, the city may set a hearing before the city council for the revocation of the permit related to that STR as to which a violation has occurred. 
(5)  If the holder of the STR permit disagrees with the finding of a violation by the city, the STR permit holder may request a hearing before the city council on the decision of the city. Following a public hearing on the matter, the city council may find in favor of the STR permit holder thereby eliminating any penalties assessed against the permit holder or the city council may confirm the city's decision and confirm the penalties assessed against the permit holder pursuant to this article including revocation of the STR permit. 
(6)  Written notice of any fines and hearings on violations and permit revocations shall be delivered to the property owner. Notice of hearings shall be given at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Notice shall be deemed delivered when placed in the U.S. mail to the address listed on the permit application. 
(7)  Any person, who disagrees with the decision of the city council, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Circuit Court of Marshall County, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 1097, § 2, 12-3-18)  
Chapter 14 - PERSONNEL  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE 
 
Sec. 14-20. - System established; merit principles. 
There is hereby established a personnel system for the police department of the city. Such system shall be established on the following merit principles: 
(1)  Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge, and skills, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial appointments; 
(2)  Establishing pay rates consistent with the principle of providing comparable pay for comparable work; 
(3)  Training employees, as needed to assure high quality performance; 
(4)  Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance and separating employees whose inadequate performance can not be corrected; 
(5)  Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, creed, national origin, ancestry, sex or religion. 
(Ord. No. 494, § 1, 8-22-77)  
Sec. 14-21. - Classified service, exceptions. 
The classified service shall include all employees serving in continuing positions in the police department of the city except the following: 
(1)  Members of the municipal governing body and other elected officials; 
(2)  Members of appointed boards and commissions, municipal judges and municipal attorneys; 
(3)  Persons employed to work less than full-time; 
(4)  Administrative officials appointed by the mayor and/or governing body, including the police chief; 
(5)  Volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the municipality; 
(6)  Temporary positions scheduled for less than one (1) year's duration unless specifically covered by the action of the mayor and council; 
(7)  Persons performing work under contract for the municipality who are not carried on the payroll as employees. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as precluding the mayor or governing body from filling any excepted positions in the manner in which positions in the classified service are filled. 
(Ord. No. 494, § 2, 8-22-77)  
Sec. 14-22. - Personnel officer—Designated; assistance. 
The city clerk is hereby designated to perform the duties of personnel officer. The city clerk may have other staff members designated to assist or may designate any member of such clerk's staff to assist. 
(Ord. No. 494, § 3, 8-22-77)  
Sec. 14-23. - Same—Duties. 
The personnel officer shall be responsible for the personnel administration system and shall direct all of its administrative and technical activities. Such officer's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective personnel administration practices within the municipality; 
(2)  Investigate from time to time the operation and, effect of this article and the policies made thereunder and to report such officer findings and recommendations to the mayor and governing body; 
(3)  Establish and maintain comprehensive personnel records for each employee in the police department including for each employee such employee's classification, pay rate, date of employment, and other relevant data; 
(4)  Advise the mayor and governing body on matters affecting the most effective use of manpower resources; 
(5)  Make an annual report to the mayor and governing body regarding the status of the personnel administration program. 
(Ord. No. 494, § 4, 8-22-77)  
Sec. 14-24. - Same—Preparation of personnel rules and regulations. 
The personnel officer shall draft or cause to be drafted the personnel rules and regulations for the police department. Such rules shall become effective upon passage of an appropriate ordinance by the governing body. The policies shall provide for: 
(1)  The classification of all positions, based on duties, authority and responsibility of each position, with adequate provisions for reclassification of any positions warranted by changed circumstances; 
(2)  A pay plan for classified service positions; 
(3)  Announcement of employee vacancies and acceptance of application for employment; 
(4)  Preparation and administration of examinations, if appropriate; 
(5)  Establishment and use of eligibility lists, if appropriate; 
(6)  Establishment of promotion policies and procedures; 
(7)  Transfer, promotion and reinstatement of employees; 
(8)  Performance evaluations of employees, including those on probationary periods; 
(9)  Separation of employees from the classified service by resignation, suspension, dismissal, layoff, or incapacity to perform required duties; 
(10)  Grievance and appeal procedures; 
(11)  Establishment of hours of work, holidays, vacations, leave regulations and procedures; 
(12)  Outside employment of municipal employees of the police department; 
(13)  Establishment of a probation period for all employees prior to final appointment; 
(14)  Development of employee morale, safety and training programs; 
(15)  Such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 494, § 5, 8-22-77)  
Sec. 14-25. - Same—Payroll verification. 
The personnel officer or such officer's authorized agent shall be responsible for the certification of the payroll vouchers that the persons named therein have been appointed and employed in accordance with the provisions of this article and the policies thereunder. The disbursing officer of the municipality shall not make or approve or take part in making or approving any payment for the personal service to any person holding a position in the municipality unless such payroll voucher or account of such pay bears the certification of the personnel officer or such officer's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 494, § 6, 8-22-77)  
Sec. 14-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 701A, adopted Feb. 21, 1994, repealed former § 14-26, which pertained to the establishment, powers and duties, and compensation of the police administrator.  
Sec. 14-27. - Storage and record of abandoned and/or stolen property. 
(a)  Abandoned and stolen property found within the corporate city limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction for the city and taken in possession by the city police department shall be stored in properly secured spaces to protect it from loss or deterioration. 
(b)  Perishable property may be sold at once without notice, in which case the proceeds shall be held for a period of six (6) months for the account of the owner and if not called for within that time shall be converted into the general fund. 
(c)  A permanent record giving the date of the taking of each piece of such property, the place where found and taken and a description of the property shall be kept. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 1, 9-7-18)  
Sec. 14-28. - Disposal and sale of abandoned and/or stolen property; notice requirements. 
(a)  At least every six (6) months, the police chief shall sell at public auction to the highest bidder for cash the abandoned and stolen property having been stored for a period of three (3) months or more. 
(b)  The sales are to be made after notice of the time and place has first been given by publication of notice once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. Should no such newspaper be published, such notice shall be given by posting in a conspicuous place at the city hall or police station. The first publication, or posting of notice, as the case may be, shall be at least twenty (20) days before the sale. 
(c)  The owner of any stored, abandoned or stolen property may redeem such property at any time prior to its sale by demonstrating bona fide proof of ownership, and by paying a reasonable cost of possession, maintenance and storage having been absorbed by the police department. 
(d)  Each article shall be sold separately and a notation in the storage record book or data base shall be made to the amount received for each article. 
(e)  The police chief, or his representative, shall have the right to reject any and all bids if the amount of bid be unreasonably low and shall have the right to continue the sales from time to time if no bidders are present. 
(f)  After deducting and paying expenses incurred in the possession, storing, maintaining and selling of the property, the balance, if any, shall be paid into the general fund of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 2, 9-7-18)  
Secs. 14-29—14-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOCIAL SECURITY 
 
Sec. 14-40. - Declaration of coverage. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of January 1, 1955, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or by this article, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of old age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the federal social security act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734 of 81st Congress, and Public Law 761 of the 83rd Congress, second session. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 325B, § 1, 1-11-55)  
Sec. 14-41. - Execution of agreements. 
The mayor or other chief executive officer of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state agency authorized to act to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 325B, § 2, 1-11-55)  
Sec. 14-42. - Withholdings. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in this article are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Ord. No. 325B, § 3, 1-11-55)  
Sec. 14-43. - Contributions. 
There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations for employers' contributions, which shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws and regulations to receive same. 
(Ord. No. 325B, § 4, 1-11-55)  
Sec. 14-44. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 325B, § 5, 1-11-55)  
Sec. 14-45. - Adoption of laws; excluded officials and employees. 
The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of title II of the Social Security Act as amended, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof, excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office, or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations; and further excluding: 
(1)  Elected officials, and 
(2)  Officials or employees whose compensation is on a fee basis. 
(Ord. No. 325B, § 6, 1-11-55)  
Chapter 15 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
 
Sec. 15-1. - City planning commission—Created. 
In order to guide and accomplish a comprehensive and coordinated development of the city which will promote the health, safety, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens thereof, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, and to insure the orderly and systematic arrangement and development of future public works projects, there is hereby created a city planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the "commission," pursuant to the Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-2. 
(Ord. No. 237, § 1, 6-3-40)  
Sec. 15-2. - Same—Members. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of nine (9) members, namely the mayor or the mayor's duly appointed representative, one (1) of the administrative officials of the city selected by the mayor and a member of the city council to be selected by it, as members ex-officio, and six (6) persons, who shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(b)  All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation, and the appointed members shall hold no other municipal office, except that one (1) of such appointed members may be a member of the zoning board of adjustments and appeals. 
(c)  The term of the ex-officio members shall correspond to their respective official tenures, except that the term of the administrative official selected by the mayor shall terminate with the term of the mayor selecting such official. The term of each appointed member shall be six (6) years or until a successor takes office, except that the respective terms of five (5) of the members first appointed shall be one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years. 
(d)  Members other than the member selected by the council may, after a public hearing, be removed by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The council may for like cause remove the member selected by it. The mayor or council, as the case may be, shall file a written statement of reasons for such removal. 
(e)  Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by mayor in the case of members selected or appointed by the mayor, and by the council in the case of the councilmanic member. 
(Ord. No. 237, § 1, 6-3-40)  
Sec. 15-3. - Same—Organization and rules. 
The commission shall elect its chairman from amongst the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 237, § 1, 6-3-40)  
Sec. 15-4. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The commission shall have all the powers given and duties imposed upon a municipal planning commission as set forth and prescribed in the Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-6 et seq. 
(b)  The commission shall act as the zoning commission for the city, and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of a municipal zoning commission as set forth and prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 237, § 4, 6-3-40)  
Sec. 15-5. - Same—Reports. 
The commission shall make an annual written report at the close of each fiscal year to the mayor and council covering its investigations, transactions, and recommendations, and such other reports relative thereto as it may deem proper or as requested by the council. 
(Ord. No. 237, § 5, 6-3-40)  
Sec. 15-6. - Violation of commission rules and regulations. 
Any person violating any reasonable rule or regulation promulgated and adopted by the commission, or who transfers or sells, or aids in transferring or selling any lands in violation of law shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 237, § 6, 6-3-40)  
Chapter 16 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Tree commission, § 2-15 et seq.; restoration of surface after excavations, §§ 12-1(c), 12-2(d), 12-3(d); attaching advertisement on street, etc., § 12-58. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Building numbers—To be assigned; specifications; cost; posting. 
(a)  There shall be assigned to each house and other building on land abutting any street, avenue, alley or highway in the city, its respective number under the uniform system adopted by the city. When each house or other building has been assigned its respective number, the owner or occupant shall place or cause to be placed upon each house or other building and/or both sides of a curb-mounted mailbox controlled by such person the number assigned under the uniform system. 
(1)  Such numbers shall be placed or, if missing, replaced within twenty (20) days after the assigning of the proper number. The cost of such numbers shall be paid for by the property owners or occupants. 
(2)  The standard minimum height of the numbers, for all houses and buildings, is three (3) inches. 
(3)  Single-family and duplex dwellings built and approved for occupancy before November 1, 1987, may continue to use numbers two and one-half (2½) inches in height. 
(b)  The numbers shall be conspicuously placed so that they can be seen plainly and be read from the street. Further: 
(1)  With single-family or duplex dwellings, the numbers shall be placed immediately above, on or at the side of the door or alongside the pathway to the door, and/or on both sides of a curb-mounted mailbox. 
(2)  With multiple-family dwellings, the numbers shall be placed on the building face most visible from the street or alley adjacent thereto. 
(3)  With commercial buildings whose public entrance is visible from the street, the numbers shall be placed above, on, or at the side of the door of each individual business. If no public entrance is visible from the street, the building will be numbered on the side most visible from the street. 
(4)  Whenever any building is situated more than fifty (50) feet from the sidewalk line, the numbers of such buildings shall be conspicuously displayed on the owner's property at the sidewalk line, near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building, and upon the gatepost, fence, post, both sides of a curb-mounted mailbox, or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk or street. 
(c)  All numbers shall be of a durable material with numbers in contrast to background color. 
(Ord. No. 615, § 1, 11-2-87)  
Sec. 16-2. - Same—New buildings. 
(a)  Whenever any house, or other building shall be erected or located in the city after the establishment of the uniform system of house and other building numbering, and in order to preserve the continuity and uniformity of numbers of the houses and other buildings it shall be the duty of the owner or builder to get the proper number assigned by the city clerk. Once the number has been assigned, it is the responsibility of the owner or the builder to procure the correct number, of the required size, and to immediately fasten the number, so assigned, upon the house or other building, as provided herein. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for any house, building or structure until the owner has been assigned an official number by the city clerk for the premises. Final approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified after November 1, 1987 shall be withheld by the building inspector until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to the structure. 
(Ord. No. 615, § 2, 11-2-87)  
Sec. 16-3. - Adoption of standards for accommodating utilities on streets. 
The city council, hereby formally adopts the state highway department standards for accommodating utilities on highway rights-of-way as standards (as written and future amendments thereto) for use by the city for accommodating utilities on roads and streets under the jurisdiction of the city on those roads and streets which have or will involve the expenditure of state or federal highway funds. 
(Ord. No. 450, 9-7-71)  
Sec. 16-4. - Excavation permit. 
No person shall dig into or take up any street or pavement in the city for the purpose of laying pipe lines, pole lines, power or telephone conduits, sewers, railway tubes, or for other similar purposes without first obtaining at a cost of five dollars ($5.00) the written permission of the city engineer and depositing with the city clerk a sum estimated by the city engineer to be sufficient to replace such street or pavement in as good condition as it was before but in no event less than fifty dollars ($50.00). Such deposit shall be on condition that it shall be forfeited to the city in the event such street or pavement is not within fifteen (15) days from the completion of the work, without cost of the city, placed in as good condition as it was before. 
(Ord. No. 441, § 1, 10-5-70) 
Cross reference— Barricades at excavations, § 12-58.  
Sec. 16-5. - Damaging or obstructing drainage ditches. 
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to fill in, damage or otherwise obstruct drainage ditches along the public streets, thoroughfares or highways in the city. 
(Ord. No. 402A, § 1, 11-9-65)  
Sec. 16-6. - Discharge of water onto sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for the owners or occupants of any buildings in the city to permit or cause to be deposited upon any of the sidewalks of the city, any water collecting on any of the buildings, either by permitting the same to run onto the sidewalks or to be thrown thereon from any gutter or down pipe or passageway leading from the roofs of any of such buildings onto any of the sidewalks of the city, but nothing in this section shall prevent the owners or occupants of any building from so constructing water spouts, gutters, or down pipes to their building as to convey such water through an opening underneath any sidewalk, provided it is so constructed as not to spread upon or over the sidewalks or pour thereon from such building. 
(Ord. No. 130, § 1, 11-5-28)  
Secs. 16-7—16-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPORTING ON 
 
Sec. 16-51. - Intent. 
The spilling of vehicle loads upon the public streets and other public ways of the City of Guntersville is a dangerous and blighting factor which damages, deteriorates and depreciates these public ways, as well as adjacent and surrounding property. The city council of the City of Guntersville, Alabama finds that the spilling of vehicle loads is a public nuisance and recognizes that appropriate measures must be taken to keep public streets, other public ways and adjacent and surrounding property free from debris and other materials spilling from vehicles. Debris and other materials spilling from vehicles pose a danger of physical injury and property damage to motorists, pedestrians and other inhabitants of the City of Guntersville and cause the proliferation of trash, garbage, litter, and other dangerous or unsanitary debris within the city. The prevention of the spilling of vehicle loads and the removal of spillage from streets is necessary to prevent proliferation of this problem. This article is enacted to protect, promote and preserve the safety and welfare of the citizens of Guntersville, Alabama, through the reduction, control and prevention of vehicle spillage within the City of Guntersville, Alabama. The council does not intend for this article to conflict with any existing state law. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 1, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-52. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as hereinafter set forth: 
City shall mean the City of Guntersville, Alabama, a municipal corporation organized under the laws of the State of Alabama. 
Construction and demolition materials shall mean lumber, roofing and sheathing, scraps, dirt, stone, brick, ceramic, rubble, broken concrete, plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation, carpet padding, gutters, sheet rock, siding, hvac, or other similar material. 
Debris shall mean the remains of any material broken down and tracked onto any highway by any vehicle, including, but not limited to, dirt, gravel, mud, rocks, brush, and any other loose material. 
Garbage shall mean putrescence animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, storage, preparation, cooking, serving and consumption of food, including wastes from markets, storage facilities, or handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
Litter shall mean all solid waste that can be or is subject to being blown or carried from place to place by the elements, including, but not limited to, cigarette butts, refuse, waste material, garbage, dead animals or fowl, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, scrap metal, debris, and any foreign substance of whatever kind description, and whether or not it is of value. 
Load shall mean any material put in, on or drawn by any vehicle for transport including, but not limited to, garbage, litter, trash, rubbish, refuse, loose material, debris, process and fill material, construction and demolition materials, yard waste, and any foreign substance of whatever kind and description, whether putrescible or nonputrescible, and whether or not it is of value. Loads shall not include people. 
Loose material shall mean any material that is hauled on, or by any vehicle that could spill, drop, sift, leak, blow or otherwise escape said vehicle including, but not limited to, garbage, litter, trash, rubbish, refuse, loose material, debris, process and fill materials, construction and demolition materials, yard waste, and any foreign substance of whatever kind and description, whether putrescible or nonputrescible, and whether or not it is of value. 
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company, firm, trust, corporation, government corporation, department, bureau, agency, business or any entity recognized by law. 
Process and fill materials shall mean all materials used for fill or that are the result of a specific process. This term includes, but is not limited to, rock, gravel (any aggregate), sand, dirt, asphalt, pug mix, brick, cinder blocks, coal, feed, cement, concrete, tar, petroleum products, liquid, and similar materials. 
Refuse shall mean all solid or semisolid waste resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations, such as food processing wastes, boiler and house cinders, wood, plastic, metal scraps and shaving, byproducts accumulated as a result of treatment of liquid waste, etc.; putrescible and nonputrescible animal and vegetable waste from the handling, storage and sale of produce and meats; street sweeping, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt and contents of litter receptacles. This term includes, but is not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals or fowl, offal, abandoned motor vehicles, and solid market or industrial wastes. 
Rubbish shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, rags, cartons, wood, boxes, excelsior, cloth, furniture, bedding, leather, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, glass, crockery, metals, metal cans, metal foils, metal furniture, mineral refuse, and similar materials. 
Special vehicle shall mean any vehicle specially manufactured to transport or draw a particular type of load which is used solely in strict accordance with the purpose for which the special vehicle was manufactured, and in order to accomplish this purpose, is designed either: 
(a)  Without solid sides or a tailgate; or 
(b)  So that the load will extend above a point four (4) inches below the top of the sides of the special vehicle; or 
(c)  So that a tarpaulin or confinement system cannot be rigged or the load covered, secured or sealed while still allowing the special vehicle to accomplish its purpose. Exceptions in this article related to special vehicles shall be narrowly construed so that a vehicle qualifying as a special vehicle under any one or more, but not all, of (a), (b), or (c) of this definition shall be exempt only from those requirements of this article which are inherent in the design and purpose of the special vehicle, as manufactured, but not from any other requirements of this article which are not inherent in the design and purpose of the special vehicle, as manufactured. 
Tarpaulin or confinement system shall mean a solid or semisolid cover or system placed and secured over open-topped vehicles to secure loads and of sufficient and appropriate size, structure and strength to prevent the dispersal of loads and loose material from the vehicle. A tarpaulin or confinement system may be constructed from any suitable material, including, but not limited to, canvas, polyethylene, rubberized cloth, netting, ropes, straps, chains, cables, and racks with a restraining or enclosing system. 
Trash shall mean any nonputrescible solid wastes including, but not limited to, yard clippings, leaves, wood, compost, tree limbs, tree trunks, furniture, bedding, appliances, paper, cardboard, plastics, wrappings, cans, tires and similar materials. 
Vehicle shall mean any devise in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon the highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationery rails or tracks. This term includes, but is not limited to, trucks, trailers and automobiles. This term includes special vehicles unless specifically denoted otherwise. 
Yard waste shall mean grass, leaves, yard trimmings, shrubbery clippings, trees, branches, palm fronds, and all other miscellaneous vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-53. - Spilling vehicle loads prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, or permit to operated, any vehicle upon the public streets or other public ways of the city, when such vehicle is so constructed, maintained, or loaded, that the vehicle's load or loose material is permitted to blow, spill, drop, bounce, fall, waste or otherwise escape from such vehicle upon the public streets or other public ways or adjacent or surrounding property. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 3, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-54. - Solid sides, tailgate and solid top or tarpaulin or confinement system required with exception for special vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul a load or loose material unless the vehicle has solid sides and a tailgate, and is further equipped with a solid top or so rigged that a tarpaulin or confinement system can be spread or secured tightly over the top of such vehicle and is further equipped with a tarpaulin or confinement system. Any one or more of the requirements imposed by this section shall not apply to a special vehicle. Each vehicle shall have signs painted on both doors, or, if the vehicle does not have doors, then, on both sides, of the vehicle indicating the correct name of the hauler and his telephone number. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 4, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-55. - Covering, securing, sealing of loads required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul a load or loose material, unless the vehicle is covered, secured, or sealed to the extent that there will be no loss or spillage during haulage to cause littering of streets or highways or cause a nuisance or a hazard to the public health. The requirement imposed by this section shall not apply to a special vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 5, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-56. - Securing of boat loads required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul a boat upon the public streets or other public ways of the city unless all food, cooler, trash, life jackets, vests, skis, ropes, fishing gear, other equipment, and loose material are stored and secured to prevent these items from blowing, spilling, dropping, bouncing, falling, wasting or otherwise escaping onto public streets or other public ways or adjacent and surrounding property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport any animal in the confines of an open boat which is being transported along public streets or public right-of-ways. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 6, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-57. - Maximum load height imposed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul a load or loose material in a vehicle which does not have a solid top unless the load or loose material remains at least four (4) inches below the top of the sides of such vehicle as measured at the front, back and side walls of the vehicle. The use of a tarpaulin or confining system on a vehicle shall not excuse any person from compliance with the provisions of this section. The requirement imposed by this section shall not apply to a special vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 7, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-58. - Tracking debris onto public streets or other public ways prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, or permit to be operated, any vehicle upon the public streets or other public ways of the city unless said vehicle is free of debris and trash that could be tracked onto the public streets or other public ways of the city in such a manner as to: 
(a)  Cause a safety hazard; 
(b)  Create rough driving conditions; 
(c)  Impede the flow of water in gutters or along streets or that would tend to clog drains, ditches, or sewers; 
(d)  Create a nuisance from dust generated by driving over debris and trash which has been tracked onto the highway; or 
(e)  Create a likelihood of gravel, stone, other debris, or trash being thrown into the windshield of other vehicles. 
The requirements of this section shall not apply to the tracking of debris onto public streets and other public ways of the city if said public streets and public ways are part of a construction or maintenance work site. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 8, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-59. - Cleaning, washing, or removing waste material prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to clean, wash, dispose of or remove waste material from any vehicle upon the public streets or other public ways of the city. This shall include, but not be limited to, grain, feed, coal, cement, or garbage vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 9, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-60. - Clearing of streets by persons responsible for spills or tracking. 
Any person operating, or permitting to be operated, a vehicle or hauling a boat in violation of this article shall immediately cause the public street or other public way or surrounding and adjacent property to be cleared of spilled or tracked material so long as the person does not endanger himself or any other person. If traffic or other conditions are such that it would not be safe to remove the spilled or tracked material, then the person responsible for the spilled or tracked material shall immediately notify Guntersville Police Department and request assistance. The person responsible for spilled or tracked material shall bear the costs involved in the containment and removal of the spilled tracked material. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 10, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-61. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of sections 16-53, 16-55 and 16-58 of this article: 
(a)  The deposit or spreading of sand or other substances, not otherwise expressly prohibited, on the streets of the city for the purpose of street construction, maintenance or repair, or a maintenance of utilities or the use of water or other substances in cleaning or maintaining public streets or public ways, when such acts are performed by a city, state or federal governmental entity or a contractor conducting such actions pursuant to valid contract with a city, state or federal governmental entity. Vehicles carrying loads or loose material covered by this subsection, while in transit to a work site, must satisfy all requirements and prohibitions of this article. 
(b)  The deposit of sand or other substances, not otherwise expressly prohibited, on the streets of the city for the purpose of increasing traction when such acts are performed by a city, state or federal governmental entity or a contractor conducting such actions pursuant to a valid contract with a city, state or federal governmental entity, or by motorists spreading sand from public receptacles. 
(c)  Vehicles hauling loads or loose material that have reached their final destination and are preparing to unload. Vehicles carrying loads or loose material covered by this subsection, while in transit to their final destination, must satisfy all requirements and prohibitions of this article. 
(d)  Vehicles hauling loads of brush, limbs and other loose materials that have been collected in an authorized door to door program. These vehicles should be equipped with specially designed lifting apparatus that can be positioned in such a manner as to prevent loads from spilling or otherwise being deposited on any city street and public right-of-way. 
In addition to the above exemptions the following activities shall be further exempt from the provisions of sections 16-54 and 16-55: 
(e)  Vehicles hauling tree stumps, however, persons responsible for vehicles loaded with stumps shall take reasonable measures and precautions to secure the load in such a manner as to prevent the load from posing a danger of physical injury or property damage. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 11, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-62. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the city police department. Any sworn officer of the Guntersville Police Department is empowered to issue citations to appear in municipal court to answer charges for violation of any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 12, 8-18-97)  
Sec. 16-63. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to obey or comply with any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished, in addition to such other punishment as may be provided by the court, by minimum fines and penalties, for a first conviction of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days; for conviction of a second offense committed within one year after the date of the first offense, such person shall be punished by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment; for conviction of a third or subsequent offense committed within one year after the date of the first offense, such person shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 13, 8-18-97)  
Chapter 17 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noise created by vehicles, § 11-2; litter thrown from vehicles, § 11-26; truck loads causing litter, § 11-27; leaving of wrecked, etc., vehicles on streets, § 11-52; parade permit, § 13-21; control of vehicle parking on parade route, § 13-33; transportation vehicle loads, § 16-51 et seq.; corner visibility at intersections, App. A, §§ 6-3(i), 7-4(a), 10-2(6); signs which create traffic hazards, App. A, § 10-2(3). 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-114, 11-47-240 et seq., 11-49-4, 11-49-5, 32-1-3, 32-4-7, 32-5-1, 32-5-31, 32-5-171, 32-5-210, 32-5A-30, 32-5A-113, 32-5A-138, 32-5A-139, 32-5A-173, 32-5A-195. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - State laws and rules and regulations adopted; penalties. 
(a)  In addition to all other provisions of law relating to the speed and operation of motor vehicles in the city, there are hereby adopted by the city all laws of the state and all rules and regulations of the state department of public safety pertaining to the control of traffic and motor vehicles on highways that are misdemeanors under the state laws and a violation of such laws, rules and regulations in the city or in the police jurisdiction thereof, shall be violations of this Code. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class "C" misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or may be imprisoned in a municipal jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding ten (10) days; for a second such conviction within one (1) year thereafter, shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or may be imprisoned in a municipal jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within one (1) year after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) or may be imprisoned in a municipal jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding three (3) months, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  The schedule of traffic penalties is as follows: 
(1)  Parking violations: 
a.  Meter violation or overtime parking ..... $ 5.00 
b.  Parking in handicapped zone ..... 25.00 
c.  Blocking street ..... 25.00 
d.  Blocking alley ..... ______ 
e.  Parking tractor/trailer on street ..... ______ 
f.  Stopping, standing or parking in: 
1.  Sidewalk ..... ______ 
2.  Intersection ..... ______ 
3.  Crosswalk ..... ______ 
4.  Within 20 feet of crosswalk ..... ______ 
5.  Hazardous/congested place ..... ______ 
g.  Other prohibited parking violations ..... ______ 
(2)  Other violations: 
a.  Pedestrian violations ..... ______ 
b.  Failure to obey lawful command of officer ..... ______ 
c.  Off truck route ..... ______ 
d.  Pedestrian littering ..... ______ 
e.  Illegal vehicle on interstate ..... ______ 
f.  Bicycle violations ..... ______ 
(Ord. No. 574, § 6, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 636, §§ 3, 4, 1-16-89) 
Cross reference— Adoption of state offenses, § 13-1.  
Sec. 17-1.1. - Liability insurance required; violation. 
The city adopts the mandatory Liability Insurance Act, pursuant to Code of Ala. § 32-7A-1, et seq., to be included on the City of Guntersville Magistrates Schedule of Fines. This section authorizes the magistrates of the city to accept payments of any violations of this section pursuant to Rule 20 (C) Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration. 
Where a defendant decides to plead guilty before a magistrate or sends a citation by mail the fine amounts shall be: 
(1)  Upon presenting valid proof of insurance on date of citation the magistrate shall recommend to the judge to dismiss the case upon payment of traffic court cost. 
(2)  Where the defendant has obtained valid insurance after the date of citation, the fine shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and traffic court cost. 
(3)  Where the defendant has no insurance the fine shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) and traffic court cost. 
(Ord. No. 886, 12-17-04)  
Sec. 17-2. - Blood alcohol test. 
In compliance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-192, the city does hereby designate the chemical analysis of the breath by use of the "Drager Alcotest" as the test to be administered by its officers approved by the state board of health pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-194, and such other tests approved in the future by the Alabama Department of Forensic Sciences and performed by approved officers according to methods approved in the future by the Alabama Department of Forensic Sciences, to determine the alcoholic content of the blood of any person lawfully arrested for any offense arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the person was driving a motor vehicle on the public highways of the state, or on the public roads and streets of the city, or on private property within the police jurisdiction, to the extent allowed under state law, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
(Ord. No. 475, 1-20-75; Ord. No. 1059, 12-15-14) 
State Law reference— Administering of blood alcohol test, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-192.  
Sec. 17-3. - Off-street reckless driving. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-1.1, upon the grounds, roads, or drives of any public park, school, or church, or upon the grounds, roads, or drives of any private commercial establishment or private shopping center, or upon any private or public parking lot carelessly or heedlessly in wilful or wanton disregard of the rights or safety of others, or without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of the offense of off-street reckless driving and guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 2, 6-6-77)  
Sec. 17-3.1. - Driving through business property to avoid traffic control devices prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle upon the streets or highways of the city, or within the city's police jurisdiction, at any intersection where gasoline filling stations or other business property is located, so as to cause such vehicle to cut the corners of any such intersection by passing over the space used in the operation of such filling station or other business property, and thereby avoid the traffic light or traffic signal at any such intersection, or so as to avoid stopping at any such intersection as is required by the laws of the city, or so as to avoid traveling at any such intersection over the usual lanes of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 975, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 17-4. - Speed limit generally. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than twenty-five (25) miles per hour on any street or alley not specifically mentioned or set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 6, 7-17-72)  
Sec. 17-5. - Fifty-five-mph speed limit. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than fifty-five (55) miles per hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  On U. S. Highway No. 431 North (Blount Avenue) from the intersection with Lurleen Wallace Memorial Parkway to the northmost city limits, a distance of 0.90 mile. 
(2)  On U. S. Highway No. 431 South (Gunter Avenue) from the intersection with Lurleen Wallace Memorial Parkway to the northmost city limits, a distance of 0.90 mile. 
(3)  On Alabama Highway 79 from the south city limits (MP 61-14), (KMP 97.52) northerly to Willow Beach Road, north, (MP 65.89), (KMP 105.16) a distance of 4.75 miles, 7.64 kilometers. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 7-17-72; Ord. No. 501, § 1, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 11-4-96)  
Sec. 17-6. - Fifty-mph speed limit. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than fifty (50) miles per hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  On Alabama Highway No. 69 from the westernmost city limit eastward to its intersection with Sunset Drive, a distance of 0.90 mile. 
(2)  On Alabama Highway No. 79 from the southernmost city limit northward to its intersection with U.S. Highway No. 431, a distance of 3.70 miles. 
(3)  On Alabama Highway No. 227 from a point 2,000 feet east of its intersection of U.S. Highway No. 431 eastward to its intersection with Morrow Acres Road, a distance of 1.70 miles. 
(4)  On U.S. Highway No. 431 from the southernmost city limit northward to its intersection with Alabama Highway No. 205, a distance of 1.60 miles. 
(5)  On U.S. Highway No. 431 from its intersection with Alabama Highway No. 205 northward to its intersection with Alabama Highway No. 79, a distance of 1.10 miles. 
(6)  On Alabama Highway 79 from Willow Beach Road, north, (MP 65.89), (KMP 105.16) northerly to the intersection of Alabama 1 (US 431), (MP 66.19), (KMP 105.64), a distance of 0.30 mile, 0.48 kilometer. 
(7)  On Alabama 1 (US 431) from Pleasant Grove Road, (Alabama 205), (MP 300.06) (KMP 470.78) northerly to Alabama 79 (MP 302.25), (KMP 474. 30) a distance of 2.19 miles, 3.52 kilometers. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 2, 7-17-72; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 11-4-96)  
Sec. 17-7. - Forty-five-mph speed limits. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than forty-five (45) miles per hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  On Alabama Highway No. 69 from its intersection with Sunset Drive eastward to its intersection with Lester Street, a distance of 0.70 mile. 
(2)  On Alabama Highway No. 205 from the southernmost city limit northward to its intersection with U.S. Highway No. 431, a distance of 1.80 miles. 
(3)  On Alabama Highway No. 227 from its intersection with U.S. Highway No. 431 eastward to a point 2,000 feet east of U.S. Highway No. 431. 
(4)  On Alabama Highway No. 227 from milepost 46.61 (near Little New York) to milepost 49.27 (near Lake Guntersville State Park office). 
(5)  On U.S. Highway No. 431 from its intersection with Taylor Street northward to the northernmost city limit, a distance of 1.20 miles. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 3, 7-17-72; Ord. No. 636, § 1(A), 1-16-89)  
Sec. 17-8. - Forty-mph speed limit. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than forty (40) miles per hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  On Alabama Highway No. 69 from its intersection with Lester Street, eastward to its intersection with U.S. Highway No. 431, a distance of 0.10 mile. 
(2)  On Alabama Highway No. 227 from milepost 49.27 to milepost 49.68 (south of Short Creek Bridge). 
(3)  On Alabama Highway No. 227 from its intersection with Morrow Acres Road eastward to the eastmost city limit, a distance of 1.10 miles. 
(4)  On U.S. Highway No. 431 South (Gunter Avenue) from the intersection of Alabama Highway No. 79 northward to the intersection of Alabama Highway No. 69, a distance of 1.00 mile. 
(5)  On Alabama Highway 1, (US 431 NE), (Blount Avenue) from May Street, (MP 302.75), (KMP 475.11) northerly to Scott Street, (MP 304.59), (KMP 478.09) a distance of 1.86 miles, 2.98 kilometers. 
(6)  On Alabama Highway 1, (US 431 SE), (Gunter Avenue) from Ringold Street, (MP 304.20), (KMP 477.48) southerly to May Street, (MP 302.75), (KMP 475.11) a distance of 1.45 miles, 2.37 kilometers. 
(7)  On Alabama Highway 1, (US 431), from Alabama 79, (MP 302.25), (KMP 474.30) northerly to May Street, (MP 302.75), (KMP 475.11) a distance of 0.5 mile, 0.81 kilometer. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 4, 7-17-72; Ord. No. 501, § 4, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 636, § 1(B), 1-16-89; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 11-4-96)  
Sec. 17-9. - Thirty-five-mph speed limit generally. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than thirty-five (35) miles per hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  On U.S. Highway No. 431 South (Gunter Avenue) from the intersection of Alabama Highway No. 69 northward to the intersection of Lurleen Wallace Memorial Parkway. 
(2)  On U.S. Highway No. 431 North (Blount Avenue) from the intersection of Greenwood Street northward to Lurleen Wallace Memorial Parkway. 
(3)  On U.S. Highway No. 431 from its intersection with Alabama Highway No. 79 northward to its intersection with Taylor Street, a distance of 2.10 miles. 
(4)  On U.S. Highway No. 431 North (Blount Avenue) from the intersection of Greenwood Street southward to the intersection of Alabama Highway No. 79, a distance of 1.50 miles. 
(5)  On Blount Avenue its entire length within the corporate limits of the City of Guntersville, Alabama. 
(6)  On Highway 205 to the corporate city limits of the City of Guntersville, Alabama on Pleasant Grove Road. 
(7)  On Spring Creek Drive (Willow Beach Road). 
(8)  On U.S. Highway 431 coming from Albertville. 
(9)  On Patterson Street between the four-way stop on O'Brig Avenue and Sunset Drive. 
(10)  The speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour on Wyeth Drive from the intersection of U.S. Hwy 431 to the intersection of Val Monte Drive. 
(Ord. No. 501, §§ 2, 3, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 720, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 728, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 789, § 1, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 1019, 3-19-12)  
Sec. 17-10. - Thirty-five-mph speed limit for trucks. 
No person shall operate a truck, herein defined as all buses, single unit trucks and truck combinations having a gross vehicle weight of nine thousand (9,000) pounds or greater, at a speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  In the northbound lane of U.S. Highway No. 431 from a point 500 feet south of Pleasant Grove Road to Wyeth Drive. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 13, 7-17-72; Ord. No. 515, § 3, 6-18-79)  
Sec. 17-11. - Thirty-mph speed limit. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  Alabama Highway No. 227 from milepost 49.68 to milepost 50.10 and from milepost 50.57 to milepost 50.95. 
(2)  Alabama Highway No. 227 from milepost 50.10 to milepost 50.57. 
(3)  On the eastside service road adjacent to A1 1 (US 431) beginning at the end of the exit ramp (MP 301.00), northerly along the service road to the end of the service road at Wyeth Drive (MP 301.45), a distance of 0.45 miles. 
(4)  On the westside service road adjacent to A1 1 (US 431) beginning at the high school exit (MP 301.30), northerly along the service road to the end of the service road at Wyeth Drive (MP 301.45), a distance of 0.15 miles. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 1(C), 1-16-89; Ord. No. 733-A, § 1, 3-18-96)  
Sec. 17-12. - Truck routes—Nine-thousand-pound trucks. 
(a)  Streets on which trucks prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck weighing over ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight on the following streets within the city: 
(1)  Lurleen B. Wallace Drive from Gunter Avenue to the intersection of Sunset Drive and Ringold Street. 
(2)  Ringold Street from the intersection of Gunter Avenue to the intersection of Lurleen B. Wallace Drive. 
(3)  Sunset Drive from the intersection of Lurleen B. Wallace Drive to the intersection of Willow Beach Road. 
(4)  Willow Beach Road from its intersection with Sunset Drive to Alabama Highway No. 79 South. 
(5)  Patterson Street from Gunter Avenue to the intersection of Sunset Drive. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to the operation of trucks weighing in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight, where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point, provided streets upon which traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to any truck operated by the city in the carrying out of any governmental or proprietary function. 
(3)  The city shall cause all streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited to be clearly signposted to give notice that this section is in effect. 
(4)  No person shall be charged with violating the provisions of this section by reason of operating a truck upon a street wherein truck travel is prohibited unless appropriate signs are posted on such street. 
(Ord. No. 641, §§ 1, 2, 7-6-89)  
Sec. 17-13. - Same—Five-thousand-pound vehicles. 
All trucks and other vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of five thousand (5,000) pounds or more traveling in a northerly direction upon and along U.S. Highway No. 431 within the corporate limits of the city, between the crest of Sand Mountain and the Stockton Causeway shall travel only in the right lane of the northbound lanes of such highway. 
(Ord. No. 470, 3-21-74)  
Sec. 17-14. - One-way roadways. 
(a)  The segment of May Street between Gunter Avenue and Blount Avenue is hereby made a one-way street and vehicular traffic on such segment is hereby restricted and limited to vehicular traffic moving in an easterly direction on such segment of May Street. 
(b)  Blount Avenue lying north of May Street is hereby made a one-way street for use by vehicular traffic and to consist of two (2) or more lanes for the flow of traffic moving in a northerly direction to the old and new river bridges. 
(c)  Gunter Avenue, from its beginning at the river bridge and extending in a southerly direction is hereby made a one-way street for use by vehicular traffic and to consist of two (2) or more lanes of traffic moving in such southerly direction to the intersection of Gunter Avenue with May Street. 
(d)  The roadway located on the west side of U.S. Highway No. 431 and adjacent to the Guntersville High School, shall be a service road with vehicular traffic permitted only to travel along such roadway in a southerly direction, parallel to, but separate from, the south bound lanes of U.S. Highway No. 431. 
(e)  The speed limit for Riley Road, a public street in the City of Guntersville, Alabama, shall be set at fifteen (15) mph. 
(f)  All motor vehicles must yield to pedestrian traffic crossing Riley Road in that area specifically designated for the pedestrian crossing of Riley Road as indicated by traffic signs and the visually designated area on Riley Road. In the event there are pedestrians in the designated crossing area, all motor vehicles must come to a complete stop until such time as the designated area has no pedestrians crossing Riley Road. 
(g)  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday motor vehicles entering Sunset Drive from Riley Road shall turn right only when public school is in session. 
(h)  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 to 3:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday motor vehicles entering Lusk Street from the parking lot of Guntersville Middle School shall turn right only when public school is in session. 
(i)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this subsections (e)—(i) of this section may be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned in the municipal jail for a period not exceeding ten (10) days or be both so fined and imprisoned. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-3-73; Ord. No. 487, §§ 2, 3, 4-4-77; Ord. No. 500, § 1, 3-6-78; Ord. No. 668, §§ 1, 2, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 1094, §§ 1—5, 3-19-18)  
Sec. 17-15. - Private display of flashing lights. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or display any flashing red, blue, green, amber, clear or white light or any combination thereof or any other flashing light or combination of lights on any vehicle or structure, or on any portable or permanent sign unless such use is expressly authorized by a city, county or state law, or as may herein be provided. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or locate any flashing lights or lights of any color or combination of colors within ten (10) feet of the curbline or edge of any street, road or highway, or within ten (10) feet of the margin of any city right-of-way within the city limits or police jurisdiction of the city, such ten-foot distance to be measured perpendicularly to and horizontally from such curb or edge of the road, street or highway or margin of such right-of-way; further, no flashing light or any color or combination of colors shall be placed on such city property, or right-of-way by lawful authority of the city, state, county or federal government. 
(c)  The chief of police and the duly authorized members of the police department are hereby vested with the power and authority and it shall be their duty to supervise and regulate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 489, §§ 2—4, 4-25-77)  
Sec. 17-16. - Unauthorized drivers subject to towing. 
(a)  Notwithstanding, any other provisions of law, and except as otherwise provided in this section, a motor vehicle is subject to impounding as a nuisance if it is driven on a highway or other public roadway in the city if the motor vehicle is driven by a person whose license or license privilege is suspended, revoked or cancelled at the time he or she was stopped or involved in an accident. 
(b)  If a driver is unable to produce a valid drivers license on the demand of a law enforcement officer, the vehicle shall be impounded regardless of ownership, unless the officer is reasonably able, by other means to verify that the driver is properly licensed. Prior to impounding the vehicle the law enforcement officer shall make a reasonable attempt to verify the license status of a driver who claims to be properly licensed, but who is unable to produce the license on demand of the officer. A notation of the officer's attempt to verify that the driver is properly licensed shall be noted on the impound report. The driver and occupants of the vehicle will be transported to a place of safety by the impounding officer and an impound report made with a full inventory of items in the vehicle. 
(c)  A law enforcement officer shall not impound a vehicle pursuant to this section if the license of the driver expired within the preceding ninety (90) days and the driver would otherwise have been properly licensed. 
(d)  If the owner of the vehicle or another family member of the owner is present in the vehicle and has a valid license, the vehicle shall not be impounded and towed. 
(e)  If there is a medical necessity jeopardizing life or limb, the law enforcement officer may elect not to impound the vehicle. 
(f)  A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released if: 
(1)  The registered owner or a representative with written authorization from the registered owner appears at the city police department and presents a valid driver's license, a copy of the title, tag receipt, or notarized bill of sale. 
(2)  If the registered owner does not have a valid driver's license he or she may bring someone with them who has a valid license and the vehicle may be released without written notarized permission. 
(3)  Any owner of a vehicle who suffers any loss due to the impoundment of any vehicle pursuant to this section may recover the amount of the loss from the unlicensed, suspended, or revoked driver. 
(4)  The person redeeming the vehicle at the wrecker lot will be responsible for paying the set towing and storage fee. 
(5)  Any vehicle impounded that is not redeemed pursuant to this section within sixty (60) days may be sold by the wrecker company for fees owed according to state law. 
(g)  The city shall be obligated to determine if any liens are listed on the title of the vehicle and to notify the registered lien holders within three (3) business days of the date of impoundment by telephone followed by a certified letter. The notice shall include a description of the vehicle, the date of impoundment and the address where the impounded vehicle is located. A lienholder shall be entitled to the release of the vehicle as set forth in subsection (f) upon presentation of the original vehicle title evidencing the existence of the lien and written certification by the lien holder that the registered owner of the vehicle is in default on the indebtedness secured by the lien and that the lienholder is entitled to immediate possession. 
(h)  If any provisions of this section or the application of this section to any person, thing or circumstances, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the provisions or application of this section can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications and to this end, the provisions of this section and such amendments as may be made in the future are declared to be severable. 
(i)  Impoundment hearings. 
(1)  The owner or person entitled to possession of any motor vehicle which is removed or towed, pursuant to this section, shall be entitled to an immediate due process hearing, prior to paying any towing or storage fee concerning the motor vehicle. The chief of police or any supervisory officer of the police of the rank of police sergeant or above, designated by the chief of police, is designated and appointed as a hearing officer for the purpose of carrying out these requirements. Any owner or person entitled to possession of any motor vehicle, unless the right is waived, shall be provided an immediate due process hearing before such officer prior to being required to pay any such towing charge or storage fee. When the hearing officer shall determine at the hearing that the towing of the vehicle was in error, the vehicle shall be ordered immediately released and returned to the owner or person in possession without the payment of any charges or fees. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of any hearing officer made pursuant to this section shall be entitled to a hearing before a municipal judge by filing notice wit the clerk of the municipal court within five (5) days from the date of any such decision. 
(3)  At any time an arrest or citation for violation of municipal ordinances is made in connection with the towing or impoundment of any motor vehicle by the police department, the municipal judge trying the case may also hear evidence concerning the impoundment, towing and storage of the motor vehicle. If the municipal judge shall determine, after a due process hearing, that the towing of the vehicle was in error, the municipal judge shall order the vehicle immediately released without the payment of any fees or charges, or if the fees or charges have already been paid, shall order the return of the fees to the person paying the fees. 
(Ord. No. 961, 3-3-08)  
Secs. 17-17—17-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKING 
 
Sec. 17-20. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Handicapped parking areas: Those parking spaces designated for parking by persons so severely handicapped that such persons are unable to move from place to place without the aid of a mechanical device, wheelchair, walker, cane, crutch, invalid tricycle, or any similar device intended for and used by such persons. 
Operator: Any individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Park or parking: The standing of a vehicle, whether or not upon a street, otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals, or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle. 
Parking zones: Those areas of certain streets designated by the city and so marked and designated where parking of vehicles is limited or restricted. 
Street: Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path, or public place located in the city and established for the use of vehicles. 
Vehicle: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 574, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 17-21. - Areas where parking is prohibited at all times. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  Where there is no parking space marked or designated by lines painted or durably marked on curbing or the surface of the street, within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance or exit to any police station, fire station or rescue squad location and on the side of the street opposite the entrance or exit to any fire station, police station or rescue squad location within seventy-five (75) feet of that entrance or exit when properly posted. 
(8)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle on Gunter Avenue between the intersection of Lurleen B. Wallace Drive and Blount Avenue and Brown Street, and on Blount Avenue from Brown Street to the intersection of Blount Avenue and Gunter Avenue at the Harbor House Restaurant where there is no parking space marked or designated by lines painted or durably marked on curbing or surface of the street. 
(c)  No person shall park any motor vehicle at any time on the paved shoulder adjacent to the truck arrester ramp located in the city and more particularly described as beginning at the southernmost point of Hardin Road located on the east side of U.S. Highway No. 431 and designated as State Highway Marker No. 1-0.00 and running in a generally northwesterly direction one thousand (1,000) feet to State Marker No. 19+72. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on the right-of-way located east of Sunset Drive from the intersection of Patterson Street and Sunset Drive and the intersection of Alabama Highway No. 69 (Henry Street) and Sunset Drive. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park a motor vehicle or a mobile unit or trailer on the right-of-way located on Ringold Street from Hill Avenue to Jackson Avenue, both on the east and west side of Ringold Street. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this subsection (e) shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding ten (10) days or be both so fined and imprisoned. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 6-17-82; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 716, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 756A, §§ 1, 2, 3-17-97) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-137.  
Sec. 17-22. - Two-hour time limit parking. 
(a)  Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer consecutive period of time than two (2) hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in the following areas: 
(1)  On either side of Gunter Avenue from the intersection of Scott Street and Gunter Avenue to the intersection of Brown Street and Gunter Avenue. 
(2)  On either side of Blount Avenue from the intersection of Brown Street and Blount Avenue to the intersection of Taylor Street and Blount Avenue. 
(3)  On either side of Gunter Avenue from the intersection of Gilbreath Street to the intersection of Gunter Avenue and Henry Street and from the intersection of Gunter Avenue and Henry Street to the intersection of Henry Street and O'Brig Avenue. 
(4)  On either side of those portions of Taylor Street, Worth Street, and Court Street lying between Gunter Avenue and Blount Avenue; also those portions of Scott Street, Worth Street, and Ringold Street lying between Gunter Avenue and Hill Street, and on Taylor Street lying between Gunter Avenue and Old Town Street. 
(b)  Except on Sundays or holidays it shall be unlawful to park or leave any vehicle for a longer consecutive period of time than two (2) hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in the city parking lot on the right side of Gunter Avenue at its intersection with Worth Street, more particularly described as follows: All that tract of land located in the city, being a portion of the east half of lot 1 of block "D" as shown on original survey of the city on file in the probate office of the county, and more particularly described as follows: Commencing at a point at the intersection of the southerly margin of Worth Street and the westerly margin of Broad Street and run thence in a southerly direction along the westerly margin of Broad Street a distance of one hundred ten (110) feet; thence in a westerly direction parallel to the southerly margin of Worth Street one hundred twenty (120) feet; thence in a northerly direction parallel to the westerly margin of Broad Street one hundred ten (110) feet to a point on the southerly margin of Worth Street; thence in an easterly direction along such southerly margin one hundred twenty (120) feet to the point of beginning; such property being a part of the same property conveyed to Gulf Oil Corporation, a Pennsylvania corporation and recorded in deed book 341, page 410, in the probate office of the county. 
(Ord. No. 574, § 2, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 17-23. - Handicapped parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle in a stall or space designed for physically handicapped persons, if, immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space, there is posted a sign known as international wheelchair symbol or painted on the parking space a sign known as the international wheelchair symbol consisting of a profile view of a stylized wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background or painted yellow on the parking space, unless the driver of the car is disabled. The penalty for the violation of this section shall be a payment of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(Ord. No. 574, § 3, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 702, § III, 4-4-94)  
Sec. 17-24. - Violations—Punishment generally. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) to be imposed at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(Ord. No. 574, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 17-25. - Same—Compromise of claim. 
(a)  Any person accused of a violation of a provision prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area or restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked, may settle and compromise a claim against such person for such illegal parking by paying to the municipality the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) within forty-eight (48) hours of the [time] such alleged offense was committed. A receipt shall be issued for all money so received and such money shall be promptly turned over to the city clerk treasurer to be used in the manner provided for the disposition of fines. 
The operator of the above-described vehicle may pay ten dollars ($10.00) at the city clerk's office within forty-eight (48) hours; or may appear at (date and time) _______ before the municipal judge for trial. 
This ticket is issued as a courtesy in lieu of an arrest. If the operator does not settle this claim or appear for trial, a warrant will be issued for violating this section. 
Police Department 
Officer ___________ 
Received $___________ 
Date ___________ 
Signed: ___________ 
The following form of the ticket may be used: 
License No. ___________ 
Date ___________ 
Hour _______ 
Charge: Illegal parking in violation of Section II of Ordinance No. _____ by (overtime parking) (parking in prohibition area) (double parking). 
(b)  The members of the police department are hereby authorized to refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved, provided that the ticket is paid within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(c)  The following form of the ticket and of arrest warrant and judgment on guilty plea may be used: 
"SUMMONS AND COMPLAINT 
CASE NO. _____   TICKET NO. _____ 
STATE OF ALABAMA, MARSHALL COUNTY 
In the Municipal Court of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, the undersigned being duly sworn, upon oath deposes and says: 
On _____ the _____ day of _______, 19___ at _____ a.m., p.m. 
Name _____ 
Residence _____ City _____ State _____ 
Business _____ City _____ State _____ 
Home Phone _____ Bus. Phone _____ 
Birth date _____ Race _____ Sex _____ 
Driver's lic. no. _____ State _____ 
DID UNLAWFULLY OPERATE/PARK VEHICLE (Lic. tag no.) _____ 
At or near (Location) _____ 
Located in the City of Guntersville, Alabama, aforesaid and did then and there commit the following offense: 
_____
_____
PARKING ( ) Meter violation METER NO. _____ 
( ) Overtime 
( ) Prohibited Parking ( ) Improper parking 
( ) Parked on private property without permission 
( ) Parked in handicapped zone 
MANNER _____ 
( ) Pedestrian violation 	( ) Failure to obey lawful command of officer 
( ) Off truck route 	( ) Bicycle violation 
 
The undersigned further states that he has probable cause to believe and does believe, that the person named above committed the offense herein set forth, contrary to and in violation of the laws and ordinances of the City of Guntersville, Alabama. 
_____
OFFICER 	_____
BADGE NO. 
 
Signature of operator _____ 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this _____ day of _______, 19___. 
	_____
JUDGE or MAGISTRATE 
 
MUNICIPAL COURT Appearance _____ day of _______, 19___ at _____ a.m., p.m. 
Courtroom, City Hall, 325 Gunter Avenue, Guntersville, Alabama 
INCLUDE THIS SUMMONS WITH PAYMENT" 
"WARRANT OF ARREST 
STATE OF ALABAMA 
CITY OF GUNTERSVILLE 
To any police officer of the City of Guntersville, complaint on oath having been presented to me that ___________ has committed the offense of ___________ in violation of the laws or ordinances of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, you are hereby commanded to forthwith arrest the said ___________ and bring him/her before a judge or magistrate authorized to hold court to answer the above stated charge. 
Bond fixed at _____ . 
Dated _____ day of _______, 19___. 
_____
CITY MAGISTRATE 
The above warrant executed by arresting the within named defendant and: 
( ) Committing defendant to jail 
( ) Admitting defendant to bail in the amount of _____ 
( ) Accepting driver's license in lieu of bail. 
Case set on date: ________ Time: _____ 
Courtroom, City Hall, 325 Gunter Avenue, Guntersville, Alabama 
Remarks: 
This _____ day of _______, 19___. 
CASE NO. ___________ 
Set for trial _____ Time _____ 
CITY OF GUNTERSVILLE 
vs. 
_____
CHARGE 
Count 1. _____ 
Count 2. _____ 
Count 3. _____ 
Trial Date ________ 
All traffic penalties are subject to change by the mayor or city council. If the violation charged is not listed, the amount of penalty and other information may be obtained by communicating with the city court clerk, city hall, 325 Gunter Avenue, Guntersville, Alabama, 571-7561. In making settlements by mail, use check or money order, payable to City of Guntersville. No personal checks will be accepted. Cash sent in is at sender's risk. Include the summons with payment. 
INCLUDE THIS SUMMONS WITH PAYMENT 
NOTICE 
READ CAREFULLY 
You may pay the penalty for this violation without going to court by making payment in person or by mailing the amount (certified check or money order) according to the schedule below to: 
CITY COURT CLERK 
325 GUNTER AVENUE 
GUNTERSVILLE, AL 35976 
However, payment must be received before the date set for court appearance in order for the ticket to be paid through the office of city court clerk. If you have not paid the penalty of the ticket before the court appearance date marked on the front side of your summons, then the ticket becomes a case to be handled by the court and you must appear in court at the time set. Failure to do so will result in a warrant being issued for your arrest and good bond is required." 
"Comes the defendant in such defendant's own person. Defendant pleads _______ guilty. On hearing the evidence the court is of the opinion that defendant is _______ guilty. It is ordered and adjudged by the court that the defendant is _______ guilty, and is fined _____ dollars, and _____ dollars costs, and sentenced to _____ days (suspended) extra at hard labor for the City of Guntersville. The fine and costs not being presently paid, defendant is sentenced to be imprisoned at hard labor for the City of Guntersville _____ days to pay fine and _____ days to pay costs. 
Fee _____ 
      Judge/Magistrate 
 
Cont. _____ 
Cont. _____ 
Cont. _____ " 
(d)  This section shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where police or fire department apparatus or other emergency equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance to a hospital; nor shall this article apply to any person charged with parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley, or parking in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only; nor to any person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the request of any member of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 574, § 5, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 702, § V, 4-4-94) 
Cross reference— Schedule of parking fines, § 17-1(c).  
Sec. 17-26. - Same—Towing and towing charges. 
(a)  The police department, and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away, by commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or may obstruct movement of any emergency vehicle. Any car or other vehicle parked in violation of section 17-21 or section 17-22 above may also be removed and towed away as herein provided. 
(b)  Cars so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place and be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) within twenty-four (24) hours after such vehicle was removed, plus two dollars ($2.00) for each additional twenty-four (24) hours or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 574, § 4, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 702, § IV, 4-4-94) 
State Law reference— Officers authorized to remove vehicles, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-139.  
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 785, adopted April 20, 1998, amended in its entirety the zoning ordinance which derived from Ord. No. 600, adopted Sept. 2, 1986. Per the city's instructions, the new provisions are not set out herein but are available in the office of the city clerk. 
 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 806, adopted Sept. 8, 1998, amended in its entirety the subdivision regulations which derived from regulations enacted by the planning commission on Sept. 8, 1987. Per the city's instructions, the new provisions are not set out herein but are available in the office of the city clerk. 

Zoning Ordinance
Zoning Ordinance
of the
City of Guntersville, Alabama
Ordinance No. 1042
Amendment 1: Ordinance No. 1055
Amendment 2: Ordinance No: 1064
DATE: June 3, 2013
Leigh Dollar, Mayor
Guntersville City Council
Samuel Stewart
George Gillen
Lee Carr
Phillip Mosley
Donald Myers
Rudy Cornelius
Randall B. Whitaker
City Clerk
Betty Jones
Guntersville Planning Commission
Larry McCoy, Chairman
David Bridges
Danny Owens
Barbara Gunter
Steve Carver
Ben Gilliland
Samuel Stewart
Guntersville Building Official
Dwain Elder
CONTENTS
Article
1 Authority & Enactment ______________________________________________1
2 Title _____________________________________________________________1
3 Purpose and Scope _________________________________________________1
4 Establishment of Districts ____________________________________________2
5 Definitions________________________________________________________4
6 District Purposes __________________________________________________16
7 Schedule of District Regulations & Uses _______________________________20
Dimensional Requirements _________________________________________33
8 Supplemental Regulations __________________________________________34
8-1 Development of Various Housing types in RM-1, RM-2 and PUD’s ___34
8-2 Planned Unit Development Regulations __________________________38
8-3 Business Restricted District ___________________________________39
8-4 Mobile Home Park District ____________________________________40
8-5 General Regulations for Residential District ______________________43
8-6 Area, Dimensional & General Requirements for Non-Residential
Districts ___________________________________________________48
8-7 Mountainside and Steep Slope Development Regulations ____________49
8-8 Recreational Vehicle Park Development Standards _________________50
8-9 Mini Storage Facilities _______________________________________53
8-10 “Q” Qualified Zone District ___________________________________54
8-11 Historical and Cultural Overlay District _________________________55
8-12 Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) District_____________ 58
9 Site Plan Review __________________________________________________75
10 Signs ___________________________________________________________80
11 Parking _________________________________________________________93
12 Non-Conforming Uses _____________________________________________99
13 Board of Adjustment ______________________________________________102
14 Amendments ____________________________________________________108
15 Administration __________________________________________________111
16 Interpretation ____________________________________________________114
17 Violations ______________________________________________________115
18 Effect upon Outstanding Building Permits _____________________________116
19 Effective Date ___________________________________________________117
1
ARTICLE 1
AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE
The City Council of Guntersville, Alabama, under authority granted by Title XI, Chapter 52, Article 4, Sections 70-84 inclusive, Code of Alabama, 1975, hereby ordains that the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Guntersville, Alabama”, Ordinance No. 231, adopted on April 17, 1939, as subsequently amended from time to time, is hereby amended to read as follows:
ARTICLE 2
TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance of Guntersville, Alabama”.
ARTICLE 3
PURPOSE AND SCOPE
3-1. Purpose
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentrations of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. The regulations have also been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of building and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
3-2. Scope
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used, occupied, and no building, structure, or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all the regulations of this ordinance for the district in which it is located, except as otherwise provided herein.
2
ARTICLE 4
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
4-1. Use Districts
To achieve the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Guntersville is hereby divided into the following districts:
SYMBOL DISTRICT
E-1 Estate District
E-2 Estate District
RS-1 Single-Family Residential District
RS-2 Single-Family Residential District
RS-3 Single-Family Residential District
RM-1 Multi-Family District
RM-2 Multi-Family District
MHP Mobile Home Park District
O & I Office and Institutional District
BR Restricted Business District
BL Local Business District
BG-1 General Business District
BG-1A General Business District
BG-1B General Business District
BG-1R General Business District
BG-2 General Business District
BG-2A General Business District
BC Central Business District
BW Waterfront Business District
PU Public District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
PUD Planned Unit Development
HCC Historical and Cultural District
TND Traditional Neighborhood Development
4-2. Zoning Map
Said districts are bounded as shown on map entitled “Zoning Map of Guntersville, Alabama”, adopted herewith, which accompanies, and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this Ordinance. The original zoning map, properly attested, is and shall remain on file in the office of the Building Inspector of the City of Guntersville, Alabama.
3
4-3. Interpretation of District Boundaries
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established as shown on the map. Unless otherwise shown on said map, the boundaries of districts shown thereon are intended to follow lot lines, centerlines of streets or alleys, the centerline of railroad tracks, or the corporate limit lines as they exist at the time of enactment of this ordinance or amendments thereto. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on said map, the Board of Adjustment shall determine said boundaries.
4
ARTICLE 5
DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular; and the word “shall” is mandatory and directory.
1. Accessory Structure or Use. A subordinate structure or use customarily incident to and located upon the same lot occupied by the principal use or structure.
2. Alcoholic Beverages. Any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, or other alcoholic beverage, or combination of liquors and mixed liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, fermented, or otherwise alcoholic, and all drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures intended for beverage purposes which contain one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume and shall include liquor, beer, wine, both fortified and table wine.
3. Alley. A public street which affords only secondary means of access to abutting property and which is not intended for general traffic circulation.
4. Antenna. A structure which is designed to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves including radio and television signals. An antenna which is not the principal structure on a lot is an accessory structure.
5. Awning. A detachable framework covered by cloth or other light materials, supported from the walls of a building for protection from sun or weather.
6. Bar. A bar as defined herein is that accessory portion of a restaurant located in a BG-1R District, which is limited by the size and other limitations as set forth in Article 6-1, N of this ordinance.
7. Beer. Any beer, lager beer, ale, porter, malt or brewed beverage or similar fermented malt liquor containing one-half (½) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume and not in excess of four (4) percent alcohol by weight and five (5) percent by volume, by whatever name the same may be called.
8. Block. The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersection streets, or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, un-subdivided acreage, river or live stream, or between any of the foregoing and any other barriers, to the continuity of development.
9. Boarding House. An establishment other than a hotel, motel, or restaurant, where lodging and meals are provided for compensation to six (6) or more persons. Lodging is temporary and meals are not served on an individual basis.
5
10. Bed and Breakfast Inn. A residential structure occupied by the owner or operator thereof consisting of not more than six (6) sleeping rooms and breakfast for hire to any occupant for not more than fourteen consecutive days with the following characteristics:
a) Minimum of one off-street parking space for each sleeping room in the structure.
b) No dining facilities open to the general public.
c) One ground mounted or wall mounted non-illuminated or externally illuminated sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area for the sole purpose of identifying the facility. If the facility has frontage on two (2) streets, a maximum of two (2) signs may be allowed.
d) Due to the desirability of a historical Bed and Breakfast Inn by the community and the many historical and cultural advantages it brings to a community, in addition to providing sleeping rooms and breakfast for hire, special events, limited to weddings, receptions, luncheons, dinner parties and business meetings, may be held at a Bed and Breakfast Inn provided the following criteria are met:
1. Parking for special events during regular working hours, Monday thru Friday, may be provided on the premises of the Bed and Breakfast Inn or on abutting streets.
2. Parking for special events held after regular working hours, Monday thru Friday, and on weekends, must be accommodated on the premises of the Bed and Breakfast Inn and on adjoining or nearby property. The owner or operator of the Bed and Breakfast Inn must submit copies of written agreements with adjoining property owners allowing the use of their property for overflow parking during special events held after regular working hours and on weekends at the Bed and Breakfast Inn.
3. Special events held at the Bed and Breakfast Inn must be pre-booked and food service shall be limited to such pre-booked special events and overnight guests of the Bed and Breakfast Inn. Special events shall involve not less than eight (8) persons and not more than one (1) special event may be conducted during luncheon or dining periods, which are not more than two (2) special events per day.
11. Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
12. Building Coverage. The percent of total lot area covered by buildings and structures but excluding roof overhangs.
6
13. Building Line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance therefore making the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected.
14. Caliper. A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measured four and one-half (4.5) feet above natural grade.
15. Day Care Facility. A day care facility is designed to offer care and/or training to children or adults unrelated to the owner or director for any part of a day on some kind of a regular basis. Such facility may or may not be operated for profit.
16. Density, Maximum. The maximum number of dwelling units allowable in a given zoning district and generally stated in number of dwelling units per acre.
17. Drive-In Establishment. A drive-in restaurant or other drive-in establishment serving food and/or drink so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle.
18. Dwelling. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including trailers, campers, hotels, motels, inns, mobile homes, boarding and lodging houses, tents, tourist homes, hospitals or nursing homes.
19. Dwelling Unit. A room or group of rooms including a kitchen and sanitary facilities designed and used exclusively or occupied as separate living quarters by not more than one (1) family.
20. Dwelling, Duplex. A single building containing two contiguous and independent dwelling units separated by a common wall and sharing a common roof and foundation.
21. Dwelling, Multi-family. A dwelling unit within a building containing three or more dwelling units so arranged that their occupants live independently of each other.
22. Dwelling Unit, Single-Family Attached. A dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one (1) family which is joined to another dwelling unit at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall and such dwelling unit is erected on its own individual lot of record.
23. Dwelling Unit, Single-Family Detached. A dwelling unit designed and constructed for occupancy by one (1) family and located on a lot or separate building track and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract.
24. Entertainment. The playing of music, signing songs, etc. using an amplification system to boost the sound.
7
25. Essential Services. Public utility facilities related to water, sanitary sewers, storm drainage, solid waste disposal, telephone, cable television, gas and electrical distribution systems, but not including buildings housing employees, or public safety facilities such as fire or police stations.
26. Family. An individual or two (2) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
27. Family Care Home. A Group care home, serving up to ten individuals, unrelated by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit under the supervision of one or two resident managers, whose purpose is to serve socially, physically, mentally, or developmentally impaired persons in a family-type living arrangement, and which meet or exceed the minimum requirements of Section 11-52-75.1 Regulation as to housing of mentally retarded or mentally ill persons in multi-family zone, Code of Alabama, 1975 as amended.
28. Floor Area, Gross. The sum of the gross enclosed horizontal area of all the floors of a building, except a basement, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and/or supporting columns.
29. Frontage. All the property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, than all of the property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
30. Garage, Private. A building or space used as an accessory to or part of a principal building permitted in any residential district for the purpose of storing not more than four (4) motor vehicles and in which no business, occupation, or service for profit is in any way conducted.
31. Garage, Public. Any building or premises, other than a private garage used exclusively for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles.
32. Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average grade at the front building setback line to: 1) the highest point of the roof’s surface; 2) to the deck line of mansard roofs; or 3) to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for hip and gable roofs.
33. Home Business. Any occupation or activity carried on within a dwelling by a member of the family residing on the premises. All home occupations shall comply with the following performance standards: (1) there is no group instruction, assembly or activity of more than two persons (except up to six (6) persons for a family day care operation); (2) no display of merchandise or other articles of any kind that will indicate from the exterior that the buildings are being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; (3) such home occupation shall not include use of chemicals, matter or energy that may create or cause to be created noises, noxious odors or hazards that will endanger the health, safety or welfare of the community; (4) no home occupation shall display any commodity for
8
advertising purposes or for sale upon the premises; (5) no person shall be employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; (6) the use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than one third of the total square feet of floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; (7) no traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood (not to exceed ten trips per day as defined in the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers), and no signage is allowed to identify the home occupation unless required by state or federal licensing requirements in which case the sign shall be limited to one square foot in size; (8) Specific use Restrictions: A home occupation does not include: barber shop, beauty parlor, restaurant, office of a physician or dentist, mortician, dancing studio, nursery school, animal hospital, boarding kennel, nursing home, clinic, tea room, tourist home, or retail business or trade or similar occupation.
34. Hospital. An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient department, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices.
35. Hotel or Motel. A building or structure under a single management which is designed, used or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are supplied for pay to transient guests or tenants. Such hotel or motel, with or without individual kitchen or cooking facilities, may have one or more dining rooms, restaurants, cafes, or cocktail lounges where food and drink are served. To be classified as a hotel or motel, an establishment shall contain not less than ten (10) individual guest rooms, maintain an inner lobby, and furnish services such as room cleaning, linens supply, telephone, and furnishing.
36. Interval Occupancy Facility. A facility comprised of one or more dwelling units in which the exclusive right of use, possession, or occupancy of each dwelling unit circulates among eight (8) or more owners or lessees thereof in accordance with a fixed time schedule on a periodically recurring basis.
37. Kennel. Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, four (4) months or more old, are kept either permanently or temporarily for commercial or breeding purposes.
38. Liquor. Any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, or other alcoholic beverage, or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, fermented, or otherwise alcoholic and all drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures, intended for beverage purposes which contain more than one-half (½) of one percent of alcohol by volume except malt or brewed beverages as defined herein.
9
39. Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building, and including such open spaces as are required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. A lot is that land area designated by its owner or developer to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Such lot may or may not coincide with a “lot of record” and may contain two (2) or more lots of record.
40. Lot Corner. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of a street which form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is the corner.
41. Lot, Depth. The mean (average) horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured at right angles to the street line.
42. Lot, Double Frontage. A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street.
43. Lot Frontage. Lot width measured at the street lot line.
44. Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
45. Lot, Width. The mean (average) horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth, with the minimum to comply with this ordinance to be measured at the front building line.
46. Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a recorded plat or plot described by metes and bounds, the map and/or description of which has been recorded according to Alabama Law.
47. Lounge. Any place or premise operated by a responsible person of good reputation in which alcoholic beverages of all types may be offered for sale but does not meet the requirement for a Restaurant-Lounge, Restaurant-Pub, or Private Club Lounge as these establishments are defined in this Ordinance. A lounge shall have at least 1,000 square feet of floor area on one floor in one room and said floor area shall be equipped with tables and chairs capable of seating at least 50 persons. Entertainment is allowed by special exception after the building has met the standards as outlined in Article 8-6 G of this ordinance.
48. Lounge, Accessory. An accessory lounge is a lounge which is accessory to a motel or hotel having not less than 40 guest rooms and which is located within or is attached to the principal structure. Entertainment is allowed by special exception after the building has met the standards as outlined in Article 8-6 G of this ordinance.
10
49. Malt or Brewed Beverages. Any beer, lager beer, ale, porter, or similar fermented malt liquor containing one-half (½) of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and not in excess of four (4) percent alcohol by weight and five (5) percent by volume, by whatever name the same may be called.
50. Marina. A place for docking pleasure boats and, where appropriate under provisions of this ordinance, servicing and repairing such boats and providing services to the occupants thereof. A boat dock or pier serving a residential property is not considered to be a marina if it does not conduct commercial activities or provide slips or spaces for more than four (4) pleasure boats.
51. Manufactured Home. The term “Manufactured Home” shall be defined by the following regulations.
1. No Manufactured Home shall have axles, wheels, tires, trailer tongues, tail lights or license plates.
2. All Manufactured Homes must conform to local, city, county, and state regulations as they pertain to new home construction.
3. All Manufactured Homes are required to have poured foundations which run the entire perimeter of the home. Slab concrete foundations are permitted where allowed. The entire perimeter of the home will have masonry pinning, i.e. brick or concrete block laid from the foundation to the first floor level.
4. A Manufactured Home shall be no smaller than twenty four feet wide in distance at the shortest measurement of the structure. This measurement is to include only enclosed living areas and does not include garages, carports, out buildings, decks, driveways, patios or utility/storage areas.
5. The roof shall have a minimum 2:12 roof pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials, or other materials approved by the building official.
52. Mobile Home. A structure designed as a movable dwelling; built upon its own permanent chassis; transported on its own chassis (normally by towing) in one or more sections; can be occupied with or without a foundation; and contains within all of the normal utility systems: plumbing, electrical, and heating and cooling.
SINGLE SECTION MOBILE HOME: A mobile home constructed and transported as a single unit.
MULTI SECTION MOBILE HOME: A mobile home constructed and transported in more than one unit which must be joined at the site of placement into a single whole.
11
53. Mobile Home Park. Any parcel of land which is designed for or contains two (2) or more mobile home dwellings.
54. Mobile Home Dwelling. A vehicle or movable dwelling structure which is designed to be used as a dwelling unit for one (1) family and which stands on wheels, or rigid supports, or on a foundation, but excluding prefabricated homes or sections thereof and travel trailers as defined herein.
55. Nonconforming Building or Structure. A building or structure that does not conform to the area or dimensional requirements of this ordinance pertaining to the district in which it is located.
56. Nonconforming Lot. A lot which does not conform to the area and dimensional requirements of this ordinance pertaining to the district in which it is located.
57. Nonconforming Use. A use that does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
58. Package Store. Any place or premise for the principal purpose of selling, at retail, alcoholic beverages by the bottle, can, pack, or case for off-premise consumption. Should gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages exceed gross receipts from other sales and activities on the premises during any month, it shall be prima facie evidence that the principal purpose of the establishment is the sale of alcoholic beverages.
59. Parking Space, Off-Street. An all-weather surfaced area not in a street or alley and having an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and connected with a street or alley by an all-weather surfaced driveway which affords ingress and egress for an automobile without requiring another automobile to be moved.
60. Portable Building. A building which is not a dwelling unit and which has dimensions and weight permitting transport by motor vehicle. It is typically used as a temporary or accessory structure.
61. Principal Building or Use. A non-accessory building in which the principal use of the lot is contained.
62. Private Club Lounge. A corporation or association organized or formed in good faith by authority of law for the purpose of promoting national, social, patriotic, political, or athletic purposes, or the like, but not operated for pecuniary gain. Such corporation or association may serve food and beverages to members and guests; however, the serving of alcoholic beverages to members and guests is permitted only when the following conditions are met:
12
(a) The corporation or association must have at least 100 paid up members;
(b) The corporation or association must hold regular meetings, continue its business through officers regularly elected; and
(c) The corporation or association admits members only by written application, investigation and ballot and charge and collect dues from elected members.
63. PUD. A planned unit development approved under procedures set forth in Article 8 of this ordinance.
64. Restaurant, Fast Food. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of quickly prepared food and non-alcoholic beverages which may be served to the consumer at a counter for consumption on the premises or served to the consumer at a pick-up window for consumption in an automobile or at another location. A fast food restaurant delivers food and beverages in disposable wrappers, bags, cups, bags or containers along with disposable utensils for eating and drinking.
65. Restaurant, Lounge. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages, including liquor and other alcoholic beverages, and which meets the following requirements:
(a) has a dining area not less than 800 square feet in area equipped with tables, chairs, and/or booths sufficient to seat at least 50 people at one time;
(b) has a kitchen separate and apart from said dining area, but adjoining same, in which food is prepared for consumption on the premises;
(c) Serves at least one meal per day for at least five (5) days each week with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of renovation;
(d) During any 90-day period, the gross receipts from the serving of meals and non-alcoholic beverages shall constitute more than fifty (50) percent of gross receipts of the restaurant’s business.
(e) Entertainment is allowed by special exception after the building has met the standards as outlined in Article 8-6 G of this ordinance.
66. Restaurant, Pub. Any place or premise in which food, refreshments, and malt or brewed beverages and/or table wines (but not liquor) are offered for sale for consumption within the building in which the establishment is located, which is operated by a person of good reputation and which meets the following additional requirements:
13
(a) a kitchen separate and apart from said dining area, but adjoining the same, in which food is prepared for consumption by the public and in which the food or meals served in said dining room are prepared;
(b) At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating;
(c) Such place shall be duly licensed by the ABC Board of the State of Alabama for the sale of malt or brewed beverages and/or table wines for on-premises consumption;
(d) The serving of such food or meals shall constitute the principal business of such establishment, with the serving of malt or brewed beverages and/or table wines being only an incidental part of said business. During any 90-day period, the gross receipts from the serving of meals and food shall constitute more than fifty percent of the gross receipts of the business.
(e) Entertainment is allowed by special exception after the building has met the standards as outlined in Article 8-6 G of this ordinance.
67. Restaurant, Standard. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics: (1) customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their foods and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which food and beverages are consumed; (2) a cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building.
68. Rooming House. A dwelling where lodging is provided for compensation for from six (6) to ten (10) persons, who are not members of a family occupying that dwelling unit, who do not occupy the dwelling as a single housekeeping unit, and who do not take their meals on the premises.
69. Special Exception. A use which may be allowed within a zoning district subject to provisions of this ordinance and in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article13 of this ordinance.
70. Structural Alterations. Any change, except the repair or replacement, in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or the rearrangement of any interior partitions affecting more than five (5) percent of the floor area of the building.
14
71. Townhouse. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family and attached to two (2) or more other buildings of similar design and separated by one (1) or more party walls. A townhouse building group consists of three or more attached townhouses.
72. Travel Trailer or Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle less than forty (40) feet in length and used for temporary or recreational living, or sleeping purposes, and standing on wheels, whether self-propelled or requiring a separated vehicle for power.
73. Tavern. Any place or premise operated by a responsible person for good reputation in which malt or brewed beverages and/or table wines (but not liquor) are offered for sale for on-premises consumption, but which does not meet the requirements for a Restaurant-Lounge, Restaurant-Pub, Private Club-Lounge or Lounge, as these establishments are defined in this Ordinance.
74. Upper-Story Apartment. A dwelling located in the upper story of a building where the ground floor is devoted to commercial or institutional uses.
75. Use. Any purpose for which buildings or other structures or land may be arranged, designed, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any occupation, business, activity or operation carried on or intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on land.
76. Variance. A variance is a relaxation of certain regulations contained in this ordinance where such variance shall not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
77. Veterinary Hospital. A facility operated by a licensed veterinarian specifically for the practice of veterinary medicine.
78. Wine. All beverages made from the fermentation of fruits, berries, or grapes, with or without added spirits and produced in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States containing not more than twenty-four percent (24%) alcohol by volume, and shall include all sparkling wines, carbonated wines, special natural wines, re-tified wines, vermouths, vinous beverages, vinous liquors and like products. Fortified Wine: Any wine containing more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume, but not more than twenty-four percent (24%). Table Wine: Any wine containing not more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume.
79. Yard. An open space between a building or use and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or use from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in Article 8. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. A required yard shall mean a yard the depth of which is specified in the “Area and Dimensional Regulations” pertaining to the district in which such yard is required to be provided.
15
80. Yard, Front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.
81. Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines. On all lots the rear yard shall be in the rear of the front yard.
82. Yard, Side. A yard between the main building and the side lot line and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard.
16
ARTICLE 6
DISTRICT PURPOSES
6-1. District Purposes
A. E-1 Estate District. This residential district is intended for individual dwellings on relatively large lots in areas where low density is appropriate because of neighborhood living patterns and the character of the natural environment.
B. E-2 Estate District. This district is provided to afford the opportunity for the choice of a low density residential environment consisting of a single family home on a large lot.
C. RS-1 Single-Family Residential District. The purpose and intent of the RS-1 Residential District is to protect areas which are, or are planned to be, developed for traditional single-family detached dwellings at low densities in spacious surroundings.
D. RS-2 Single-Family Residential District. The purpose and intent of the RS-2 Residential District is to protect areas which are, or are planned to be, developed for traditional single-family detached dwellings at moderate single family densities.
E. RS-3 Single-Family Residential District. The purpose and intent of the RS-3 Residential District is to protect areas which are, or are planned to be, developed for single-family dwellings at relatively high single-family residential densities.
F. RM-1 Multi-Family District. This district is applied to certain older, single-family areas of the City where a transition to moderate density housing is already established, or to undeveloped areas where moderate density housing would include detached and attached single-family dwelling units which may be placed on relatively small lots, or multi-family structures in which dwelling units may be rented as apartments or owned by their occupants. Densities differ between the various housing types permitted but the maximum density will not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre.
G. RM-2 Multi-Family District. This district is applied primarily to areas where moderate density housing, including high-rise multi-family structures, would be appropriate. Generally, areas included within this district would be relatively undeveloped and would offer scenic views of the lake and surrounding mountains. The district can be applied to certain older transitional areas having similar locational advantages. As more retired people and seasonal residents are attracted to the City, the availability of dwelling units in high-rise structures will meet the need of households who desire their security and amenities.
17
H. O & I Office and Institutional District. This district is intended for locations suitable for non-residential uses but in which development must be in harmony with residential or institutional environments. It is intended that buildings be surrounded by spacious, landscaped grounds and that signs be limited in size and location to minimize commercial impact. Locations for this district will be found in transitional areas between neighborhoods and more intensive uses, along thoroughfares where most intensive types of development would be undesirable, or in areas where development permitted under this district exists or is planned.
I. PU Public District. This district is intended to provide locations for special public and semi-public uses which can exist compatibly with surrounding or nearby non-public uses. It will have particular application for waterfront land where nearby development is primarily residential in character. It should also be used to provide locations for public and semi-public uses which may require relatively small sites within predominantly residential areas provided that such public and semi-public uses can blend harmoniously into their surroundings with appropriate architectural treatment of buildings and the provision of open spaces and other amenities. The size of the district may be small accommodating the requirements of a single public or semi-public use or it may be large enough to accommodate the needs of a number of public uses or semi-public uses.
J. BR Restricted Business District. This district is intended to protect areas of historic significance, or other areas, where a limited mixture of residential and non-residential uses is appropriate, but only when such mixture is in harmony with the general character of the district. Regulations for this district are intended to minimize the visual impact of non-residential uses.
K. BL Local Business District. This district is intended to provide locations for retail shops and personal service establishments serving the needs of surrounding residents and having trade areas generally less than citywide in extent. Business establishments may be within a unified center or on individual parcels and shall be served with off-street parking and loading facilities.
L. BG-1 General Business District. This district is intended to provide locations for motels, restaurants, and other uses, including retail trades and services, which are compatible. Trade areas for these establishments are generally citywide or greater. Regulations are designed to establish an appropriate environment for those businesses which require an attractive appearance of building and premises for the successful conduct of business.
18
M. BG-1A General Business District. The purposes of this district include those set forth for the BG-1 General Business District and, in addition, establishes locations for establishments selling and serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. Because it establishes locations for such establishments, and the need to insure compatibility with surrounding uses, this district may be limited in size where necessary to protect residential or other uses from possible adverse impacts.
N. BG-1B General Business District. The purposes of this district include those set forth for the BG-1 General Business District and, in addition, establishes locations for establishments selling and serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. Because it establishes locations for such establishments, and the need to insure compatibility with surrounding uses, this district may be limited in size where necessary to protect residential or other uses from possible adverse impacts. This district is for lots facing a major street and where there is an existing city alley in the back.
O. BG-1R General Business District. The purpose of this district is to provide locations for restaurants whose principal business is the sale of food and also to allow the sale of alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the consumption of meals. Such restaurant may have a bar which is located in the same building as the main restaurant, shall not exceed 20% of gross floor area of the main restaurant, and shall be owned and operated by the owners of the main restaurant.
.
P. BG-2 General Business District. The intent of this district is to provide locations for a broad range of commercial activities serving the needs of residents, businesses, industry, and transients. In addition to retail trades and services, permitted uses would include commercial services, warehousing, wholesaling, and some light industrial operations which are not characterized by frequent heavy trucking activity, unenclosed storage areas for materials or equipment, or the generation of dust, odor, vibration or noise. Districts would typically exist along major thoroughfares or highways where similar uses now exist or are planned to exist.
Q. BG-2A General Business District. The purposes of this district include those set forth for the BG-2 General Business District and, in addition, establishes locations for establishments selling and serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. The size and locations of such districts should insure compatibility with surrounding uses.
R. BC Central Business District. This district establishes regulations designed to meet the particular needs of the two original commercial centers of the City. Commercial development within these centers is characterized by abutting buildings with little or no setbacks from the street right-of-way lines. This development pattern provides for little or no off-street parking to serve individual establishments. Regulations for the District recognize the historic pattern of development by area and dimensional
19
requirements and eliminating off-street parking requirements for lots developed in the characteristic manner of the old commercial centers. It is not intended that this District extend beyond the development pattern of the old commercial centers.
S. BW Waterfront Business District. This district is intended to provide locations for marinas, boat sales and service, piers, sale of boating and fishing supplies, and other related businesses and recreational activities.
T. I-1 Light Industrial District. The purpose of this district is to provide suitable locations for industrial activities which are clean, quiet, free from hazardous or objectionable emissions, and do not generate heavy truck traffic. Industrial parks and industries desiring attractive surroundings are encouraged in this district.
U. I-2 Heavy Industrial District. This district is intended for industrial activities which require special locations resulting from the employment of heavy equipment or machinery; emission of odors, noise, vibration, glare or other nuisances; appearance of premises and structures; generation of heavy truck traffic; and site requirements.
V. PUD. Planned Unit Development. See page 36
W. HCC. Historical and Cultural Overlay District. See page 53
X. MHP. Mobile Home Park District. See page 38
Y. TND. Traditional Neighborhood Development. See page 56
20
ARTICLE 7
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND USES
Within the Zoning Districts established there are certain uses permitted, density limitations imposed, and special requirements set forth. The following pages contain specific regulations for each district including uses permitted, uses prohibited, required lot area, density limitations, setbacks, and height limitations and uses permitted.
7-1. Schedule of Permitted Uses
A. The Table of Permitted Uses consists of a list of uses on its left side and columns for all districts on its right side. Letters located in a column, opposite a listed use, identify the district in which such use is permitted and conditions for such use. The letter “R” identifies the district in which a use is permitted by right. The letters “SE” identify the district in which a use is permitted only by special exception. The letter “H” identifies uses which may be permitted in a BR Restricted Business District only when such uses are found to be compatible with the general character of existing development within the district under procedures outlined in Article 8.
B. Asterisk (*) indicates the use is subject to requirements as forth in Supplemental Regulations, Article 8.
C. If a use is not specifically referred to in the Table, its status shall be determined by the Building Inspector by reference to the most clearly analogous use or uses that are specifically referred to in the Table of Permitted Uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment. When the status of a use has been so determined by the Building Inspector, such determination shall thereafter have general application to all uses of the same type.
D. Districts designated for Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) shall be subject to the use regulations set forth in Article 8-12 Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) District.
21
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES A. RESIDENTIAL USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM 1* RM2* PUD * O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
1. Single-Family Dwelling
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
2. Single-Family Patio Home
R
R
R
H
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
3. Single-Family Townhouse
R
R
R
H
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
4. Single-Family Duplex
R
R
R
H
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
5. Single-Family Lot Line Detached
R
R
R
H
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
6. Zero Lot Line
R
R
R
H
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
7. Multi-Family Dwelling **
R
R
R
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
8. Upper Story Apartment
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
9. Bed & Breakfast Inn
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
10. Family Care Home
SE
SE
SE
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
11. Rooming and Boarding Homes
SE
SE
SE
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
SE
12. Manufactured Houses
R
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
*See Article 8, Supplemental Regulations for uses A2 through A7
**See Article 8, Limits on Condominiums/Multi-Family Dwellings in Commercial Districts
***See Article 8, Supplemental Regulations for Traditional Neighborhood Development
22
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
A. Lodging Facilities
Hotels/Motels
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
B. Agricultural
Commercial greenhouse and/or plant nursery
R
R
Farmer’s Market
R
C. Incidental Uses
Incidental accessory retail uses and services such as food service, gift or novelty shops, soda bars, barber and beauty shops, children’s day care facilities, and similar activities, conducted primarily for the convenience of employees, patients, patrons, or visitors, provided these activities are carried on wholly within a principal building and are not advertised to the general public by exterior signs or other advertising display.
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
D. Institutional, Public and Semi-Public
Day nurseries and kindergarten meeting all requirements of appropriate state regulations and standards
R
R
H
R
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
Libraries, community centers, public parks and playgrounds, museums, art galleries, legitimate theaters, artistic programs for events
R
R
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Public and semi-public buildings used exclusively for public purposes but excluding those of an industrial nature such as garages, repair or storage yards, warehouses, buildings used as correctional institutions, and industrial type operations of any kind
R
R
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Public and semi-public buildings used exclusively for public purposes including open storage of materials and equipment as accessory use when screened from public view.
R
R
Essential Services
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Radio and television stations and transmitting towers
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
R
R
Radio and television stations excluding transmission towers
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Public utility storage yard
R
R
23
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
Assembly hall, convention centers, coliseums owned by
non-profit organizations or by the State, City or County governments
R
R
R
Convention Centers
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Charitable and philanthropic organizations
R
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Convalescent and nursing homes and homes for the aged
R
SE
R
R
R
R
R
R
Hospitals
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Lodges, fraternal and social organizations, headquarters for scout and other youth organizations
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Medical and dental offices and clinics excluding veterinarians
R
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Veterinarian Clinics
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Penal and correctional institutions
R
Churches and other places of worship including Sunday school buildings, parish houses and other residences of clergy
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
R
R
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
City incinerators, dumps, and landfills
SE
SE
E. Commercial, Retail Sales
1. Food, Drink and Drugs
Grocery, delicatessen, supermarket or other store carrying a variety of food and related goods
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Food specialty store, including but not limited to the following lines: Meat (excluding slaughtering and eviscerating), fish, eggs, poultry (excluding slaughtering), fruit, vegetables, candy, nuts, coffee, tea, confection, dairy products, health food, and bakery (retail)
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Sale of liquor, wine, or beer not to be consumed on the premises
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Drugs or cosmetic store, including sale of goods and services customarily incidental thereto
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
2. Apparel and Clothing
Department Store
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Variety Store
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Apparel, clothing and shoe store
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
3. Hardware, Household Goods and Furnishings
Hardware, paint, wallpaper, fabrics, upholstery supplies, curtains, linens, knitting supplies, china, glass, pottery
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
24
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
Furniture, floor covering, appliances
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Sale of antiques at retail
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Sale of second-hand goods excluding materials held only for discard or reprocessing
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
4. Personal Goods
Specialty stores selling or renting goods predominantly at retail on the premises, including but not limited to the following lines: tobacco, news, books, stationary, gifts, cards, novelties, flowers, jewelry, luggage, optical goods, sporting goods, bicycles, pets, hobbies, toys, coins, stamps, photo supplies, art supplies, works of art, music, musical instruments, hobby goods
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Products of artists and craftsmen provided that areas for the production of such products do not exceed a floor space of four hundred square feet
R
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
5. Farm and Garden Supplies
Farm and garden supplies, including nursery stock, feed and grain
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
6. Automotive, Marine
Sale of automotive accessories, parts, tires, batteries, and other supplies.
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Gasoline service stations and convenience stores selling gasoline when complying with the following conditions:
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
(1) unless otherwise permitted within the district in which the establishment is located, the following activities are prohibited:
(a) painting, body work, major repair, dismantling for the recovery of parts, or storage of vehicles for more than five days;
(b) has lighting facilities so arranged, designed and shielded that they do not unreasonably disturb occupants of neighboring residential properties or interfere with traffic;
(2) Such establishments must:
(a) Be located on a lot having a minimum area not less than 15,000 square feet and a minimum frontage of 100 feet.
(b) Have no driveway within 20 feet of the intersection of any two street right-of-way lines.
(c) Have no gasoline pump island nearer than 15 feet to any street right-of-way line.
25
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
Rental of Automobiles
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Rental of trucks, trailers, and heavy equipment
R
R
R
R
R
Sale of new or used automobiles, mobile homes, boats, motorcycles, equipment prefabricated homes, and similar commodities, provided that: only commodities used for display shall be located within any required front year; for every four (4) square feet of unenclosed or unscreened display area there shall be not less than one (1) square foot of landscaped area within or bordering the display area; and all commodities which are not on display shall be screened from public view by an approved fence of uniform construction not less than six (6) feet in height, or by other acceptable buffering. Landscaping within the bordering and display area shall be planted with grass, shrubs, and/or trees and maintained in a healthy condition. Planted areas shall be protected from moving vehicles by curbs or other acceptable barriers.
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
7. Other Retail
Monument sales establishment, with incidental processing to order but excluding the shaping of stones & similar processing.
R
R
Office equipment & supplies; restaurant equipment & supplies
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Pre-fabricated home sales
R
R
Orthopedic braces, artificial limbs, orthopedic equipment and supplies
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
F. Commercial Services
1. Food, Beverage, Personal and Consumer Service
Barber and beauty shops, shoe repair shops, travel agencies, photographers, tailor, dressmaker, artist studio, picture framing, and similar personal services
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Health studio or club, reducing salon
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Laundromats, laundry or dry cleaning pickup stations, dyer, clothing storage
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Standard and fast food restaurants
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Accessory lounges, restaurant lounges, restaurant pubs
R
R
SE
R
R
Lounges, private club lounges, taverns
R
R
R
R
Funeral parlors, mortuaries
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
26
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
Caterers
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Music or dancing school, athletic instruction when contained within a building
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Upholstery shops
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
2. Amusement and Recreation Services
Establishments so arranged that noise, vibration, lights, and all other possible disturbing aspects connected with their operation are enclosed, screened, or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of the establishment will not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties in the surrounding area, as follows:
Theater, excluding drive-in
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Drive-in theater
R
R
R
Skating rink
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Billiard or pool hall, bowling alley
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Amusement park, amusement arcade, kiddie land
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Miniature golf courses and driving ranges
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Golf Course
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
SE
R
Indoor tennis or racquetball clubs or establishments
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
G. Financial, Professional, Business and Administrative Services
Banks and financial institutions
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Broker, investment company
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Insurance company
R
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Office: professional, business, administrative, executive, and other offices having no storage of stock in trade (other than samples) or heavy equipment, and no sale of commodities on the premises
R
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Offices incidental to a permitted use
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Patrol system and burglar alarm watching service
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Credit bureaus
H
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Printing, engraving, mailing, telephone answering service, telegraph or messenger service
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
27
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
H. Repair, Decorating, Construction Services
Repair shop for repairs or adjustments to bicycles, small appliances, watches, locks, musical instruments, guns, and similar items, conducted wholly within a building with no outside storage of materials or equipment.
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Furniture and appliance repairer, home improvements company, interior decorator, upholsterer, general contractor or workman, with all storage of goods and materials and all processing and manufacturing kept within a completely enclosed building or buildings.
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Repair of motor vehicles carried on completely within a structure and having no outside storage of vehicles or parts of vehicles except those to be serviced or repaired for retail customers. Such storage shall be clearly incidental to the principal business and time of such storage shall not exceed one week for each vehicle.
R
R
R
R
Building, electrical and plumbing contractors with all outside storage of goods, materials and equipment screened from public view by an approved fence not less than eight (8) feet in height, or by other acceptable buffering. Such fence or buffering shall not intrude upon any required front or street side yard.
R
R
R
R
I. Boat Storage, Service and Repair
Dockage and wet storage of pleasure craft
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Dry storage of pleasure boats
SE
R
R
Dockage of permitted commercial vessels shall be allowed solely as a subordinate use to an adjoining hotel, motel, or multi-family complex having in excess of 30 dwelling units
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Sale of boat fuels, bait, fishing equipment and supplies including sports diving equipment
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Sale and repair of pleasure craft and pleasure craft motors and associated equipment
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Construction, repair and storage of commercial vessels
SE
R
R
Sales of all manner of water craft & associated equip & supplies
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
One dwelling unit for use by owner or lessee of a marina
SE
R
R
28
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
J. Commercial, Wholesale, Distribution and Other
Services
Wholesaling or distribution, including the handling of stock and incidental retail with all outside storage of goods, materials and equipment screened from public view by an approved fence of uniform construction, not less than six (6) feet in height, or by other acceptable buffering. Such fence or buffering shall not intrude upon any required front or street side yard.
R
R
R
R
Mini storage facilities for the storage of personal property
R
R
R
R
R
R
Plant for cleaning, laundering, dyeing
R
R
Commercial kennel or other establishment where the care, breeding or sale of animals is the principal purpose of the enterprise, with no animals to be located within 500 feet of any residentially zoned property or fifty feet from any property line.
R
R
R
R
Blueprinting, printing, engraving, or other reproduction services limited to 2.500 square feet of floor space.
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Car Wash
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Building, plumbing and electrical supplies with all outside storage of goods, materials and equipment screened from public view by an approved fence of uniform construction, not less than six (6) feet in height or by other acceptable buffering. Such fence or buffering shall not intrude upon any required front yard or street side yard.
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Newspaper publishing
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Newspaper or magazine distribution racks
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Newspaper or magazine distribution
R
R
R
R
K. Transportation
On site parking lot for employees, customers, or visitors for any business or industrial use, provided that no parking facility for nonresidential uses shall be permitted within a residential district unless it is used to meet the parking requirements of a use permitted in the residential district in which such facility is located
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Taxi dispatching station
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Taxi terminal
R
R
R
R
Bus passenger station (intercity)
SE
SE
R
29
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
Storage of commercial vehicles (where not an accessory use to another use which is permitted)
R
R
R
R
Barge or truck terminal
R
R
Heliport
R
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
R
R
Express office
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Airport
R
L. Light Industrial
Manufacturing or industrial operations which do not emit detectable dust, odor, smoke, gas or fumes beyond the bounding property lines of the lot or tract upon which the use is located and which do not generate noises or vibrations perceptible in frequency or pressure above the ambient level of noise in areas lying beyond the zone district boundaries in which such operations are located including the following:
Candy products and manufacture
R
R
R
R
Bottling works and soft drinks
R
R
R
R
Clothing Manufacture
R
R
Dairy products processing, bottling and distribution, cream manufacture, all on a wholesale basis
R
R
Furniture manufacturing
R
R
The manufacture and sale at retail or wholesale of those handicrafts which are manufactured predominately by hand and involve the application of artistic skill occupying a gross floor area of not more than 2,000 square feet and with no outside storage of materials
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
R
R
Food processing in wholesale quantity but excluding meat, fish, poultry, vinegar and yeast
R
R
Processing in wholesale quantity of meat, fish and poultry but excluding slaughtering of meat or poultry
R
R
Industrial Research and Educational Facilities
R
R
R
R
Leather Good Manufacture
R
R
Optical and Scientific Instrument Manufacture
R
R
R
R
Pharmaceutical Manufacture
R
R
R
R
Plumbing Shops
R
R
R
R
Machine Shops
SE
SE
R
R
30
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG 2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
Sign Manufacture
R
R
Tire recapping and retreading
R
R
R
R
Electrical equipment assembly
R
R
R
R
Woodworking and planning mill with dust and noise control
R
R
Textile manufacture with dust and odor control
R
R
Ceramic and pottery manufacture with dust, odor and fume control
R
R
Plastic products manufacture with dust and fume control
R
R
Paint, oil, shellac and lacquer manufacture when hoods and fume destructors are used in the cooking process
R
R
Grain processing with hoods, dust and odor controls
R
R
Electroplating or battery making with acid, fume & odor controls
R
R
Manufacturing or industrial operations of any type which meet the general conditions set forth above and which are not offensive by reason of emission of noise, odor, smoke, gas fumes or dust
R
R
Manufacturing or industrial operations which meet the general conditions set forth above, employ no more than 20 workers, occupy no more than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area, and which can fit compatibly within its surrounding environment.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
M. Objectionable Uses
The following uses, or manufacture, compounding processing, packaging or treatment of the following products, having accompanying nuisances or hazards, such as fire, explosion, noise, glare, vibration, dust, or the emission of smoke, odor, or toxic gases, may be located in the I-2 Industrial district after site plan review, as provided in Article 8, and a determination by the City Council that such uses will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, will be properly protected, and that necessary safeguards will be provided for the protection of surrounding property, persons, and areas of critical environmental concern.
31
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES E1 E2 RS1 RS2 RS3 RM1 RM2 PUD O&I PU BR BL BG1 BG 1A BG 1B BG 1R BG 2 BG 2A BC BW I-1 I-2
Chemical, Petroleum, Coal, and Allied Products:
Acids and derivatives - Acetylene, generation and storage - Ammonia - Caustic soda - Cellulose and cellulose storage - Chlorine - Coke oven products (including fuel gas) and coke oven products storage - Creosote - Distillation, manufacture, or refining of coal, tar asphalt, wood, and bones - Explosives (including ammunition and fireworks) and explosives storage - Fertilizer (organic) - Fish oils and meal - Glue, gelatin (animal) - Hydrogen and oxygen - lamp black, carbon black - Nitrating or cotton or other materials - Nitrates (Manufactured and natural) of an explosive nature, and storage - Petroleum, gasoline, and lubrication oil refining, and wholesale storage - Plastic materials and synthetic resins - Potash - Pyroxylin - Rending and storage of dead animals; offal, garbage, or waste products - Turpentine and resin.
SE
Clay, Stone, and Glass Products: Brick, firebrick, refractories, and clay products (coal fired) - cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris - minerals earths; quarrying, extracting, grinding, crushing, and processing.
SE
Food and Beverage: Fat rendering - Fish curing - Slaughtering of animals - Starch manufacture
SE
Metals and Metal Products: Aluminum powder and paint manufacture - blast furnace, cupolas - Blooming mills - metal and metal ores; reduction, refining, smelting, and alloying - Scrap metal reduction
SE
Wood and Paper Products: Match manufacture - Wood pulp and fibre, reduction and processing.
SE
Unclassified Industries and Uses: Cotton ginning - Cotton seed oil refining - Hair, hides, and raw fur; curing, tanning, dressing, dyeing, and storage - shell dredging - Stockyard.
SE

33
7-2. Schedule of Dimensional Requirements
The following regulations govern the minimum lot size, minimum lot width at building line, yard setback and height for each district subject to exceptions set forth in Supplemental Regulations (Article 8) and other modifications as noted in the footnotes below the matrix.
MATRIX AREA & DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
Zone Districts Maximum Building Height (stories) Minimum Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Minimum Lot Width Front Set. Back Line (ft.) Minimum Yard Req. Front Minimum Yard Req. Rear Minimum Yard Req. Side (Ft.) Minimum Yard Req. Street Side (Ft.) E-1
(2½) 35'
43,560
150'
75'
75'
25'
30' E-2
(2½) 35'
21,780
125'
50'
50'
15'
20' RS-1
(2½) 35'
15,000
100'
40'
30'
15'
20' RS-2
(2½) 35'
10,500
75'
35'
30'
10'
20' RS-3
(2) 30'
7,500
50'
30'
20’
5'
15' RM-1
REFERENCE SECTION 8-1 RM-2 PUD* O&I
NONE
20,000
150'
60'
30'
20'
30' PU
3
40,000
200'
45'
25'
20'
30' BR
1
10,000
75'
45'
20'
20'
45' BL
2
10,000
50'
45'
20'
NONE
45' BG-1
NONE
7,000
50'
45'
20'
5’
20' BG-1A
NONE
7,000
50'
45'
20'
5’
20' BG-1B
NONE
7,000
50’
45’
5’
5’
20’ BG-1R
NONE
7,000
50'
45'
20'
5’
20' BG-2
NONE
7,000
50'
45'
20'
5’
20' BG-2A
NONE
7,000
50'
45'
20'
5’
20' BC
2
2,500
25'
NONE
NONE
NONE
NONE BW
3
40,000
200'
45'
25'
20'
30' I-1
NONE
10,000
100'
45'
30'
15'
20' I-2
NONE
15,000
100'
45'
40'
20'
20'
* See Article 8
34
ARTICLE 8
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
8-1 Development of Various Housing Types in RM-1, RM-2, and PUD’s, and TND
A. Maximum Number of Dwelling Units per Acre (Excluding Street
Rights-of-Way)
RM-1/
RM-2
PUD
Single-family detached dwelling units
4.84
6.22
Duplex dwelling units
6.22
7.26
Lot line detached dwelling units
7.26
7.26
Patio house dwelling units
8.71
8.71
Townhouse dwelling units
8.71
8.71
Multi-family dwelling units
10.00
10.00*
* See Section 8-1, C-8 for exceptions
B. Maximum Building Height, Maximum Floor Area, and Maximum Lot Coverage by Principal and Accessory Structures (See Section 8-1, C-8 for exceptions)
RM-1/RM-2
PUD
Height
2 stories/30 feet
2 stories/30 feet
Floor Area
40 percent of lot area
40 percent of lot area
Building Coverage
25 percent of lot area
25 percent of lot area
C. Area and Dimensional Requirements
1. Single-Family Detached Dwelling Unit
RM-1/
RM-2
PUD
Minimum lot area
9,000 sq. ft.
7,000 sq. ft.
Minimum yards
Front
30'
25'
Interior side
10'
8'
Street side
15'
12'
Rear
30'
25'
Minimum width at building line
60'
50'
35
2. Duplex Structure. A duplex structure is a single building, located on a single lot, that contains two contiguous and independent dwelling units separated by a common wall and sharing a common roof and foundation.
RM-1/
RM-2
PUD
Minimum lot area
14,000 sq. ft.
14,000 sq. ft.
Minimum yards
Front
30'
25'
Interior side
10'
8'
Street side
15'
12'
Rear
30'
25'
3. Lot Line Detached Dwelling Unit. This dwelling type is a single-family, fully detached dwelling unit which is located on an individual lot and is set on one side lot line, the rear lot line, or one side lot line and the rear lot line. Before approval is given to a project containing this type of dwelling unit, assurance must be given that a maintenance easement, not less than five feet in width is provided on the neighboring lot of any lot line building wall. As an alternative, the dwelling unit may be set back from the lot line not less than five feet and a use easement may be granted to the adjoining lot.
RM-1/
RM-2
PUD
Minimum Lot Area
6,000 sq. ft.
6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Yards
Front
20'
20'
Interior side
20'
20'
Street side
15'
15'
Rear
0'
0'
36
4. Patio House Dwelling Unit. This is a detached or attached single-family dwelling unit which is located on an individual lot. Living rooms, dens, and bedrooms typically face into the yard or “patio area”. Walls and buildings are typically set back at least 15 feet from any street right-of-way line. When individual patio house lots are smaller than 5,000 square feet, the difference in ground area between that occupied by all individual lots and that required for the total number of patio houses in a project shall be in open space commonly shared by all project residents.
Number of Bedrooms
Same requirements for RM-1,
RM-2 & PUD
1
2
3 or more
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)
One Story
2,500
3,000
3,500
Two Story
2,200
2,600
3,000
Minimum Patio Area (Square Feet)
1,000
1,250
1,500
Minimum Lot Width (Feet)
38
42
46
5. Zero Lot Line Dwelling Unit. This type of single-family attached dwelling unit, on its own lot, abuts or is attached to a similar type of dwelling unit on an adjoining lot along a common interior side lot line. No openings of any kind are permitted on a building wall which is contiguous to the common interior side lot line.
RM-1/
RM-2
PUD
Minimum Lot Area
7,000 sq. ft.
12,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Yards
Front
30'
25'
One side yard
20'
16'
Rear
30'
25'
37
6. Townhouse Dwelling Unit. This type of dwelling unit is attached to not less than two (2) nor more than five (5) similar types of dwelling units, each of which has its own front and back yard, and each of which is separated from a joining dwelling units by a common party wall. Each dwelling unit occupies an individual lot and no other dwelling unit occupies any space above the ground area of such lot. The total land area of a townhouse project must provide a minimum of 5,000 square feet for each townhouse dwelling unit in a PUD. When individual townhouse dwelling units occupy lots with less area, the difference in ground area contained within the individual lots and that required for the total number of dwelling units, must be devoted to open space commonly shared by all project residents. Such commonly shared open space must be located within the project area.
RM-1/
RM-2
PUD
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
1 bedroom
2,800
2,400
2 bedrooms
3,200
2,800
3 or more bedrooms
3,600
3,200
Minimum Yards (feet)
Front
30
20
Interior Side
0
0
Street Side
15
15
Rear
30
20
Minimum Width at Building Line (feet)
1 bedroom
20
18
2 bedrooms
24
22
3 or more bedrooms
28
25
38
7. Multi-Family Structure. A multi-family structure contains three or more dwelling units typically having access through a common entrance or hallway. In a multi-story structure, dwelling units may be located one above the other. Individual dwelling units do not occupy individual lots and generally do not have separate doors opening directly onto a front and a rear or side yard.
Same Requirements for RM-1, RM-2, & PUD
Minimum Lot Area
21,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Yards
Front
30 feet
Interior side
10 feet
Street side
15 feet
Rear
30 feet
Minimum Lot Width
100 feet
8. Exceptions to Height and Density in RM-2 and PUD’s for Multi-Family Dwellings. The maximum number of dwelling per acre shall be as follows:
Stories
Unit Per Acre
3
12
4
14
(Note: As provided in Article 8A2 above the maximum height in RM-1 Districts is 2 stories)
Condominium/Multi-Family dwellings height in any zoning district other than RM-2, if allowed, is restricted to a maximum height of 65 feet above grade and shall meet all building code requirements.
8-2. Planned Unit Development (PUD) District.
A. Designation of Districts. A Planned Unit Development District may be established for any tract with a minimum site area of five acres whose development could be undertaken as an integral unit under single ownership or control. Before the City Council shall designate or amend the boundaries of any Planned Unit Development District(s), the Planning Commission shall first submit a report to the City Council, which shall include the boundaries of the proposed district the Commissions specific intent for development within the district and how implementation of the City’s Comprehensive Plan would be furthered by such development.
39
B. Application Requirements. A conceptual site plan shall accompany each application for rezoning to the PUD District. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and dimensioned, prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect, or landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Alabama. The site plan shall show, in schematic detail, the concept for use and development of the entire PUD overlay district, including the location of the proposed uses and major buildings, the proposed residential density, housing types, dimensional standards for all lots, layout of roads, location of all entrances, and layout and configuration of all common open spaces. The site plan shall be accompanied by a brief narrative text describing the general design and architectural policies for the PUD, the treatment of environmentally sensitive lands, and the proposed time frame for phased development.
C. Permitted Uses and Development. Development of the PUD shall be in substantial accord with the approved conceptual site plan and with all other site plan and subdivision approval procedures as required by this ordinance and the subdivision regulations. There shall be permitted a mix of uses within a single development as indicated in the Schedule of Permitted Uses, Article 7-1 and Article 8-1. But within the spirit of this Ordinance and the City’s Comprehensive Plan, such uses may be relocated within the planned unit development.
8-3 Business Restricted District
A. An applicant for approval for development in this district must file an application with the Building Inspector on forms available in the Building Inspector’s office. The application should be accompanied by sketches, drawings, photographs, descriptions or other information that would enable the Planning Commission to determine the nature of proposed improvements including construction of new buildings, alteration of existing buildings, signs, driveways, trees to be retained, trees to be removed, landscaping, and other improvements or changes. The application must be filed with the Building Inspector not less than fifteen (15) days prior to a regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which the application is to be considered.
B. The burden shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate to the Planning Commission that both the use and related construction, reconstruction, alterations, and site improvements will be compatible with the general character of existing development within the Business Restricted District and with nearby residential uses.
C. After review of the application at a regular meeting, the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with modification, or disapprove the application. If the application is disapproved, the applicant may appeal the Planning Commission’s decision to the Board of Adjustment.
D. Within the BR Restricted Business District, no tree with a caliper of ten (10) inches or more shall be cut down or otherwise destroyed without the approval of the Planning Commission. After a site plan for development has been approved by the Planning Commission, the developer may remove all trees from an area to be occupied by new buildings, driveways, parking areas, and other areas on the site specifically authorized
40
by the Planning Commission.
The developer or owner of a site shall be responsible for the protection of tops, trunks and roots of existing trees on the property that are to remain. Existing trees subject to construction damage shall be boxed, fenced or otherwise protected before any work is started. Interfering branches shall be removed without injury to trunks and the area of the cut shall be covered with tree paint.
When trenching occurs around trees to remain, the tree roots shall not be cut. The trench shall be tunneled under or around the roots by careful hand digging and without injury to the roots.
When the existing grade at a tree to be retained is below the new finished grade, and fill not exceeding twelve (12) inches is required, clean washed gravel graded from 1-inch to 2-inch size shall be placed directly around the tree trunk. The gravel shall extend out from the trunk on all sides a minimum of eighteen (18) inches and finish approximately 2-inches above the finished grade at the tree trunk. Gravel shall be installed before any earth fill is placed. New earth fill shall not be left in contact with the trunks of any trees requiring fill.
Trees to be retained that are buried in fills over twelve (12) inches deep shall have an open dry well of durable masonry (without mortar) situated at least twelve (12) inches from the tree trunk. All wells are to be properly drained.
Trees to be retained in areas where the new finished grade is to be lowered, shall have regrading work done by hand to elevation as indicated on the grading plan. Roots as required shall be cut cleanly 3-inches below finished grade and scars covered with tree paint.
Trees marked for preservation that are located more than six (6) inches above proposed grades shall stand on broad rounded mounds and be graded smoothly into the lower level. Exposed or broken roots shall be cut clean and covered with topsoil.
It shall be a violation of the Ordinance for any person to cut down or destroy any tree with a caliper of ten (10) inches or more within a BR Restricted Business District, without the written approval of the Planning Commission.
8-4. MHP Mobile Home Park District
A. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide space at appropriate locations for the establishment of mobile home parks.
41
B. Uses Permitted Upon Approval of Mobile Home Park Site Plan
Mobile Home Park
Mobile home park office
Recreation buildings and playgrounds
Service facilities for the exclusive use of mobile home park residents including self service laundry.
C. Site Plan Approval
1. Site Plan. No person shall engage in the construction of a mobile home park, or make any addition or alteration to any mobile home park or facilities therein, until he has first obtained approval of a site plan from the Building Inspector.
The site plan shall be drawn to a suitable scale not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet and shall show:
- the names of the applicant, developer and property owner;
- legal description of property being developed;
- name and registration number of licensed surveyor or engineer who
prepared or certified the site plan;
- scale, north arrow, and location key map of the proposed development;
- widths of proposed rights-of-ways and easements;
- existing and proposed water supply and sewage disposal systems;
- layout of all lots with dimensions;
- parking layout;
- location of all existing or proposed structures, enclosures and facilities,
including required open areas, trash receptacles and fire hydrants.
2. Application for Building Permit. After approval of the site plan, the applicant may apply for a building permit which shall be processed in accordance with established procedures.
3. Certificate of Occupancy. Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector. The certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any portion of a partially developed mobile home park unless the owner or developer of such property has posted with the town a performance bond, satisfactory to the City Attorney guaranteeing completion of development within two years of the date of the certificate of occupancy.
42
D. Site Standards for Mobile Home Park
1. Lots within a mobile home park may be leased or rented. Lots that are proposed to be sold must be filed as a regular subdivision plat in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Guntersville.
2. The minimum area for any mobile home park is five (5) acres.
3. The maximum density shall not exceed ten (10) mobile home spaces per acre.
4. The mobile home park site shall be designed and developed to be completely surrounded by a buffer strip having a width of thirty-five (35) feet which shall have the characteristics of a yard as defined by this ordinance. The buffer strip shall be landscaped and maintained.
5. Access points shall be controlled through review of plans submitted to the Building Inspector.
6. The entire area developed shall be adequately served by water and sanitary sewer facilities meeting all requirements of the Marshall County Health Department and the City of Guntersville.
7. All mobile home sites shall abut upon a roadway having a paved surface not less than twenty (20) feet in width. All roadways shall be paved, marked, and lighted by the mobile home park owner in a manner consistent with standards established by the City of Guntersville.
8. Each mobile home park shall be provided with a park and recreation area having a minimum area of one hundred (100) square feet for each mobile home space. Such areas shall be consolidated into usable areas.
E. Mobile Home Space Standards
1. Each mobile home space shall have an area of not less than 3,200 square feet and a width of not less than thirty (30) feet. The average area of all spaces shall not be less than 3,600 square feet, and the average width of all spaces shall not be less than forty (40) feet.
2. Mobile homes shall be so located on each space that there shall be at least a twenty (20) foot clearance between mobile homes.
3. Minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be:
Front Side Rear
15 Feet 10 Feet 10 Feet
43
4. All required yards shall be permanently landscaped and maintained with ground cover, trees, and shrubs.
5. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a deck or patio of at least two hundred (200) square feet.
6. Each mobile home space shall be provided with two (2) off-street parking spaces.
F. Responsibilities of Park Owner for Tie-Downs, Anchors and Underpinning Skirting
It shall be unlawful for any person including, but without limitation, owners of mobile home parks and owners and/or occupants of mobile homes within such park, to place, maintain, or occupy any mobile home unless such mobile home is equipped with tie-downs or anchors and underpinning skirting meeting or exceeding standards of the City’s Building Code. Owners of mobile home parks shall notify the Building Inspector of the placement of any mobile home on his property. The park owner shall also notify the Building Inspector of the existence of any mobile home in his park which by visual inspection appears not to comply with the tie-down or anchor and under skirting standards of the City’s Building Code. Such notification shall be written, shall contain a statement of the nature of the possible violation, the location of the mobile home, and the name and address of the mobile home owner. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the mobile home park to notify owners of all mobile homes within such mobile home park of the requirements of this section.
8-5 General Regulations for Residential Districts
A. Lot Regulations
1. Existing Lots of Record. A single-family structure may be constructed on a nonconforming lot in any R district if said lot has less than the required area of width provided the following conditions are met:
a. No structure shall be constructed on any nonconforming lot if the owner of said lot owns any adjoining vacant land on the effective date of this ordinance which could create a conforming lot if said vacant land were combined with the lot deficient in area or width.
b. No structure shall be constructed on a nonconforming lot unless it shall have front, rear, and side yards conforming to the minimum required for the district in which said lot is located or unless a variance to yard requirements is granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
44
2. Lots to Have Street Access. No single-family residential structure or duplex shall be constructed on any lot unless it shall have frontage on a public street having a minimum right-of-way width of forty (40) feet. No townhouse group or multi-family structure shall be constructed on any lot unless it shall have frontage on a public street having a minimum right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet. In the event construction is permitted on any undeveloped street, the lot shall be within 1000 feet of an approved fire hydrant and the lot shall have street access as required above.
3. Through Lots. On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each frontage street.
4. Number of Principal Buildings on a Lot.
a. Only one (1) principal building and its customary accessory building may hereafter be erected on any lot in any single-family residential district unless otherwise approved in a planned unit development.
b. In any district where multi-family structures or townhouses are permitted, two or more multi-family structures and two or more townhouse groups may be permitted on a lot provided that such multi-family structures or townhouse groups are separated from one another not less than the following dimensions:
30 feet between two rear walls;
40 feet between a front and a rear or side wall;
50 feet between two front walls;
20 feet between two side walls;
20 feet between buildings when there are no facing walls
c. Each multi-family structure and townhouse group must be directly accessible from a public street or an unobstructed fire lane.
5. Lot Width. The minimum lot width of any lot shall be measured along the front setback line.
6. Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth of any lot shall be measured by a straight line from the midpoint of the front lot line, and perpendicular thereto, to its intersection with the rear lot line.
B. Yard Regulations
1. Projections into Yards. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky and unobstructed unless otherwise provided by this ordinance except for:
45
a. Accessory structures conforming to requirements of Section 6-3D of this ordinance.
b. Sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, ornamental features, chimneys and a porte-cochere or canopy which do not project more than 18 inches into a required yard.
c. An uncovered deck more than thirty (30) inches above the ground elevation at the rear wall projecting not more than ten (10) feet into any required rear yard.
d. Terraces, steps, and uncovered porches not higher than thirty (30) inches above the average ground level of the building wall to which they are attached and not located nearer than four (4) feet to any adjoining property line.
e. A private swimming pool located within a rear yard provided that such pool shall not be nearer than ten (10) feet to any adjoining property line.
f. Roof overhangs, not to exceed a projection into a required yard of more than three (3) feet.
g. Window air conditioning units not to exceed a projection into a required yard of eighteen (18) inches.
h. Movable awnings attached to, and supported by a building wall over doors or windows provided they do not extend nearer than five (5) feet to any lot line.
2. Corner Lot. Any corner lot shall have a side yard equal in width to the minimum front yard setback of any adjoining lot fronting on the side street. In no case, however, shall the street side yard of the corner lot be greater than the actual front yard setback of any existing principal building on the adjoining lot fronting the side street.
3. Reduced Front Yard Setback. A required front yard may be reduced where the average setback of existing buildings within 200 feet on either side of a proposed building lot, and within the same block, is less than the required minimum front yard depth. In such case, the setback on the proposed building lot may be less than the required front yard depth, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, except that in no case shall a building project beyond the average front yard of the two adjacent buildings on either side of the proposed building lot.
46
4. Two Front Yards on Through Lots. On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each frontage street.
C. Walls and Fences. All walls and fences within required yards shall conform to the following regulations:
1. Front Yards. Any portion of a wall or fence above three (3) feet in height, but not exceeding a height of six (6) feet must be constructed of wire mesh, or other suitable material, so that not less than eighty (80) percent of its surface area is open for the passage of light and air.
2. Corner Side Yards. Regulations governing walls and fences in a required corner side yard shall be the same as regulations governing front yards (see Subsection C-1 above).
3. Interior Side Yards and Rear Yards. The maximum height of a wall or fence within a required interior side yard or a rear yard shall be six (6) feet.
4. Walls and Fences Separating Residential and Nonresidential Districts. Where a side or rear lot line of a residential lot abuts a boundary of a nonresidential district, a wall or fence may be constructed to a height of eight (8) feet.
5. Walls and Fences for Housing Projects. Where the Planning Commission finds that there will be no adverse effect on adjoining properties or on visibility at street intersections, the Planning Commission may approve walls and fences not more than eight (8) feet in height to enclose part or all of a housing project, or to enclose all or portions of yards around individual residential structures within such housing projects.
6. Retaining Walls. Height limitations of this Section shall not apply to retaining walls.
D. Accessory Buildings and Structures. Customary accessory buildings or structures may be constructed in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Placement of Unattached Accessory Buildings and Structures
a. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, an unattached accessory building or structure may be constructed in a rear yard provided that:
- it is not located closer than ten (10) feet to any property line;
- does not occupy more than fifteen (15) percent of the area of the required rear yard.
47
b. Accessory swimming pools and tennis courts may be constructed in a rear yard provided that:
- no part of the swimming pool structure or paved court is located nearer than ten (10) feet to any property line;
- no part of a pool deck, platform, or screen enclosure is located nearer than six (6) feet to any property line; and the combined area of a swimming pool, tennis court, screened enclosures, decks, platforms, and all unattached accessory building does not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of a required rear yard.
2. Placement of Attached Accessory Buildings and Structures. When an accessory building or structure is located less than ten (10) feet to a principal structure, it is considered attached to the principal structure and shall comply in all respects with the yard requirements of this ordinance applicable to the principal building.
3. Dwelling Units and Guest Accommodations Prohibited. Dwelling units, guest quarter, or any other types of accommodations to house people on a permanent or temporary basis, are prohibited in accessory buildings or structures except that on lots having a land area exceeding 60,000 square feet, a single dwelling unit for permanent occupancy, and accommodations for guests in accessory buildings, may be approved by the Board of Adjustment as a special exception. (See Article 13)
4. Portable Buildings and Mobile Homes. No portable building or mobile home shall be permitted on any parcel of land, except where provided elsewhere in this ordinance, or upon approval of a temporary permit by the City Council, however, these provisions are not intended to prohibit a resident from parking his recreation vehicle on the lot of his residence.
5. Pier Houses and Boat Houses. A partially enclosed roofed structure may be built on a pier or pilings over a body of water provided that: the structure shall contain no permanent facilities for toilets, bathing or cooking and meets all applicable TVA requirements.
6. Time of Construction. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the principal building has been commenced. No accessory building shall be used unless the principal building on the lot is also being used.
E. Maximum Building Coverage. Land coverage by principal and accessory buildings or structures shall not be greater than is permitted by the regulations governing the district in which such buildings or structures are located.
48
F. Corner Visibility. On a corner lot, there shall be no structure or planting which materially obstructs traffic visibility between the height of two (2) feet and ten (10) feet above the street corner grade, within the triangular space founded by the two (2) intersecting right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting the right-of-way lines fifteen (15) feet from their intersection.
8-6. Area Dimensional and General Requirements for Nonresidential Districts
A. Additional Side Yard Setbacks for Buildings Exceeding Two Stories in Height in the BG-1, BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-1R, BG-2, and BG-2A General Business Districts. Any building within a BG-1, BG-1A, BG-1R, BG-2, or BG-2A General Business District exceeding two stories in height shall have two side yards with a total width equaling ten (10) feet for each story in height and no one side yard having a width of less than ten (10) feet plus two (2) feet for each story in height.
B. Exception to Building Height Limitation in a Central Business District. A building in a BC Central Business District may exceed two (2) stories in height provided that requirements for off-street parking and loading, set forth in Article 11 of this Ordinance are complied with.
C. Additional Requirements for Side Yard.
1. If a side yard contains a driveway passing between a structure and an interior lot line, such side yard shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet.
2. In districts where side yards are not required, if a side yard is provided, it shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet.
D. Corner Visibility. On a corner lot, there shall be no structure or planting which materially obstructs traffic visibility between the height of 2 feet and 10 feet above the street corner grade, with a triangular space bounded by the two intersecting right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting the right-of-way lines 20 feet from their intersection.
E. Buffering Between Residential and Nonresidential Developments. Where development within a nonresidential district abuts the boundary of a residential district, suitable buffering will be required to protect the residential environment. Such buffering shall consist of a wall, fence, shrubs, or trees, in such combination, and on an easement of such width, that adjoining residences shall not be unduly disturbed by the visual intrusion of commercial or industrial activities, windblown trash or noise.
F. Exceptions for Atriums. The floor space occupied by an atrium shall not be included in determining ground coverage or floor space of a building provided that the atrium floor is treated as open space, open and unobstructed from the floor to the roof of the building or the sky, and provided that the floor space is not divided by walls or petitions and is used only for landscaping, art display, pedestrian promenade, informal assembly, facilities for public convenience such as serving areas for food and beverages (excluding food preparation areas) benches, seats, and advertising of events and
49
facilities. Not more than twenty-five percent of the atrium floor space may be used for serving food and beverages. Food and beverage service areas may be partially enclosed by a decorative fence or protective barrier not exceeding forty (40) inches in height. No food preparation areas shall extend onto that portion of the atrium floor that was excluded from the determination of building coverage.
G. General Requirements for Buildings Providing Entertainment.
1. The building is to be constructed with sound absorbing materials installed
in all exterior walls and the ceiling. The sound material is to be of a
quantity that the sound produced inside does not exceed the requirements
of the sound ordinance.
2. The building is to be 300 feet from any residential area.
H. Reduced Yard Setback. A required yard may be reduced where the average setback of existing buildings within 200 feet on either side of a proposed building lot, and within the same block, is less than the required minimum yard depth. In such case, the setback on the proposed building lot may be less than the required yard depth, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, except that in no case shall a building project beyond the average front yard of the two adjacent buildings on either side of the proposed building lot.
8-7. Mountainside and Steep Slope Development Regulations
In areas of Steep Slopes a site plan adequately addressing soil erosion, landslides and storm water drainage is required for all developments; said plan is to be made by an Alabama Licensed Engineer and shall be approved by the Planning Commission. The following standards shall apply:
A. Slopes of 18 to 30 percent: not more than forty (40) percent of such areas shall be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation with the exception that not more than thirty (30) percent of such areas may be disturbed in the case of erosion-prone soils, as defined by the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
B. More than 30 percent slope: no more than thirty (30) percent of such areas shall be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation with the exception that no more than twenty (20) percent of such areas may be disturbed in the case of erosion-prone soils, as defined by the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
C. Minimum Distance for Slope Calculations. In calculating steep slope the vertical rise in the horizontal interval of 50 feet is to be used.
D. Engineer Certification. As part of the approval process, the Planning Commission shall require a report by a licensed professional Engineer that the proposed development is designed so as to prevent any adverse affect on surrounding properties in terms of soil
50
erosion, landslides or storm water drainage.
E. All foundations for structures in mountain side and steep slope development areas as defined above are to be designed by an Alabama registered architect or engineer and submitted to the Building Inspector for approval prior to construction.
8-8. Recreational Vehicle Park Development Standards
In order to provide for a clean, safe and healthy living environment for recreational activities in Recreational Vehicle Parks the following standards are to guide the development of RV park sites. Plans meeting these minimum specifications will be approved by the Planning Commission in those zones permitting Recreational Vehicle Parks as well as by the Board of Adjustment for a special exception.
This district is established to provide developed areas which contain sites for the temporary location of assorted recreational vehicles to include travel trailers, motor homes, truck campers and tents. Such facilities cover a range of short overnight stops to longer destination type stays of several days to weeks. All site plans must be in compliance with all onsite sewage disposal and tourist court development standards as required by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management.
A. Permitted Principal Uses
1. Recreational Vehicles
2. Tents
B. Locational Requirements. All recreational vehicles shall be placed in approved recreational vehicle spaces in RV parks or designated spaces at mobile home parks. The storage of unoccupied recreational vehicles shall be permitted only in those areas for storage on the approved final site plan.
C. Standards for Design
1. Minimum Development Park Site Standard
a. Development site area 3 acres
b. Street frontage 60 ft.
c. Perimeter setback 20 ft.
d. Front yard setback 50 ft.
e. Open space (exclusive of
Perimeter setback) 10%
f. Tent and cabin sites may be
provided at the discretion of
park owner.
51
2. Minimum Lot Standard: Each lot established in a recreational vehicle park shall meet the following size requirements:
a. Lot Size 2,100 sq. ft.
b. Lot Width 35 feet
3. Setback: Minimum service building front yard setback shall be 50 feet from the property line.
4. Access: Recreational Vehicle Parks shall be so located and designed that no entrance or exit shall require movement of traffic to or from the recreational vehicle park through a residential subdivision.
5. Parking Requirement: Each recreational vehicle lot shall contain a stabilized level vehicle parking pad of a suitable all weather wearing surface material. The parking pad shall be located at least five (5) feet from a designated lot line.
Vehicle parking shall be designed to insure the smooth flow of traffic through the park by other residents entering or leaving. Parking spaces shall contain a stabilized, level area suitable for all-weather usage, improved with gravel, asphalt or a suitable grass turf.
Two parking spaces per lot shall be provided which can be part of the parking pad. Parking spaces shall be at least nine (9) by eighteen (18) feet in size. No parking is allowed on the streets or roads fronting the recreational vehicle lot.
In addition, the park shall provide adequate paved parking spaces for all service buildings or recreational facilities. The total additional parking requirement ratio is one (1) parking space for every five (5) recreational vehicle lots.
6. Utilities. Utilities shall be provided as follows:
a. Sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Alabama Department of Environmental Management. The location of sanitary facilities needs to be indicated on the plan and marked on the site.
b. Each recreational vehicle park shall provide either individual service lines or a common service area line delivering safe, pure, potable water. In addition, each recreational vehicle lot shall be provided with an individual electrical service mounted on a pole or pedestal and shall have a disconnecting means consisting of a circuit breaker or a switch and fuses housed in a panel approved for exterior use. A minimum combination of thirty (30) AMP must be provided for each recreational vehicle lot.
7. Garbage and Trash: Central trash collection points shall be completely screened
52
from view from outside the park.
8. Site Conditions: Conditions of soil, groundwater, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or safety of the occupants. The RV spaces shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and no portion of the park subject to flooding, subsidence, or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expos persons or property to hazards. To this end, all recreational vehicle spaces which are located in any designated flood zone shall conform to the Flood Plan Management Ordinance.
9. Identification: Recreational vehicle lots shall be plainly staked off and marked. Each lot shall be permanently numbered with minimum 2-1/2" high numbers and/or letters so they may be easily read from the street.
10. Facilities and Equipment: All facilities and equipment on site must meet the Fire Safety Standards latest edition, NFPA 510D Standards for Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds.
C. Street Design. The principle vehicular road shall be paved and shall be clearly marked as to internal circulation and direction of travel. Pavement widths for travel lanes shall be approved by the Planning Commission and if applicable by the Board of Adjustment.
D. Use Restrictions
1. Removal of Vehicle Equipment Prohibited: Removal of the vehicle tag, wheels, tongue, hitch or A-frame, gas tanks or other vehicle equipment from a recreational vehicle shall be prohibited, and shall be considered prima facie evidence of permanent occupancy.
2. Attachments to Recreational Vehicles Prohibited: Attachments to recreational vehicles shall be prohibited, with the sole exceptions of pop-out units and similar structures which are integral to the recreational vehicle as originally manufactured.
E. After all required improvements have been completed for a recreational vehicle park, or an approved construction stage of the park, the registered Engineer shall certify completion of all improvements in accordance with construction drawings and the Building Official shall certify the completed Recreational Vehicle lots as being approved for occupancy. Until a Recreational Vehicle lot is approved for occupancy, no recreational vehicle shall be placed thereon.
F. Submission of Plans. A site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and if applicable to the Board of Adjustment for review showing the following items. After satisfactory review the plan shall be submitted to the Building Official for the issuance of a building permit. The minimum scale of the plans shall be one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch or larger or smaller as approved by the City Engineer.
53
1. Title, scale, north point, date, and name of site planner.
2. Existing buildings and structures.
3. Streets, layouts.
4. Service and maintenance building, if applicable.
5. Recreational vehicle lots consecutively numbered or lettered.
6. Street (driveways) and parking spaces with dimensions.
7. Recreational facilities, if applicable.
8. Drainage.
9. Proposed sanitary sewer system including location of communal sanitary and bathing facilities.
10. Proposed water distribution system and fire hydrants.
11. Proposed street lighting system and other lighting for benefit of safety of resident, if applicable.
12. Proposed electrical plan and the locations and sizes of outlet.
13. Site acreage.
G. Property Controlled by Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). In the event that TVA requirements for Recreational Vehicle Parks are in conflict with this Section and the Planning Commission finds that the TVA requirements meet the intent of this Section, the Planning Commission may grant approval based on the TVA standards.
8-9 Mini Storage Facilities. The following provisions apply to the use of Mini Storage Facilities.
A. The storage building(s) shall be subdivided by permanent partitions into individual storage compartments with no single storage compartment having a floor area exceeding 300 square feet.
B. The use of the storage compartments shall be limited to the storage of personal property and no other use shall be permitted except a manager’s office which is clearly incidental to the principal use.
C. There shall be no outside storage of goods or materials of any type on the site of a mini storage facility.
54
D. Building coverage may equal no more than 40 percent of total lot area. No part of any fence enclosure shall be located within any required front yard.
E. The design of facades and landscaping of premises shall be compatible with the purposes of the zone district in which the mini storage facility is located.
8-10. “Q” Qualified Zone District
A. Purpose
1. The purpose of the “Q” (Qualified) District is to provide for the regulation of commercial, manufacturing or residential uses of land and structures in order that uses and development of said land, buildings and structures will be harmonious and compatible with and not have an undesirable or detrimental impact on surrounding development. The purpose of this Section is also to protect the public welfare and the property value of surrounding property by securing an appropriate development that is in harmony with the objectives of the City of Guntersville Strategic Growth Plan as adopted by the Planning Commission.
2. In order to achieve the above stated purposes provision is hereby made that in consideration of a change of zone the subject property shall be limited in such manner that it may not be utilized for all the uses ordinarily permitted in a particular zone classification and/or that development of said subject property shall conform to specific standards. In such cases, the ordinance changing the zoning classification of the property in question shall place it in a “Q” (Qualified) zoning classification. The “Q” (Qualified) District shall be indicated in the rezoning ordinance passed by the City Council and on the official zoning map by the symbol “Q” immediately before the combination of symbols designation, e.g., “Q” BG-1A in addition to the case number assigned to the individual rezoning case.
B. Zone Districts That May Be Combined with a “Q” (Qualified) District
Rezoning for a “Q” (Qualified) District must be combined with another zone district as set forth below. A “Q” (Qualified) District may not be requested which is not so combined with these applicable districts.
A “Q” (Qualified) District zoning classification shall only be used in combination with zones RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, RM-1, RM-2, BR, BL, BG-1, BG-1A, BG-1B, BG-1R, BG-2, BG-2A, BC, BW, I-1, I-2 as defined elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Guntersville.
C. Uses Permitted in a “Q” (Qualified) District
The uses permitted in a “Q” (Qualified) District shall be limited to those set out in the rezoning ordinance passed by the City Council.
55
D. Standards That May Be Required in a “Q” (Qualified) District
In addition to permitted uses as set forth in Subsection C above, the “Q” (Qualified) rezoning ordinance passed by Council may impose standards on the subject property with respect to buffers, ingress and egress, development plans, drainage, and environmental plans as well as other considerations that may be necessary to make the proposed development compatible with surrounding development. All applicable limitations and/or standards within the “Q” (Qualified) District shall be considered to apply permanently to the specific uses permitted in said zone.
E. Expiration of Development Plan (Time Limit on Development)
In the even that construction, in accordance with a development plan (when required) is not begun within two years from the date of approval by the City Council of the “Q” Qualified District, said development plan shall become null and void.
F. Amendments to “Q” (Qualified) District
A. In the event that more permitted uses than those set forth in the “Q” (Qualified) District rezoning ordinance passed by Council are desired for the subject property, the City Council will, after proper notification, hold a public hearing on the matter to determine its validity.
B. Applications for amendments pertaining only to standards, which may be required as set forth in Subsection D above, need only be presented to and approved by Guntersville Planning Commission.
8-11. Historical and Cultural Overlay District
A. General Purpose. The Historical and Cultural Overlay District shall be overlaid on exiting districts to designate areas, sites, and structures of sufficient historical and cultural significance to warrant public protection. The general intent includes, among others, the following specific purposes:
1. To preserve and protect the historical and/or architectural value of buildings, other structures, or historically significant areas.
2. To regulate exterior design, arrangement, texture, and materials, proposed to be used within the historic district to ensure compatibility.
3. To create an aesthetic appearance that compliments the historic buildings or other structures.
4. To stabilize and improve property values.
5. To foster civic beauty.
6. To strengthen the local economy.
7. To promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare
56
of the present and future citizens of Guntersville.
B. How Zoning Maps are Amended to Designate Historical and Cultural Overlay Districts. Any amendment to the Zoning Map of the City of Guntersville designating Historical and Cultural districts shall be subject to requirements of Article 14.
1. The Historical and Cultural Overlay District and boundaries shall be shown on the zoning map or on special overlays thereto which are made a part of this ordinance and noted by name on said maps, in which no structure shall be constructed, altered, repaired, relocated or demolished in this district unless the activity complies with the requirements set forth in this Code.
2. A Historical and Cultural Overlay District shall be defined as a geographically definable area which meets one or more of the following criteria:
a. That it is associated with an event which has made a significant contribution to local, state, or national history or
b. That it includes structures associated with the lives of persons significant in local, state or national history or
c. That it contains structures or groups of structures which embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
d. That it has yielded or may be likely to yield archaeological information important in history or prehistory; or
e. That it is listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
C. Uses Permitted. The uses permitted in the use regulations of the underlying district in which the site, structure or area is located shall govern.
D. Appointment of Historical and Cultural Review Committee.
1. As an amendment to the city ordinance establishing the Design Review Commission, the City Council shall appoint a five member subcommittee of the Design Review Commission to be designated as the Historical and Cultural Review Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Review Committee)
2. The Review Committee shall consist of the following five members: Chairman of the Planning Commission; Chairman of the Design Review Committee; Building Official and two at large members who are residents of the City of Guntersville.
57
E. Powers and Duties of the Review Committee
1. The Review Committee shall review applications regarding the creation of Historical and Cultural Overlay Districts. The review of such applications shall be in accordance with the criteria set forth in Item B of this Section. The Commission shall furnish to the Planning Commission, in writing, its recommendations regarding the creation of any Historical and Cultural Overlay District.
2. Prior to the establishment of a Historical and Cultural Overlay District, and subsequent to City Council adoption of the district, the Review Committee shall adopt for each such proposed district a set of review guidelines, which it will apply in ruling upon the granting or denial of a certificate of appropriateness as provided for in this Article. Such review guidelines shall be consistent with the purposes of this Article and with regulations and standards adopted by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, applicable to the construction, alteration, rehabilitation, relocation or demolition of any building, structure, or other improvements situated within a Historic District which has been certified by the Secretary of the Interior as a registered Historic District. Reasonable public notice and opportunity for public comment, by public hearing or otherwise, shall be required before the adoption of any such review guidelines.
F. Submittal of Applications to the Review Committee. The Building Official shall not issue permits for construction, alteration, repair, demolition, or relocation of a building or structure within any Historical and Cultural Overlay District without first submitting the request for such permit together with all plans, elevations, or other information as may be required to determine the appropriateness of the features to be passed upon by the Historic Zoning Commission
G. Approval by the Review Committee. Upon approval of any application, the Review Committee shall forthwith transmit a report to the Building Official stating the basis upon which such approval was made, and cause a Certificate of Appropriateness to be issued to the applicant. Upon failure of the Review Committee to take final action within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application, the case shall be deemed approved, except when mutual agreement has been made for an extension of the time limit. When a Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the Building Official, who shall, from time to time, inspect the construction or alternation of the exterior approved by such certificate, and report to the Review Committee any work not in accordance with such certificate before issuing an Occupancy Permit.
H. Disapproval by the Review Committee. In the case of disapproval of any
58
application, the Review Committee shall state the reasons therefore in a written statement to the applicant, in terms of the design, arrangements, texture, color, material, and the like of the property involved. Notice of such disapproval and a copy of the written statement of reasons therefore shall also be transmitted to the Building Official.
I. Appeals from Decision of the Review Committee. Appeals from any decision of the Review Committee may be taken to the City Council within thirty (30) days.
8-12. Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) District
A. Generally ..................................................................................................................1
1. Purpose and Intent ........................................................................................1
2. Applicability.................................................................................................2
B. Definitions................................................................................................................2
C. Procedures ................................................................................................................2
1. Initial Conference .........................................................................................3
2. General Implementation Plan Submittal Requirements ...............................3
3. Specific Implementation Plan Submittal Requirements ..............................4
4. Minor Amendments to the Specific Implementation Plan ...........................5
5. Ownership and Maintenance of Public Space ..............................................5
D. Design Standards .....................................................................................................5
1. Areas and Uses within the Traditional Neighborhood Development ..........5
2. Dimensional Standards ................................................................................8
3. Circulation Standards .................................................................................10
4. Architectural Standards ..............................................................................13
5. Landscaping and Screening Standards .......................................................14
6. Storm Water Management .........................................................................16
* * * * * *
A. Generally
1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to allow the optional development and redevelopment of land consistent with the design principles of traditional neighborhoods. A Traditional Neighborhood Development:
a. Is compact;
b. Is designed for the human scale;
c. Provides a mix of uses, including residential, commercial, civic, and open space uses in close proximity to one another within the neighborhood;
59
d. Provides a mix of housing styles, types, and sizes to accommodate households of all ages, sizes, and incomes;
e. Incorporates a system of relatively narrow, interconnected streets with sidewalks, bikeways, and transit that offer multiple routes for motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists and provides for the connections of those streets to existing and future developments;
f. Retains existing buildings with historical features or architectural features that enhance the visual character of the community;
g. Incorporates significant environmental features into the design; and,
h. Is consistent with community, regional and state master plans.
2. Applicability. This section is an alternative set of standards for development within the City of Guntersville for: 1) new development of fifteen (15) acres or more; 2) ten (10) acres or more for development contiguous to existing development; or 3) redevelopment or infill development within areas designated for TND Centers.
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Alley. A public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Block. A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity of development.
Building Scale. The relationship between the mass of a building and its surroundings, including the width of street, open space, and mass of surrounding buildings. Mass is determined by the three-dimensional bulk of a structure: height, width, and depth.
Central Square. A common open space that serves as the focal point for a community center. It is typically surrounded by commercial uses and may include a landmark structure or building.
Common Open Space. Squares, greens, neighborhood parks, public parks, and linear environmental corridors owned and maintained by the City or a neighborhood association.
Traditional Neighborhood. A compact, mixed use neighborhood where residential, commercial and civic buildings are within close proximity to each other.
C. Procedures. Prior to the issuance of any permits for development within a traditional
60
Neighborhood Development (TND) district, the following steps shall be completed according to the procedures outlined in this section.
Step 1. The applicant shall have had an initial conference.
Step 2. A general implementation plan and a zoning map amendment to a Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) district shall be approved by the City Council in accordance with the procedures for amendments contained in Article 14 Amendments of this Zoning Ordinance.
Step 3. A specific implementation plan shall be approved by the City Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures for site plan review contained in Article 9 Site Plan Review of this Zoning Ordinance and in concert with approvals required under the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Guntersville.
1. Initial Conference. Before submitting an application for a traditional neighborhood development project, the applicant shall schedule an appointment and meet with the City staff to discuss the procedures for approval, including submittal requirements and design standards.
2. General Implementation Plan Submittal Requirements. The purpose of the general implementation plan is to establish the intent, density, and intensity for a proposed TND development. In addition to the submittal requirements of Article 14 Amendments, any request for approval of a general implementation plan of a TND shall also include the following items:
a. A general location map of suitable scale which shows the location of the property within the community and adjacent parcels including locations of any public streets, railroads, major streams or rivers and other major features within 1,000 feet of the site.
b. A site inventory and analysis to identify site assets or resources, and constraints, including but not limited to floodplains, wetlands and soils classified as “poorly drained” or “very poorly drained,” soils with bedrock at or within 42 inches of the surface, utility easements for high-tension electrical transmission lines (>69KV), and steep slopes greater than 15%.
c. A conceptual site plan consisting of a map with proposed features and existing site features and uses that will remain. These features should include setback and/or build-to lines, location of streets, drives and parking areas, pedestrian and bicycle paths, service access areas for receiving material and trash removal and other impervious surfaces. The location of proposed and existing trees and shrubs should also be
61
included along with any other significant features.
d. A conceptual storm water management plan identifying the proposed patterns of major storm water runoff, location of storm water infiltration areas, and other significant storm water best management practices.
e. Identification of the architectural style(s) of the TND and the accompanying site design styles(s). The design style of the TND shall be conveyed with drawings or computer simulations of typical proposed building elevations including dimensions of building height, width and façade treatment.
f. A written report that provides general information about the covenants, conservation easements or agreements which will influence the use and maintenance of the proposed development. The report shall also describe the site conditions and the development objectives.
g. Any other information deemed necessary by the City in order to evaluate the proposal.
3. Specific Implementation Plan Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements of subsection 2 above and Article 9 Site Plan Review, any request for approval of a specific implementation plan of a TND shall also include the following items:
a. A site plan with the following information:
i. The location of: 1) existing structures that will remain; and 2) proposed maximum building envelope and maximum gross floor area for new structures;
ii. The location of street and pedestrian lighting;
iii. The location of proposed open space;
iv. The circulation system indicating pedestrian, bicycle and motor vehicle movement systems including existing and proposed public street right-of-ways, easements and proposed curb cuts, off-street parking and loading spaces including service access for receiving and trash removal, sidewalks and other walkways.
v. The location of all trees, shrubs and ground cover to remain on those portions of the site to be dedicated to the public.
62
b. A storm water management plan for the site. The grading plan shall show existing and proposed ground elevations with contours and spot elevations at significant high points, low points and transition points. The grading plan shall note the finished ground floor elevations of all buildings. The plan shall show the locations of all storm drainage sewers and structures, infiltration or detention/retention structures, and all wetlands on the site.
c. Detailed elevations of all proposed commercial buildings and typical elevations of residential buildings. Scaled elevations should identify all signs; building materials; the percentage of ground floor commercial façade in windows; the location, height and material for screening walls and fences; outdoor trash storage areas; electrical, mechanical and gas metering equipment; and rooftop equipment.
d. As an alternative to submission of detailed elevations of all proposed commercial buildings as indicated in item “c” above, a pattern book may be submitted that represents typical commercial buildings indicating all of the items stipulated in item “c” above.
e. A utilities plan showing underground and above ground lines and structures for sanitary sewers, electricity, gas telecommunications, etc.
f. Phasing plans, where applicable.
g. Any other information deemed necessary by the City in order to evaluate plans.
4. Minor Amendments to the Specific Implementation Plan. Minor amendments to the Specific Implementation Plan as approved by the City Planning Commission may be approved by the City Planning Director provided that the changes do not involve: a) an increase of more than 10% of the floor area of structures other than single family detached dwellings; b) an increase of more than 10% of the number of dwelling units; or c) an alteration of any conditions or modifications to the Specific Implementation Plan made by the City Planning Commission.
5. Ownership and Maintenance of Public Space. Provision shall be made for the ownership and maintenance streets, squares, parks, open space and other public spaces.
D. Design Standards
1. Areas and Uses within the Traditional Neighborhood Development. In order to achieve the proximity necessary to make neighborhoods walkable, it is
63
important to mix land uses. A Traditional Neighborhood Development should consist of a mix of residential areas, community center(s), and open space.
a. Residential Areas. A mix of the following types of residential land use can occur anywhere within the Traditional Neighborhood Development. For infill development, the mix of residential uses may be satisfied by existing residential uses adjacent to the Traditional Neighborhood Development.
i. Single-family detached dwellings,
ii. Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes, townhouses, and row houses;
iii. Multifamily dwellings, including senior housing;
iv. Accessory dwelling units within a single-family unit;
v. “Special needs” housing such as community living arrangements and assisted living facilities.
b. Community Centers. A traditional neighborhood development will include a community center composed of a mix of commercial, residential, civic or institutional, and open space uses as identified below. The project dimensions should be organized so that residential blocks are within approximately 2,000 feet from the Community Center.
i. Commercial Uses in the Community Center. The interior square footage of individual businesses should not exceed 6,000 square feet in size, but may be larger for specialty and bulk sales stores. In addition, the following active, pedestrian-oriented uses are desired:
a) Food services (neighborhood grocery stores; butcher shops; bakeries; restaurants, not including drive-throughs; cafes; coffee shops; neighborhood bars or pubs);
b) Retail uses (including but not limited to florists or nurseries; hardware stores; stationery stores; book stores; studios and shops of artists and artisans; apparel shops and home décor stores);
c) Services (day care centers; music, dance or exercise studios; offices, including professional and medical offices; barber; hair salon; dry cleaning);
64
d) Accommodations (bed and breakfast establishments, small hotels or inns).
ii. Residential Uses in the Community Center.
a. Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes, townhouses, and row houses:
b. Multifamily dwellings, including senior housing;
c. Residential units located on upper floors above commercial uses or to the rear of storefronts;
d. “Live/work” units that combine a residence and a workplace;
e. “Special needs” housing such as community living arrangements and assisted living facilities.
iii. Civic or Institutional Uses in the Community Center.
a. Municipal offices, fire stations, libraries, museums, community meeting facilities, and post offices;
b. Transit shelters;
c. Places of worship;
d. Educational facilities.
iv. Open Space Uses in the Community Center. (In addition to the open spaces within the Community Center, open spaces shall be incorporated elsewhere in the Traditional Neighborhood Development in accordance with section 4.2(a).
a. Central square;
b. Neighborhood park;
c. Playground.
c. Open Space. The open space uses identified below should be incorporated into the traditional neighborhood development as appropriate. Large outdoor recreation areas should be located at the
65
periphery of neighborhoods rather than central locations.
i. Environmental corridors;
ii. Protected natural areas;
iii. Community parks;
iv. Streams, ponds and other water bodies;
v. Storm water detention/retention facilities.
2. Dimensional Standards. In order to create a compact design, the following standards of density and dimensions will be included in any Traditional Neighborhood Development proposal.
a. Open Space. At least 10 percent of the gross acreage of the traditional neighborhood development must be open space. At least 25 percent of the open space must be common open space dedicated to the public for parkland. Ninety percent of the lots within the areas devoted to residential uses shall be within 2,000 feet from common open space. Large outdoor recreation areas should be located at the periphery of neighborhoods rather than central locations.
b. Residential Uses. The number of residential units shall be determined as follows:
i. In residential areas:
a) The number of single family attached and detached units permitted shall be a maximum of eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
b) The number of multi-family units shall be no more than 14 dwelling units per net acre.
c) Accessory dwelling units shall be permissible in addition to the number of dwelling units authorized under this section. However, the total number of accessory dwelling units shall not be more than number of single-family attached and detached units.
ii. In community centers:
a) The number of single-family and multi-family dwelling units permitted shall be calculated the same as above
66
plus an additional number of units not to exceed 10 percent of the amount permitted above.
b) All dwelling units constructed above commercial uses shall he permissible in addition to the number of dwelling units authorized under this section. However, the total number of dwelling units shall not be increased by more than 10 dwelling units or 10 percent whichever is greater.
c. Commercial Space. The total ground floor area of nonresidential development uses, including off-street parking areas, shall not exceed 25 percent of the Traditional Neighborhood Development.
d. Lot and Block Standards.
i. Block and lot size diversity. Street layouts should provide for development blocks that are generally in the range of 200-400 feet deep by 400-800 feet long. Where topography averages over a 20% slope and cross streets are not practical, longer blocks may be provided, however, in no case shall blocks exceed the standards contained in the Subdivision Regulations. In such cases, the longer blocks shall be divided by pedestrian ways in common open space. A variety of lot sizes should be provided that allow for diverse housing choices.
ii. Lot Width. Lot widths should create a relatively symmetrical street cross section that reinforces the public space of the street as a simple, unified public space.
e. Building Setbacks Standards.
i. Front Building Setback - Community Centers. Structures in community centers have no minimum setback. Commercial and civic or institutional buildings should abut the sidewalks in the community centers.
ii. Front Building Setback – Residential Areas. Single-family detached residences shall have a building setback in the front between 0 and 25 feet. Single-family attached residences and multifamily residences shall have a building setback in the front between 0 and 15 feet.
iii. Front Building Setback – Residential Areas with Steep Slopes. Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph “ii” above, the
67
front building setback in residential areas with steep slopes averaging over 20% may be as great as indicated in the following table, provided that there is a plan for the landscaping and treatment of the streetscape.
Front Building Setback in Residential Areas with Steep Slopes Lots with Front Vehicular Access Only Lots with Alley Vehicular Access Elevation* Setback as much as Elevation* Setback as much as
Rise
0 – 10 feet
10 – 21 feet
21 – 26 feet
Over 26 feet
25 feet
50 feet
75 feet
100 feet
Rise
0 – 30 feet
30 – 50 feet
50 to 70 feet
Over 70 feet
25 feet
50 feet
75 feet
Submit specific solution
Fall
0 – 5 feet
5 – 21 feet
21 – 26 feet
Over 26 feet
25 feet
50 feet
75 feet
Submit specific solution
Fall
0 – 15 feet
15 – 30 feet
30 – 50 feet
Over 50 feet
25 feet
50 feet
75 feet
100 feet
* Elevation of rise or fall is measured at the center of the lot, 50’ back relative to the edge of the roadway surface.
iv. Rear Building Setback – Residential Areas. The principal building on lots devoted to single-family detached residences shall be setback no less than 30 feet from the rear lot line.
v. Side Setbacks. Provision for zero lot-line single-family dwellings should be made, provided that a reciprocal access easement is recorded for both lots and townhouses or other attached dwellings, provided that all dwellings have pedestrian access to the rear yard through means other than the principal structure.
3. Circulation Standards. The circulation system shall provide for different modes of transportation. The circulation system shall provide functional links within the residential areas, community center area, and open space and shall be connected to existing and proposed external development. The circulation system shall provide adequate traffic capacity, provide connected pedestrian and bicycle routes (especially off street bicycle or multi-use paths or bicycle lanes on the streets), limit access onto streets of lower traffic volume classification, and promote safe and efficient mobility through the Traditional Neighborhood Development.
a. Pedestrian Circulation. Convenient pedestrian circulation systems that minimize pedestrian-motor vehicle conflicts shall be provided continuously throughout the Traditional Neighborhood Development. Where feasible, any existing pedestrian routes through the site shall
be preserved and enhanced. All streets, except for alleys, shall be bordered by sidewalks on both sides or in accordance with the
68
specifications listed in the table accompanying this section. The following provisions also apply:
i. Residential Sidewalks. Clear and well-lighted sidewalks of 3-5 feet in width, depending on projected pedestrian traffic, shall connect all dwelling entrances or designated entrances to multi-family dwelling units to the adjacent public sidewalk. Shared sidewalks are acceptable.
ii. Community Center Sidewalks. Clear and well-lit walkways shall connect building entrances to the adjacent public sidewalk and to associated parking areas. Such walkways shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width.
iii. Disabled Accessibility. Sidewalks shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
iv. Crosswalks. Intersections of sidewalks with streets shall be designed with clearly defined edges. Crosswalks shall be well lit and clearly marked with contrasting paving materials at the edges or with striping.
d. Motor Vehicle Circulation. Motor vehicle circulation shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles. Traffic calming features such as “queuing streets,” curb extensions, traffic circles, and medians may be used to encourage slow traffic speeds.
e. Street Hierarchy. Each street within a Traditional Neighborhood Development shall be classified according to the following (arterial streets should not bisect a Traditional Neighborhood Development):
i. Collector. This street provides access to commercial or mixed-use buildings, but it is also part of the City’s major street network. On-street parking, whether diagonal or parallel, help to slow traffic. Additional parking is provided in lots to the side or rear of buildings.
ii. Sub-collector. This street provides primary access to individual residential properties and connects streets of lower and higher function. Design speed is a maximum of 25 mph.
iii. Local Street. This street provides primary access to individual residential properties. Traffic volumes are relatively low with a design speed is a maximum of 20 mph.
69
iv. Alley. These streets provide secondary access to residential properties where street frontages are narrow, where the street is designed with a narrow width to provide limited on-street parking or where alley access development is desired to increase residential densities. Alleys should also be provided in commercial areas to provide delivery access or alternate parking access to commercial properties.
f. Street Layout. The traditional neighborhood development should maintain the existing street grid, where present, and restore any disrupted street grid where feasible. In addition:
i. Intersections shall be at right angles whenever possible, but in no case less than 75 degrees. Low volume streets may form three-way intersections creating an inherent right-of-way assignment (the through street receives precedence), which significantly reduces accidents without the use of traffic controls.
ii. Corner Radii. The roadway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a maximum radius of 15 feet for local streets and 20 feet for intersections involving collector or arterial streets. The intersection of a local street and an access lane or alley shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a maximum radius of 10 feet.
iii. Curb Cuts. Curb cuts for driveways to individual residential lots shall be prohibited along arterial streets. Curb cuts on arterial streets shall be limited to intersections with other streets or access drives to parking areas for commercial, civic or multifamily residential uses.
iv. Street Orientation. The orientation of streets should enhance the visual impact of common open spaces and prominent buildings, and minimize street gradients. All streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land, with the following exceptions:
a) Local streets may terminate in stub streets when such streets act as connections to future phases of the development;
b) Local streets may terminate other than at other streets or public land when there is a connection to the pedestrian and bicycle path network at the terminus.
70
c) Where topography prevents the local street from terminating at another street or public land and the exceptions under paragraphs “a” and “b” above are not practical, the local street may terminate in a cul-de-sac or square in accordance with the standards contained in the Subdivision Regulations.
g. Parking requirements. Parking areas for shared or community use should be encouraged. In addition:
i. In the mixed-use area, any parking lot shall be located at the rear or side of a building. If located at the side, screening shall be provided as specified in section regarding landscaping and screening standards.
ii. A parking lot or garage may not be adjacent to or opposite a street intersection.
iii. In the mixed-use area, a commercial use must provide one parking space for every 500 square feet of gross building area but no more than one parking space for every 300 square feet provided parking can be shared with other uses.
iv. Parking lots or garages must provide not less than one bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle parking spaces.
v. Adjacent on-street parking may apply toward the minimum parking requirements.
vi. In the mixed residential areas, parking may be provided on-site. One off-street parking space with unrestricted ingress and egress shall be provided for each secondary dwelling unit.
vii. Single family uses must provide two parking spaces for every dwelling unit.
viii. Multi-family uses must provide one parking space for every dwelling unit and 0.5 parking spaces for each additional bedroom.
ix. Accessory residential uses must provide one parking space for every dwelling unit and 0.5 parking spaces for each additional bedroom.
h) Service access. Access for service vehicles shall be provided in accordance with Article 11-2 Off-Street Loading of the Zoning
71
Ordinance and should provide a direct route to service and loading dock areas, while avoiding movement through parking areas.
i) Paving. Reduction of impervious surfaces through the use of interlocking pavers, grid pavers, sand set paving blocks or other such paving systems is required for areas such as remote parking lots and parking areas for periodic uses.
j) Outdoor lighting. Street lighting shall be provided along all streets. Generally more, smaller lights as opposed to fewer, high-intensity lights should be used. Street-lights shall be installed on both sides of the street at intervals of no greater than 80 feet. Exterior lighting shall he directed downward in order to reduce glare onto adjacent properties.
Attributes of Streets in a Traditional Neighborhood Development Collector Sub-collector Local Street Alley
Right-of-way
60 feet
50 feet
40 feet
20 feet
Auto travel lanes
Two or three 10 foot lanes
Two 10 foot lanes
Two 10 foot lanes or one 14 foot lane
Two 8 foot lanes for two-way traffic or one 12 foot lane for one way traffic
Street parking
Both sides, 8 feet
None, one or both sides, 8 feet
None or one side, 8 feet
None
Curb and gutter
Required
Required
Required
Not required
Planting strips
Minimum 6 feet
Minimum 6 feet
Minimum 6 feet
None
Sidewalks
Both sides, minimum 6 feet
One or both sides, minimum 4 feet
One or both sides, minimum 4 feet
None
4. Architectural Standards. A variety of architectural features and building materials is encouraged to give each building or group of buildings a distinct character.
a. Guidelines for Existing Structures. If existing structures are determined to be historic or architecturally significant, they shall be protected from demolition or encroachment by incompatible structures or landscape development. The U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties shall be used as the criteria for renovating historic or architecturally significant structures.
b. Guidelines for New Structures. New structures within a Traditional Neighborhood Development shall be no more than 3 stories, 45 feet for single-family residential or 4 stories, 65 feet for commercial, multifamily residential or mixed use. Entries and facades for new structure shall be subject to the following requirements.
i. The architectural features, materials, and the articulation of a
72
facade of a building shall be continued on all sides visible from a public street, courtyard or any common area.
ii. The front facade of the principal building on any lot in a Traditional Neighborhood Development shall face onto a public street.
iii. The front facade shall not be oriented to face directly toward a parking lot.
iv. Porches, pent roofs, roof overhangs, hooded front doors or other similar architectural elements shall define the front entrance to all residences.
v. For commercial buildings, a minimum of 50 percent of the front facade on the ground floor shall be transparent, consisting of window or door openings allowing views into and out of the interior.
vi. New structures on opposite sides of the same street should follow similar design guidelines. This provision shall not apply to buildings bordering civic uses.
c. Garages and Accessory Dwelling Units. Garages and accessory dwelling units may be placed on a single-family detached residential lot within the principal building or an accessory building provided that the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.
d. Exterior signage. A comprehensive sign program is required for the entire Traditional Neighborhood Development to establish a uniform theme. Signs shall share a common style (e.g., size, shape, material). In the mixed-use area, signs shall be wall signs or cantilever signs. Cantilever signs shall be mounted perpendicular to the building face and shall not exceed 8 square feet. Wall signs shall be sized and placed to fit within the architectural elements.
5. Landscaping and Screening Standards. Overall composition and location of landscaping shall complement the scale of the development and its surroundings. In general, larger, well-placed contiguous planting areas shall be preferred to smaller, disconnected areas.
a. General Screening. Where screening is required by this ordinance, it shall be at least 3 feet in height, unless otherwise specified. Required screening shall be at least 50 percent opaque throughout the year. Required screening shall be satisfied by one or some combination of a decorative fence not less than 50 percent opaque behind a continuous
73
landscaped area, a masonry wall, or a hedge.
b. Street trees. A minimum of one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet of street frontage, or fraction thereof, shall be required. Trees can be clustered and do not need to be evenly spaced. Trees should preferably be located between the sidewalk and the curb, within the landscaped area of a boulevard, or in tree wells installed in pavement
or concrete. If placement of street trees within the right-of-way will interfere with utility lines, trees may be planted within the front yard setback adjacent to the sidewalk.
c. Parking Area Landscaping and Screening.
i. All parking and loading areas fronting public streets or sidewalks, and all parking and loading areas abutting residential districts or uses shall provide:
a) A landscaped area at least 6 feet wide along the public street or sidewalk.
b) Screening at least 3 feet in height and not less than 50 percent opaque.
c) One tree for each 27 linear feet of parking lot frontage.
ii. Parking area interior landscaping. The corners of parking lots,
“islands,” and all other areas not used for parking or vehicular circulation shall be landscaped. Vegetation can include turf grass, native grasses or other perennial flowering plants, vines, shrubs or trees. Such spaces may include architectural features such as benches, kiosks or bicycle parking.
iii. In large parking lots containing more than 200 spaces, an additional landscaped area of at least 300 square feet shall be provided for each 25 spaces or fraction thereof, containing one canopy tree. The remainder shall be covered with turf grass, native grasses or other perennial flowering plants, vines or shrubs.
d. Installation and Maintenance of Landscaping Materials.
i. All landscape materials shall be installed to current industry standards.
ii. Maintenance and replacement of landscape materials shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Landscape
74
maintenance should incorporate environmentally sound management practices, including the use of water- and energy-efficient irrigation systems such as drip irrigation, and pruning primarily for plant health and public safety replacing dead materials annually.
6. Storm Water Management. The design and development of the traditional neighborhood development should minimize off-site storm water runoff, promote on-site filtration, and minimize the discharge of pollutants to ground and surface water. Natural topography and existing land cover should be protected/maintained to the maximum extent practicable. New development and redevelopment shall be subject to the requirements of Section 8-7 Mountainside and Steep Slope Development Regulations and shall meet the following requirements:
a. Untreated, direct storm water discharges to wetlands or surface waters are not allowed.
b. Post development peak discharge rates should not exceed pre-development peak rates.
c. Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to remove 80% of the average annual load of total suspended solids.
d. Redevelopment storm water management systems should improve existing conditions and meet standards to the extent practicable.
e. All treatment systems or BMPs must have operation and maintenance plans to ensure that systems function as designed.
f. Meet all requirements of Ordinance No. 963, the Guntersville, Alabama storm water management ordinance.
75
ARTICLE 9
SITE PLAN REVIEW
9-1. Site Plan Review Required
Site plan review by the Planning Commission will be required for all development other than construction of single family dwellings.
9-2. Submission Requirements
Any application for site plan approval shall include the following information unless the Building Inspector finds that some or all requirements are not essential to a proper decision on the project. The Building Inspector may establish additional requirements for site plans to clarify the nature of proposed developments.
A. Applications for site plan shall be signed by the fee owner or by his authorized agent who has power of attorney for said owner to sign the application.
B. The location and size of the site including its legal description, and a current certified survey map.
C. A vicinity map showing the site in relation to surrounding property.
D. The recorded ownership interests and the nature of the developer’s interest if the developer is not the owner.
E. The relationship of the site to existing development in the area including streets, utilities, residential and commercial development, and physical features of the land including significant ecological features.
F. The type and intensity of land use throughout the site including dwelling units per acre, size and location of buildings, percent of land area covered by buildings, and gross floor area.
G. The location, size and character of any common open space, commonly owned facilities, and form of organization which will own and maintain any common open space and facilities.
H. The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other restrictions which will be imposed upon the use of the land, structures and facilities including proposed easements or grants.
76
I. Provisions for disposition of open space, including tree protection, landscaping provisions and buffering requirements.
J. In case plans call for development over a period of years, a schedule showing the proposed times within which applications for building permits are intended to be filed.
K. Any additional data, plans or specifications which the applicant or City believes is pertinent and will assist in clarifying the application.
L. As appropriate, architectural renderings, elevations and representative floor plans in preliminary form.
9-3. Approval Procedure
A. Application for Site Plan Review. An application for a site plan review shall be made to the Building Inspector prior to an application for a building permit.
B. Appropriateness and Completeness. Upon receipt of a site plan application, the Building Inspector shall have ten (10) working days to determine the appropriateness and completeness of the information presented in the submission and accepts or reject the application. This decision shall not be taken as approval or disapproval of the site plan itself.
C. Staff Review. Within forty-five (45) working days after receipt of a site plan review application, the Building Inspector shall refer said application, together with all supporting documentation and staff recommendations to the Planning Commission.
D. Consultant’s Review. The City of Guntersville may, if in its opinion it is necessary, retain consultants to assist in the review of an application for site plan review. The cost of retaining said consultants shall be borne by the applicant.
E. Planning Commission Review. Upon receipt of said application, the Planning Commission shall, within sixty (60) working days of the original acceptance date by the Building Inspector, review said site plan and make one of the following recommendations:
1. Approval as submitted;
2. Approval with changes and/or special conditions; or
3. Disapproval if the requirements of the district regulations have not been met. If the application is not approved, the applicant may appeal the Planning Commission’s decision to the Board of Adjustment.
77
F. Revision. The applicant may elect to revise his site plan submission at any time in the review process. He shall submit a letter of intent to revise to the Building Inspector who, upon receipt of the letter, will halt the normal review processing. Within fifteen (15) days after receiving revised documents, the Building Inspector will review the revisions and forward his comments and recommendations to the Planning Commission, which shall have thirty (30) working days to act on the revised site plan and the entire review process shall be similarly extended in time.
G. Building Permit. Upon the granting of approval of the site plan, the Building Inspector may, upon application, issue a building permit for a portion or all of the proposed development after he finds that the application is in compliance with all applicable City, County, State, and Federal requirements.
If, within six (6) months of the date of approval of an application for site plan review, a building permit has not been applied for, the approved site plan becomes null and void; provided, however, that the Planning Commission and applicant may jointly agree to extend such period of approval for an additional six months.
H. Changes after Approval. Minor changes to an approved site plan may be authorized by the Building Inspector to overcome unanticipated hardships or conditions provided that such minor changes:
1. Are not inconsistent with provisions of this zoning ordinance;
2. Are not inconsistent with the design concept of the approved site plan;
3. Do not add additional stories in height; and,
4. Do not add additional dwelling units.
Other changes or amendments to an approved site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.
9-4 Design Review Committee
To supplement the City’s staff in the site plan review process, the City Council may appoint a design review committee made up of individuals having knowledge, training or experience in architecture, landscape architecture, planning, engineering, administration, or other similar backgrounds related to urban development. The number of members, terms of membership, method of organization, and duties will be prescribed by the City Council in the resolution establishing the design review committee.
78
9-5 Review Standards
The following standards shall be used by the City in reviewing any site plan:
A. Traffic Access
All proposed site traffic access ways are adequate but not excessive in number; adequate in grade, width, alignment and visibility, and not located too near street corners, places of public assembly; and other similar considerations.
B. Circulation and Parking
1. There shall be adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of roads, driveways, off-street parking, loading space and pedestrian circulation facilities.
2. Roads, pedestrian walks and open spaces shall be designed as integral parts of an overall site design. They shall be properly related to existing and proposed buildings and appropriately landscaped.
3. Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining walls, fences, curbs, benches and signs, shall be of good appearance, easily maintained and indicative of their function.
4. Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to orderly arrangement, landscaping, drainage, ease of access, adequacy, and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall site design.
5. Any above grade loading facility should be screened from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness.
C. Design and Arrangement of Buildings
1. Adequate provision shall be made for light, air, access and privacy in the arrangement of buildings to each other. Each living space shall have sufficient exterior exposures. Adequate laundry facilities including space and connections for washing machines and clothes dryers shall be available for multiple-family dwellings, on the premises, for use by all occupants of the premises.
2. The design of buildings and parking facilities shall take advantage of the natural features and topography of the project site, where appropriate.
79
3. All building walls shall be so oriented as to insure adequate light and air exposures to the rooms within.
4. All buildings shall be arranged so as to be accessible to emergency vehicles.
D. Landscaping
1. The proposed site shall be properly landscaped, the purpose of which is to further enhance the natural qualities of the land. Proper screening and buffering should be provided.
2. Landscape treatment for plazas, roads, paths, service and parking areas shall be designed as an integral part of a coordinate landscape design for the entire project area.
3. Native vegetation shall be used where practicable.
4. Whenever appropriate, existing trees shall be conserved and integrated into the landscape design plan.
E. Storm Drainage
The site plan shall meet all requirements of Ordinance No. 963, the Guntersville, Alabama storm water management ordinance.
9-6. Conformity with Provisions of Codes and Ordinances
All development shown on the site plan must conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, the City’s subdivision regulations, the building code, and other applicable ordinances.
80
ARTICLE 10
SIGNS
10-1. Purpose and Definitions
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to provide minimum control of signs to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community by: reducing hazards to pedestrians and vehicular traffic; preserving property values; preventing excessive clutter of sign messages that obscure one another to the detriment of commerce; preventing unsightly development that has a blighting influence upon properties; and by securing certain fundamentals of design that are compatible with the character of the community.
B. Definitions.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY – A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means.
DISSOLVE – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Display accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.
FADE – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Display accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
FRAME – A complete, static display screen on an Electronic Message Display.
FRAME EFFECT – A visual effect on an Electronic Message Display applied to a single frame to attract the attention of viewers.
SCROLL – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Display where the message appears to move vertically across the display surface.
TRANSITION – A visual effect used on an Electronic Message Display to change from one message to another.
TRAVEL – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Display where the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface.
EMC- Electronic Message Center
10-2. General Sign Regulations
The following regulations apply generally to all signs and are in addition to the regulations established for each zoning district or to the regulations contained elsewhere in this Ordinance.
A. Permit Required
81
No sign, unless herein accepted, shall be erected, constructed, painted, altered, or relocated, until a permit has been issued by the Building Inspector. Before any permit is issued, an application shall be filed with the Building Inspector together with such drawings and specifications as may be necessary to fully set forth information on the location, type of construction, materials, manner of illuminating, securing and fastening, and the number of signs applied for. All signs which are electrically illuminated shall require a separate electrical permit and inspection. Each sign requiring a permit shall be clearly marked with the permit number and the name of the person or firm placing the sign on the premises.
Prior to issuing a permit for a sign, the application for a sign permit, together with such drawings and specifications as are appropriate, shall be submitted by the Building Inspector to the City’s Design Committee for review and approval. Prior to issuing a permit for a sign in a BR Restricted Business District, or any historic district, the Building Inspector shall submit a sign application, along with appropriate drawings and specifications to the Historic Board of Review for review and approval.
B. Exempt Signs
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of these regulations and may be erected or constructed without a permit but in accordance with the structural and safety requirements of the City’s building code:
1. Public signs to regulate traffic;
2. Signs required to be posted by law;
3. Signs erected or posted by governmental agencies when required to protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
4. Signs indicating bus stops, taxi stands, and similar transportation facilities;
5. Signs located within the interior of any building, stadium, shopping center, or within any enclosed building space, that are not visible from the public right-of-way.
6. Holiday or special public event signs which are clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday or a public event provided that such signs shall be displayed for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days nor more than sixty (60) days in any one year. Such signs may be illuminated or animated; shall be setback not less than ten feet from all boundary lines of the lot; and shall not occupy any space within fifty-five feet of the intersection of any two streets, a railroad and a street, or a street and a driveway, that is less than six (6) feet above the ground. Holiday or special event signs that obscure or divert attention from traffic signals or directional signals are specifically prohibited;
7. Signs erected on private property, limited in area to four (4) square feet,
82
providing directions or information regarding parking areas, rest rooms, telephones, walkways, entrances, exists, or to other similar facilities, provided that such signs do not in any way advertise a commercial enterprise;
8. Temporary signs involved in campaigns of charitable, civic and similar organizations;
9. Temporary non-illuminated signs not more than sixteen (16) square feet in area, erected in connection with construction work and displayed on the premises during such time as the actual construction work is in progress. Only one such sign is permitted. Such signs shall be removed upon completion of construction;
10. Sign on truck, bus or other vehicle, while in use in the normal course of a business and provided that the primary purpose of the vehicle is not to serve as a sign at a stationary location;
11. Name plate, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, to identify the owner or occupant of a dwelling or building;
12. Street numbers for houses, businesses and other uses not to exceed six (6) inches in height;
13. Temporary signs providing information on the name of buildings, the date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building, or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material;
14. No trespassing sign not to exceed two (2) square feet in area per sign and not to exceed two signs per lot, except that special permission may be obtained from the Building Inspector for additional signs, or signs of larger size, under proven special circumstances;
15. Signs warning the public of the existence of danger, but containing no advertising material, of a size as may be necessary, and which is removed promptly upon subsidence of danger.
16. Mailbox signs identifying only the occupants of the premises and street address, with lettering or numbers not to exceed two (2) inches in height.
17. All signs belonging to Federal, State and Local governments.
C. Signs and Sign Devices Prohibited
1. Signs creating hazards for motorists. No sign shall be erected or maintained which displays either intermittent light and/or light of such intensity that it either constitutes, because of its location, hazardous conditions to motorists, or stimulates lights customarily associated with those used by police, fire, ambulance, or other emergency vehicles. No sign shall be erected or maintained which uses the word “stop” or “danger” so as to imply the need or requirement
83
for stopping, or the existence of danger, or which is a copy or imitation of an official traffic control sign.
2. Signs with irregular illumination. No sign shall be erected or maintained which attracts attention by means of displaying flashing, scintillating, blinking intermittent, rotating moving lights or lights of changing degrees of intensity. Illuminated signs shall emit only light of constant intensity. This prohibition shall not apply to signs, which are electronically controlled to display time, temperature, date or messages displayed on electronic message display signs, which are defined herein.
3. Moving signs. No sign or any portion thereof shall be permitted which moves or assumes any motion constituting a non-stationary or non-fixed condition except for a barber pole or other rotating sign which does not exceed one complete revolution every twenty (20) seconds.
4, Advertising vehicles. No person shall park any vehicle or trailer, which has a sign painted or attached thereto, for the purpose of same or nearby premises, or to a product, business or activity located on a public right-of-way in the vicinity of such advertising vehicle. No such advertising vehicle shall be parked on a public right-of-way or on private property visible from a public right-of-way for the purpose of advertising any product, business or activity at a location other than that occupied by such advertising vehicle.
5. Miscellaneous signs and posters. The tacking, pasting, or otherwise affixing of signs, visible from a public right-of-way, to walls of a building, barns, sheds, trees, poles, posts, fences or other structures is prohibited unless specifically permitted by this Article.
6. Pennants, banners, and fluttering signs. Pennants, banners streamers, and all other fluttering, spinning or similar type signs and advertising devices are prohibited except during recognized holiday seasons when such devices may be displayed on a temporary basis as provided in subsection 10-1B-6 of this Article.
7. Movable signs. Movable signs including mobile signs, sidewalk and sandwich signs are prohibited.
D. Signs over Public Property
1. No sign of any character shall be suspended across any public right-of-way or alley except on a temporary basis as provided in subsection 10-B of this Article.
2. No portion of any flat sign or projecting sign which extends over a public street or alley shall be less than nine (9) feet above such sidewalk or fifteen (15) feet above such alley.
3. No part of a projecting sign shall project over any street or alley right-of-way
84
for a distance of more than four (4) feet.
4. No detached ground or pole sign shall extend or project over any portion of any public right-of-way.
E. General Advertising Signs
No general advertising sign shall be erected except in zoning districts in which they are specifically permitted.
F. Intersection Visibility
At all street intersections, no sign shall be placed, erected, or maintained at any location if such sign obstructs vision within a triangular area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a line drawn between points along such right-of-way lines thirty (30) feet distant from their point of intersection and between elevations of two and one-half (2½) and twelve (12) feet above the established grade within this triangular area.
G. Nonconforming Signs
1. Except as otherwise specifically provided in these regulations, all signs shall be subject to provisions of Article 12 governing nonconforming uses.
2. All legally existing nonconforming moveable signs which exist on the effective date of these regulations shall be removed within ninety (90) days after the effective date of these regulations.
3. No permits for additional signs shall be issued for premises on which there are any nonconforming signs.
H. Travelers Directional Signs
In districts in which they are permitted, a travelers directional sign may be placed only when conforming to the following standards:
1. The location of a travelers directional sign must be approved by the Building Inspector and Design Review Committee before being erected or displayed in any form.
2. No travelers directional sign shall be located nearer than fifty (50) feet to any other travelers directional sign unless it is attached to a structure designed for the display of two (2) or more travelers directional signs which meet standards of design and installation established by the City of Guntersville. When two (2) or more travelers directional signs are mounted on such structure, they shall be separated from one another by an open space not less than nine (9) inches in width.
3. A travelers directional sign shall be limited in sign area to six (6) square feet and shall display only the following information: the name of the
85
establishment, place, or thing being advertised; route to be followed; miles to be traveled; logo; and symbol indicating direction.
4. A traveler’s directional sign shall not be directly illuminated.
I. Gasoline and Other Pricing Signs
Signs advertising the price of gasoline, or other products or services, are permitted in addition to any other signs permitted on the premises provided that:
1. Only one (1) pricing sign shall be permitted for each street frontage:
2. The pricing sign must be attached to a permitted detached sign, to a structure covering gas pump islands, or a principal or accessory structure.
J. Sign Illumination
Any permitted sign in any district may be indirectly illuminated. Illuminated signs which give forth artificial light are prohibited unless permitted by specific provisions of these regulations.
K. Detached Signs May be Divided into Two or More Parts
The permitted sign area of a detached sign may be divided between two or more parts provided that all such parts are not separated from each other by more than nine (9) inches. If at least three-fourths (3/4) of the space separating parts of the sign permits unobstructed horizontal view, such space shall not be included in determining sign area.
If parts of the detached sign include both directly illuminated and indirectly illuminated or non-illuminated parts, the size of each part shall be determined on the basis of its proportionate share of permitted sign area. For example, if a zoning district permits sign areas of 48 square feet for directly illuminated signs and 64 square feet for indirectly illuminated or non-illuminated signs, and the developer chooses to install a 16 square foot directly illuminated sign, the maximum sign area remaining for indirectly illuminated or non-illuminated parts, can be determined as follows:
86
Directly
Illuminated
Indirectly
Illuminated
Maximum sign area
48 sq. feet
64 sq. feet
Indirectly illuminated part(s)
16 sq. feet
% of permitted area
33.3%
% of total sign area remaining for indirectly
illuminated or non-illuminated part(s)
66.7%
Remaining sign area for indirectly illuminated or non-illuminated part(s)
42.7 sq. feet
10-3. Zoning District Sign Regulations
All signs permitted in zoning districts shall be establishment identification signs unless otherwise specified.
A. Signs Permitted in All Single-Family Residential Districts
1. All signs exempted from these regulations by Subsection 10-2B of this Article.
2. Non-illuminated signs for home occupation indicating only the profession, craft, or occupation of the occupant and his name, not to exceed one (1) square foot in sign area.
3. A detached ground sign identifying the name of a residential subdivision, not to exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in sign area.
4. A customary church bulletin board, not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in sign area.
5. A detached ground sign to identify any public or semi-public use, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area.
6. A flat sign identifying a public or semi-public use, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in sign area except that the area of such sign may be increased by one-fourth (1/4) square foot for each foot of setback, from the street it fronts, in excess of fifty (50) feet.
B. Signs Permitted in Multi-Family Zone Districts
1. Any sign permitted in Subsection 10-3A of this Ordinance.
2. One detached ground sign for each street frontage of a multi-family housing project, not to exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in sign area.
3. One detached ground sign identifying a multi-family structure, and placed not more than thirty (30) feet therefrom, not to exceed four (4) square feet in sign area.
87
4. One flat sign for each major building in a multi-family housing project, not to exceed eight (8) square feet in sign area.
5. Detached signs providing directions to parking areas, recreation facilities, buildings, points of ingress and egress, and other facilities, not to exceed a height of four (4) feet or a sign area of four (4) square feet.
6. Temporary detached or flat signs, limited to one such sign for each street, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area, only for the purpose of advertising units for sale or rent and not to be displayed for a period exceeding six (6) months.
C. Signs Permitted in the Mobile Home Park District
1. One detached pole or ground sign identifying a mobile home park, not to exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in sign area.
2. One detached or flat sign identifying an office or common facility not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area.
3. Detached or flat sign providing directions to motorists or pedestrians to common facilities or areas, with no single sign to exceed four (4) square feet in sign area.
D. Signs Permitted in Office and Institutional and Public Use Districts
1. Travelers directional signs meeting requirements of subsection 10-2H of this Ordinance.
2. Detached signs providing directions to parking areas, facilities, buildings, places, or points of ingress and egress, not to exceed a height of four (4) feet or a sign area of four (4) square feet.
3. A detached ground sign for each street frontage not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area except that for every foot of frontage in excess of one-hundred (100) feet, the sign area may be increased two-tenths (0.2) square foot up to a maximum sign area of sixty-four (64) square feet.
4. Flat signs, including directly illuminated, with a total aggregate sign area not more than two (2) square feet for each foot of length of the wall on which the signs are mounted, not to exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in sign area except that:
a. For every foot of setback in excess of 30 feet from the frontage road, the maximum area of any individual sign may be increased two-tenths (0.2) square foot up to a maximum sign area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
b. For each story in height that a flat sign is raised above the second story of a building, its maximum area may be increased ten (10) square feet.
88
5. Projecting signs, including directly illuminated signs, only two for each fifty (50) feet of building wall and no individual sign shall exceed a sign area of six (6) square feet.
6. Awning signs not to exceed six (6) square feet in sign area.
7. Marquee signs, one for each principal entrance, with no single sign exceeding a sign area of sixteen (16) square feet.
8. Signs for residential uses shall comply with subsection 10-3B of this Ordinance.
E. Signs Permitted in Restricted Business Districts
1. Travelers directional signs meeting requirements of subsection 10-2H of this Ordinance.
2. Projecting signs, illuminated or non-illuminated, one for each business on the premises, with sign area limited to four (4) square feet.
3. One detached ground sign for each premises regardless of whether such premises contains one or more establishments. Such ground sign shall not exceed a height of four and one half (41/2) feet above ground level and shall not exceed a sign area of nine (9) square feet.
F. Signs Permitted in Local and General Business Districts
1. Travelers directional signs meeting requirements of subsection 10-2H of this Ordinance.
2. Detached signs providing directions to parking areas, facilities, buildings, places or points of ingress and egress, not to exceed a height of four (4) feet and no single sign to exceed a sign area of four (4) feet.
3. One detached sign, including directly illuminated, on a premises regardless of whether such premises contains one or more establishments. A detached ground sign shall not exceed an area of forty-eight (48) square feet and a detached pole sign shall not exceed an area of thirty-two (32) square feet except that:
a. If it is a detached ground sign which is either non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated, maximum sign area may be increased five tenths (0.5) square foot for each foot of frontage in excess of fifty (50) feet up to a maximum sign area of one-hundred fifty (150) square feet.
b. If it is a directly illuminated ground sign, or an indirectly illuminated pole sign, maximum sign area may be increased three tenths (0.3) square foot for each foot of frontage in excess of fifty (50) feet up to a maximum sign area of one hundred (100) square feet.
89
c. If a directly illuminated pole sign, the maximum sign area may be increased two tenths (0.2) square foot for each foot of frontage in excess of fifty (50) feet up to a maximum sign area of sixty-four (64) square feet.
d. The maximum height of a detached pole sign shall not exceed twenty-five feet in a business district.
e. In addition to the allowing detached sign, changing message signs, electronic reader board signs or electronic message signs are allowed that do not exceed sixty-five (65) percent of the allowing detached sign. A reader board is defined as a permanent sign containing messages in the form of removable letters or changeable copy.
f. Electronic message displays may be permitted, with the approval of a use permit, in BG-1, BG-1A, BG-R, BG-2, BG-2A, I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements:
g. Operational Limitations. Such displays on electronic message displays shall be limited to static displays. Messages that appear or disappear from the display through dissolve, fade, travel or scroll modes, or similar transitions and frame effects that text, or images that appear to move or change in size, or be revealed sequentially rather than at once are strictly prohibited.
h. Minimum Display Time. Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of eight (8) seconds.
4. Flat signs, including directly illuminated, with a total aggregate sign area not to exceed two (2) square feet for each foot of length of the wall on which the signs are mounted with maximum sign area not to exceed one-hundred fifty (150) square feet, except that:
a. For every foot of setback in excess of fifty (50) feet from the frontage street, the maximum area of any individual sign may be increased five-tenths (0.5) square foot up to a maximum sign area of five hundred (500) square feet.
b. For each story that a flat sign is raised above the second story of a building on which it is mounted, its maximum area may be further increased by five (5) percent.
Illuminated signs within show windows, and within five (5) feet thereof, shall be included in the computation of aggregate flat sign area and, in addition, shall be limited to twenty (20) percent of the total glass area of the window.
Neon tubing outlining all or portions of store windows shall be included in sign area and measured by multiplying the length of the tubing by six (6) inches.
5. Temporary, non-illuminated paper or painted signs in windows limited to
90
twenty (20) percent of the total glass area of the window in which they are placed.
6. Projecting signs, including directly illuminated, one for each building entrance, with the area of individual signs limited to sixteen (16) square feet.
7. Marquee signs, including directly illuminated one for each principal building on the premises, with the area of individual signs limited to thirty-two (32) square feet.
8. Awning signs, limited in number to two (2) for each building entrance and limited in sign area to sixteen (16) square feet.
9. Total aggregate sign area for all flat and marquee signs shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the wall (including windows) on which they are attached.
10. Signs for residential uses shall comply with subsection 10-3B of this Ordinance.
Shopping Center Signs
For the purpose of this section, the term "Shopping Center" shall be defined as a group of commercial - retail establishments planned, developed, and managed as a unit with off-street parking provided on the property. A development site must consist of at least two individual businesses and a minimum of 10,000 square feet of gross building area to be considered a shopping center. Shopping centers consisting of between 10,000 and 20,000 square feet of gross building area shall be allowed one (1) sign. The total area of said sign shall not exceed 120 square feet. Shopping centers consisting of at least 20,000 square feet and less than 65,000 square feet of gross building area shall be allowed one (1) sign. The total area of said sign shall not exceed 200 square feet. Shopping centers consisting of greater than 65,000 square feet of gross building area shall be allowed one (1) sign. The total area of said sign shall not exceed 400 square feet. The combined height of the base and sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height for shopping centers. All shopping center signs shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any side lot line.
G. Signs Permitted in Central Business Districts
1. Flat signs, illuminated or non-illuminated, with a total aggregate sign area not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of walls on which they are attached and no one sign with an area of more than one hundred (100) square feet in sign area. Illuminated signs inside of show windows and within five (5) feet thereof, shall be included in the computation of aggregate sign area and shall be limited in area to twenty (20) percent of the total glass area of the window in which they are placed.
91
2. Projecting signs located below an awning, illuminated or non-illuminated, one for each business on the premises, with sign area not to exceed four (4) square feet for any individual sign.
3. One detached sign, illuminated or non-illuminated, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area except that if the frontage along the street on which the sign is to be erected exceeds fifty (50) feet, the sign may be increased in sign area five-tenths (0.5) square foot for each foot of frontage in excess of fifty (50) feet up to a maximum sign area of sixty-four (64) square feet. A detached sign shall not exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet.
4. Marquee signs, illuminated or non-illuminated, limited in sign area to fifty (50) percent of the facie of the marquee to which they are attached.
5. Temporary, non-illuminated paper or painted signs in windows, limited in sign area to twenty (20) percent of the total glass area of the window in which they are placed.
6. Detached signs providing directions to parking areas, facilities, buildings, places or points of ingress or egress, not to exceed a height of four (4) feet or a sign area of four (4) square feet.
7. Signs for residential uses shall comply with subsection 10-3B of this Ordinance.
H. Signs Permitted in Industrial Districts
1. Flat signs, illuminated or non-illuminated, with a total aggregate sign area not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of a wall to which they are attached and no one sign having a sign area exceeding four hundred (400) square feet.
2. Projecting signs, illuminated or non-illuminated, not to exceed one for each building entrance and non individual projecting sign to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in sign area.
3. Detached sign, illuminated or non-illuminated, one for each street frontage with the area of any individual sign limited to a total sign area of ninety-six (96) square feet. A detached sign shall not exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet.
4. Roof sign with a sign area not to exceed three (3) square feet for each lineal foot of the longest building wall, provided that the maximum size of a roof sign shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
5. Detached signs providing directions to parking area, facilities, buildings, places, or points of ingress and egress, not to exceed a height of six (6) feet or a sign area of eight (8) square feet.
6. Travelers directional signs meeting requirements of subsection 10-2H of this Ordinance.
92
7. General advertising signs provided that there shall be a minimum distance of four hundred (400) feet between any two signs and the total aggregate sign area at any one location shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
I. Maintenance and Sign Removal
1. Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in good condition and appearance. The Building Inspector may cause to be removed any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated, or where the area around such sign is not well maintained, unless such conditions are corrected within thirty (30) days after due notice has been given.
2. Removal of Signs. The Building Inspector shall remove, or cause to be removed, any sign erected or maintained in conflict with these regulations if the owner of lessee of either the site or the sign fails to correct the violation promptly after receiving written notice of violation from the Building Inspector. Removal of a sign by the Building Inspector shall not affect any proceedings instituted prior to removal of such sign. The costs of such sign removal shall be paid by the owner of the sign.
93
ARTICLE 11
OFFSTREET PARKING AND LOADING
11-1. Required Off-street Parking
Except as otherwise provided in Section 8-6B of this Ordinance, developments in a central business district shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in Article 11. For developments in all other zoning districts, there shall be provided, at the time of the erection of any building or before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another, permanent off-street parking and loading space in the amount specified by this Section.
A. Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
1. Residential - Two parking spaces for each single-family dwelling unit regardless of whether they are attached or detached.
Two parking spaces for each multi-family dwelling unit is the limit allowed.
2. Hotels and Motels - One and one-quarter (1.25) parking spaces for each of the first one hundred (100) sleeping units, plus one and one-tenth (1.1) space for each additional sleeping unit, plus additional spaces for accessory uses such as restaurants, lounges, offices, shops, etc., as required in this Article.
3. Churches, synagogues, theaters, auditoriums, and other places of public assembly - One space for each three (3) seats in the principal of assembly.
4. Libraries, art museums and similar cultural facilities - One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area.
5. Private clubs, country clubs, lodges, fraternities, and similar institutions - One (1) space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
6. Funeral Home - One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the largest auditorium.
7. Medical offices, dental offices and clinics - Four (4) parking spaces for each doctor plus one (1) parking space for each employee.
8. Professional and business offices - One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
9. Retail stores selling variety merchandise, jewelry, clothing, sporting goods, stereo tapes, records and equipment, musical instruments and supplies, drugs, liquor, groceries, and similar items - One (1) space for each two hundred eighty (280) square feet of gross floor area.
94
10. Retail stores selling merchandise generally characterized by high bulk and high cost including furniture, large appliances, large hardware items, business machines, bicycles, guns, light fixtures, computers, television sets, auto accessories, building materials, home furnishings, and similar goods - One (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area.
11. Restaurants, lounges, and other eating and drinking places - One (1) space for each three (3) seating accommodations, plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees on shift of greatest employment, or one (1) space for each eighty (80) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is the greatest.
12. Automobile service stations - Two (2) spaces for each island of gasoline pumps plus two (2) spaces for each service bay.
13. Bowling alley - Four (4) spaces for each lane. If restaurant or lounge is provided, they must be computed separately.
14. Bank, savings and loan, or other financial institution - One (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees on shift of greatest employment.
15. Billiard Parlor - Two (2) spaces per billiard table. If restaurant or lounge is provided, they must be computed separately.
16. Commercial recreational and amusement establishments - One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor space, plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of unenclosed space devoted to recreation or related uses.
17. Personal services including barber shops, beauty salon, washerettes, and similar establishments - One (1) space for each one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area.
18. General service or repair establishment; electrical, plumbing and heating contractors; printing, publishing or broadcasting establishments - one (1) space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of gross floor area.
19. Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory, bottling plant, wholesale, warehouse or similar establishment - One (1) space for each one thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area.
20. Marina - one half (0.5) space per berth except that if the marina is an accessory use to a residential building or project, there shall be no requirements for off-street parking.
95
21. Nursing and convalescent homes - There shall be provided one (1) space per four (4) patient beds or residents plus one (1) space per employee, including nurses and staff doctor, on the shift of greatest employment.
22. Hospital - One and one-half (11/2) spaces per hospital bed.
B. Location of Parking Spaces - Parking spaces for all uses or structures shall be located on the same lot with the principal use unless offsite parking facilities are approved after site plan review as required in Article 8 of this Ordinance. Offsite parking facilities shall not be located more than two hundred (200) feet from the lot on which the principal use to be served is located. Offsite parking must be located in a zoning district where off-street parking facilities for employees and customers are permitted. Where required parking spaces are not located on the same lot as the principal use, a written agreement assuring the continued availability of such offsite facilities to serve the principal use shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit.
C. Collective Provision of Parking Spaces - Two (2) or more owners or operators of commercial buildings or uses of the same type of zoning classification may make collective provision for required off-street parking facilities if the following conditions are met:
1. The total number of off-street parking spaces, when combined, shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for each individual use when computed separately;
2. The combined parking facility is located in a zone district where off-street parking facilities for employees, customers or visitors are permitted;
3. The combined parking facility is approved under provisions for site plan review contained in Article 8 of this Ordinance.
96
D. Landscaping - The following landscaping standards shall apply to all parking lots accommodating twelve (12) or more parking spaces but shall not apply to parking decks or to parking spaces under a permanent structure.
1. At least ten percent of the total area reserved for off-street parking shall be suitably landscaped. A portion of the required landscaped area may border the paved parking area provided that not less than one-half (½) the required landscaped area must be located within the area in which vehicles are parked.
2. Each separate landscaped area must be a minimum of sixteen (16) square feet in area if it is to be counted toward the minimum landscaped area requirement.
3. Within the paved portion of the parking lot, there shall be not less than one tree for each 24 parking spaces. Trees must be a minimum of six (6) feet in overall height immediately upon planting and have a minimum caliper of one and one-half (1½) inches in diameter. The location of trees shall be designed so that visibility at intersections is not restricted.
4. Landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by the use of curbing or wheel stops.
5. The owner, tenant and/or agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for watering and maintaining all landscaping in a healthy, neat, and orderly condition, replacing it when necessary, and keeping it free of refuse and debris.
E. Design Standards and Improvements Requirements
1. Definition. An off-street parking space is an all-weather surfaced area (e.g., asphalt or concrete) not in a street or alley and having an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet and minimum dimensions of 10'x18', exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of automobile and connected with a street or alley by an all-weather surfaced driveway which affords unobstructed ingress and egress to each space.
2. Permit. A parking area permit approved by the Building Inspector shall be required for any parking area with a design capacity for twelve (12) or more vehicles.
3. Parking Area Dimensions. The design and dimensions of the parking area shall be in accordance with the following dimensions table.
97
Dimensions Table
Angle of
Parking
Curb
Length
Per Car
Stall
Depth
Access
Driveway
Width
0
23'0"
9'0"
12'0"
20
26'4"
15'0"
11'0"
30
18'0"
17'4"
11'0"
40
14'0"
19'2"
12'0"
45
12'9"
19'10"
13'0"
50
11'9"
20'5"
12'0"
55
11'1"
20'3"
15'6"
60
10'5"
21'0"
18'0"
70
9'8"
21'0"
19'0"
80
9'8"
20'4"
24'0"
90
9'0"
19'0"
24'0"
4. Width of Two-Way Access Driveways. The minimum width to two-way access driveways within parking area shall be twenty-four (24) feet.
5. Paving Standards. Parking spaces and driveway shall be paved to standards established by the City of Guntersville.
6. Parking Areas Exempted from Landscaping Requirements. All parking areas located within the I-1 Industrial District which are not within fifty (50) feet of any street right-of-way shall be exempt from the landscaped area requirements of this Ordinance.
98
11-2. Off-Street Loading
In any district, in connection with every building, or building group or part thereof hereafter erected and having a gross floor area of four thousand (4,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by commercial or industrial uses requiring the receipt or distribution of goods by trucks, there shall be provided off-street load or unloading berths as follows:
Gross Floor Area
Number of Berths
4,000 - 25,000 square feet
1 berth
25,001 - 40,000 square feet
2 berths
40,001 - 60,000 square feet
3 berths
For each additional 50,000 square feet
1 berth
The loading berth(s) required in each instance shall be not less than twelve (12) feet in width, thirty (30) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height, and may occupy all or any part of any required yard except for a required front yard or water front yard; provided, however, that the loading berth(s) shall be screened from the street or public way.
99
ARTICLE 12
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
12-1. Nonconforming Use of Land
In any district where open land is being used as a nonconforming use, and such use is the main use and not accessory to the main use conducted in a building, such use shall be discontinued not later than two (2) years from the effective date of this Ordinance. During the two-year period, such nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged either on the same or adjoining property. Any building incident and subordinate to such use of land shall be removed at the end of the two-year period or, if such building is so constructed as to permit the issuance of a permit for a use not excluded from the district, such building may remain as a conforming use; thereafter, both land and building shall be used only as conforming uses.
12-2. Nonconforming Use of Buildings
Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawful use of a building existing at the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restrictive classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use. The nonconforming use of a building may be hereafter extended throughout those parts of a building which were lawfully and manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the effective date of this Ordinance.
12-3. Discontinuance of Nonconforming Buildings
No building or portion thereof, used in whole or in part, for a nonconforming use, which remains idle or unused for a continuous period of six (6) months, or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period whether or not the equipment or fixtures are removed, shall again be used, except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building is located.
12-4. Destruction of Nonconforming Uses
No building which has been damaged by any causes whatever to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of the County tax-assessed value of the building shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations contained in this Ordinance and all rights as a nonconforming use are terminated except that if the damaged building is a residence on the date this Ordinance was adopted, such residence may be rebuilt regardless of the extent of damage provided that the nonconformity is not increased.
If a building is damaged by less than fifty (50) percent of the tax-assessed value, it may be repaired and used as before the time of damage, provided that such repairs or reconstruction be substantially completed within twelve (12) months of the time of such damage.
100
12-5. Intermittent of Illegal Uses
The casual, intermittent, temporary, or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use and the existence of a nonconforming use on a part of a lot or tract shall not be construed to establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract.
12-6. Building Nonconforming in Height, Area, or Bulk
A building nonconforming only as to height, area, yards, or bulk requirements of this Ordinance may be altered or extended, provided such alteration or extension does not increase the degree of nonconformity in any respect.
12-7. Nonconforming Signs
A. All legally existing nonconforming signs (except general advertising signs) which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance may continue to lawfully exist provided however, signs which are determined to be fifty percent (50%) or more structurally deteriorated by the Building Inspector shall be either removed or altered so as to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance in instances where a change in use, occupancy, or ownership occurs which necessitates the altering of the sign in any manner.
B. All legally existing nonconforming movable signs which exist on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be removed within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this Ordinance.
C. No permits for additional signs shall be issued for any premises on which there are any nonconforming signs.
12-8. Administration
A. The Building Inspector shall conduct a survey of all nonconforming uses of land or structures at least two (2) times a year to determine where they exist and whether or not they are discontinued.
101
B. The Building Inspector shall maintain an accurate and up-to-date record of all nonconforming uses of structures and land and dates of their discontinuance.
C. The question as to whether a nonconforming use exists shall be a question of fact and in case of doubt or challenge raised to the initial determination made by the Building Inspector; the question shall be decided by the Board of Adjustment after public notice and hearing in accordance with the rules of the Board.
102
ARTICLE 13
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
13-1. Creation and Membership
The Board of Adjustment consists of five members and two supernumerary members appointed by the City Council. Each member is appointed for a term of three (3) years. Members of the Board of Adjustment may be removed for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
13-2. Procedure
A. Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall establish rules for its operation not inconsistent with applicable state statutes or this Ordinance.
B. Officers. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman and secretary from among its members. The chairman shall be the presiding officer of the board and the vice-chairman shall be the presiding officer in the chairman’s absence or disqualification. The terms of all of officers shall be for one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection.
C. Residents of City. All members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Guntersville shall be citizens and residents of the City of Guntersville. Any member who ceases to be a citizen and resident of the City of Guntersville shall vacate said position on the Zoning Board of Adjustment immediately.
D. Minutes and Records. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceeding, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and of other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
E. Meetings Open to Public. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public.
13-3. Appeals to the Board.
1. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, and board of bureau or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days after rendition of the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from in writing to the Board of Adjustment and file same, and two (2) copies of supporting facts and data with the Building Inspector. This does not, however, restrict the filing of a request
103
for a special exception or variance by any person at any time as provided for elsewhere in this Article.
2. Procedure. The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Building Inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application or notice to the Building Inspector and on due cause shown.
3. Hearing on Appeal. Before rendering a decision upon an appeal, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing for which a reasonable time shall be set. Public notice of the hearing shall be given as well as due notice to the parties in interest. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The Board of Adjustment may require the person appealing to send notice by general mail to the property owners within a reasonable area not to exceed a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the property involved and a minimum due notice shall be sent to adjacent property owners. The mailing requirement to owners shall be the most current county assessment role. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
13-4. Powers and Duties
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties when considering matters within its jurisdiction as defined by Title XI Chapter 52 Sec. 80 Alabama Code, as amended.
A. Appeals
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Ordinance as set forth in section 13-3.
B. Variances
Authorized upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
104
A variance is a deviation from the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance which is granted by the Board of Adjustment when strict conformity to the Zoning Ordinance would cause an unnecessary hardship owning to circumstances unique to the property on which the variance is granted. In order to authorize any variance from the terms of this Ordinance, the Board of Adjustment must and shall find:
1. That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
2. That the literal enforcement of the Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography or other extraordinary or exceptional physical situation or physical condition unique to the specific piece of property in question; unnecessary hardship shall mean physical hardship relating to the property itself as distinguished from a hardship relating to convenience, financial considerations or caprice, and the hardship must not result from the applicant or property owner’s own actions.
3. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district;
4. That the literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of this Ordinance;
5. That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure;
6. That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Ordinance, and that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
7. The granting of the variance shall not permit a use in a zoning district that prohibits that use.
The burden of proving to the Board of Adjustment that the foregoing conditions have been met is upon the applicant.
In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, then made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in other zone districts shall be considered grounds for the authorization of a variance.
105
C. Special Exceptions Uses
To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance upon which such board is required to pass under such Ordinance. (See Table 7-1 “Schedule of Permitted Uses”)
The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide applications for special exceptions; decide such questions as are involved in determining when special exceptions should be granted or denied; and grant special exceptions with appropriate safeguards or deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
In granting any special exception, the Board of Adjustment shall find that such grant will not adversely affect the public interest. Such decision shall be reached only after receipt of a written advisory report from the Planning Commission and the holding of a public hearing conducted in a manner set forth elsewhere in this Article.
In granting any special exception, the Board of Adjustment shall be guided by the following standards:
1. That the use is permitted as a special exception within the zone district within which it is to be located.
2. That the use is so designated, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be protected.
3. That the use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood where it is to be located.
4. That the use will be compatible with adjoining development and the proposed character of the district where it is to be located.
5. That adequate landscaping and screening is provided to protect neighboring properties from the nuisance of visual intrusions of activities or structures that would detract from the enjoyment of property by adjoining owners.
6. That adequate off-street parking and loading is provided, that ingress and egress is so designated as to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets and that heavy traffic is not introduced on residential streets.
7. That the use conforms to all applicable regulations governing the district where located.
In granting any special exception, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate
106
conditions and safeguards. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. The Board of Adjustment may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be begun or completed or both. Action taken by the Board of Adjustment on any special exception, after review by the Planning Commission as required by Article 9 of this Ordinance, completes all site plan review requirements for such special exception.
8. Certain public and semi-public uses are essential and desirable for the general convenience and welfare but may not fit compatibly within residential neighborhoods. The following public and semi-public uses may be permitted within residential districts by special exception when it is established by the Board of Adjustment that the location, design, and proposed activities will not adversely affect neighboring properties, streets, utilities, or the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. Uses permitted by special exception in residential districts are:
a. Public schools, and private or parochial elementary and high schools having a curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public elementary and high schools and meeting all standards of the State Board of Education for instruction and site size.
b. Churches, synagogues, and other places of worship including parish houses, rectories, and other facilities normally incidental to places of worship.
c. Cultural activities not carried on as a gainful business, including art galleries, libraries, and museums.
d. Convalescent and nursing homes and homes for the aged.
e. Recreation facilities, country clubs, community centers, and clubs drawing substantial numbers of users from the immediate neighborhood in which they are located, excluding residential accommodations and any activity carried on as a gainful business other than incidental concessions.
f. Cemeteries and mausoleums but not including funeral homes.
g. Fire and/or police stations.
107
D. Other Modifications
The Board may modify the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance and cause a permit to be issued upon such reasonable conditions as it may prescribe in the following cases:
1. The extension of a district for a distance of not more than fifty (50) feet where the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of the passage of this Ordinance.
2. The determination of the proper district applicable to particular land in cases of ambiguity or doubt arising from a difference between the street layout actually on the ground and the street layout as shown on the zone map.
3. The reconstruction of a building, the use of which is nonconforming, which has been destroyed, or partially destroyed, by explosion, fire, act of God or the public enemy.
4. Reduction in the parking and loading requirements of this Ordinance whenever the character or use of a building or premises is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities, or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship, such as extreme financial difficulty, structural difficulty or similar conditions, upon the use of the property.
5. The erection of a temporary building for commerce or industry in the “E” or “R” districts which is incidental to the residential development, such permit to be issued for a period of not more than one year.
13-5. Decision
The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Inspector or to decide in favor of the applicant in respect to any matter upon which the Board of Adjustment can legally act.
13-6. Judicial Remedy by Circuit Court
Any party aggrieved by a final judgment or decision of the Board of Adjustment may within 15 days thereafter appeal to the circuit court by filing with such board a written notice of appeal specifying the judgement or decision from which the appeal is taken. In case of such appeal such board shall cause a transcript of the proceedings in the action to be certified to the court to which the appeal is taken, and the action in such court shall be tried de novo.
108
ARTICLE 14
AMENDMENTS
14-1. Procedure
A. City Council. The City Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this Ordinance as provided by law and upon initiation by one of the following ways:
1. On its own motion.
2. On petition from the owner’s of the property or their authorized agents or owners of a majority of frontage in any area proposed for zoning change.
3. On recommendation of the Planning Commission.
B. Planning Commission. Regardless of the source of the proposed change the Planning Commission must first prepare a preliminary report, hold a public hearing thereon, and submit a final report to the City Council.
C. Petition by Property Owners. Whenever the owner of record of any property desires a change in zoning classification, a change of the conditions or regulations of any district or any other provision of this Ordinance, he shall make written application to the City Clerk on a form provided by the City together with evidence that a deposit of the appropriate fee as set forth in a separate Ordinance to cover cost of notices for required public hearings thereon has been made with the City. Said application shall be accompanied by any necessary information or documentation supporting such request.
14-2. Public Hearings and Notice
A. Planning Commission. The City Council shall not hold its public hearing or take actions on any amendment to this Ordinance until it has received a final report on such amendment from the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall make a preliminary report and hold a public hearing thereon before submitting its final report to the City Council. If no recommendation is received from the Planning Commission within sixty (60) days of the date of application, the City Council may proceed to hold a public hearing.
B. Mailed Notice. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing to be held by the Planning Commission, notice shall be sent to owners of record of property lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the change in zoning is requested. Such notice shall be served by posting the same, postage paid, in the United States Post Office, to owners of record as their name and address appear on the last approved tax roll of Marshall County.
109
C. City Council. Within a reasonable time After receipt of the final report of the Planning Commission or after sixty (60) days of the date of the application on the proposed zoning amendment the City Council shall take action on the proposed zoning amendment. Prior to enactment of any amendment the City Council shall cause the proposed amendment to be published, and hold public hearing thereon, as required by law.
D. No action shall be initiated for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel of land more often than once every twelve months; provided, by resolution of the City Council that such action may be initiated at any time.
E. Both the City Council & Planning Commission shall at a minimum consider the following criteria on all amendments to the official zoning map:
1. Whether the rezoning will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property.
2. Whether the rezoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property.
3. Whether the property to be affected by the rezoning has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned.
4. Whether the rezoning will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools.
5. Whether the rezoning is in conformity with the policy and interest of the most recently adopted land use plan.
6. Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal.
110
14-3. Procedure for Evaluating and Zoning Newly Annexed Land
A. Annexation requests shall first be reviewed by the Planning Commission which shall submit a report to the city council.
B. Newly annexed land to the City of Guntersville shall be zoned at the time of annexation.
C. The property owner shall state in writing in the petition for annexation the type of zoning classification requested. The property owner shall also indicate in the annexation petition whether it will accept a more restrictive zoning classification than the requested classification.
D. After notice as required by law as to annexation and zoning procedures, the City council shall determine whether the zoning classification requested or a more restrictive zoning classification shall apply to the real property to be annexed pursuant to the petition of annexation and subject to the provisions of subsection E herein.
E. If the property owner will not accept a more restrictive zoning classification then the petition for annexation shall be considered by the Council only as to the specific zoning classification requested.
F. Any change in the zoning classification after the original classification upon annexation shall be made as an amendment to this zoning ordinance in the manner set forth in Section 14-1 and 14-2 of this Article.
ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE
Petitions for annexation shall be received by the City Annexation coordinator or other appropriate City Official. The coordinator shall review to insure that the petition is complete. If acceptable, the coordinator shall submit to the City Attorney for legal review. Upon approval, the coordinator shall forward to the Building Official for review by the Planning Commission. The Commission shall review and forward comments as appropriate to the Mayor and City Council.
111
ARTICLE 15
ADMINISTRATION
15-1. Enforcing Officer
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Building Inspector of the City of Guntersville, Alabama or his duly authorized agent. This official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary in carrying out his duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
15-2. General Procedure
A. General Sequence of Steps. All persons desiring to undertake any excavation, new construction, structural alternation, or changes in the use of a building or lot shall apply to the Building Inspector for a building permit and certificate of occupancy, or statement of zoning compliance, by filling out the appropriate application form and submitting the required fee. If the proposed project requires site plan review under provisions of Article 9 of this Ordinance the Building Inspector shall issue no building permit or certificate of occupancy until site plan approval has been obtained. Upon receipt of an application, and upon site plan approval for projects that must conform to provisions of Article 9, the Building Inspector will then either issue or refuse to issue a building permit or refer the application to the City Council or to the Board of Adjustment. After the building permit has been received by the applicant, the applicant may proceed to undertake the action permitted in the building permit. If the Building Inspector finds that the action of the applicant has been taken in accordance with the building permit, a certificate of occupancy will then be issued allowing the premises to be occupied or a statement of zoning compliance will be issued.
B. Building Permit Types. Under the terms of this Ordinance, the following classes of building permits may be issued:
1. Permitted Use: A building permit for a permitted use may be issued by the Building Inspector on his own authority as provided for in other sections of this Ordinance;
2. Special Exception Uses: A building permit for a special exception may be issued by the Building Inspector upon the order of the Board of Adjustment after the procedures and provisions of Section 13-4C of this Ordinance are compiled with;
3. Building Permit after an Appeal or a Request for a Variance: A building permit may be issued by the Building Inspector upon the order of the Board
of Adjustment after the procedures and provisions of Section 13-4B of this Ordinance are complied with.
112
15-3. Building Permit Required
No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged until a permit has been issued by the Building Inspector. Except upon a written order of the Board of Adjustment, no such building permit, and certificate of occupancy or statement of zoning compliance shall be issued for any building where such construction, addition, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
15-4. Certificate of Occupancy
No building hereafter erected, converted or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use and no land may be used until and unless the Building Inspector shall have issued a Certificate of Occupancy.
15-5. Approval of Plans and Issuance of Building Permit
It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector to approve any plans or issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until he has inspected plans for such projects and has found them in conformity with this Ordinance. To this end, the Building Inspector shall require that every application for a building permit for excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration by accompanied by a plan or plat drawn to scale and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the Building Inspector to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alternation is in conformance with this Ordinance:
A. The boundaries of the property involved, easements, adjoining street, waterways, and unusual physical features;
B. Location and dimensions of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved and any building or other structures already on the property;
C. Number of proposed dwelling units;
D. Area of property in square feet;
E. Gross floor area of the principal building(s);
F. Design of required off-street parking facilities;
G. Proposed use of land and buildings; and
H. Any other information required by the Zoning Official to determine compliance with this Ordinance.
113
15-6. Enforcement
A. Upon good cause and upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Inspector or his authorized agent, may enter at any reasonable time, any building, structure, or premises, for the purpose of determining whether this Ordinance is being violated. When a violation of this Ordinance is found, the Building Inspector, or the City, or the City in his behalf is authorized and directed to institute any appropriate action to put an end to such violation.
B. In addition to the criminal penalties and enforcement procedures provided in Article 17 of this Ordinance, the Building Inspector, or the City, or the City in his behalf, may institute any lawful civil action or proceeding to prevent, restrain or abate:
1. The unlawful construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration, rehabilitation, expansion, maintenance or use of any building or structure; or
2. The occupancy of such building, structure, land or water; or
3. The illegal act, conduct, business, or use, in or about any building, structure, or premises.
C. Prior to any criminal prosecution, the Building Inspector, or his authorized agent, shall give a written notice or citation to the person, firm, corporation, or organization violating any provision of this Ordinance stating the rule or regulation being violated and notifying the said person, firm, corporation, or organization to cease and desist such violation immediately. Otherwise, such person, firm, corporation, or organization will be prosecuted as provided herein.
114
ARTICLE 16
INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY
16-1. Interpretation
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protections, promotion and improvement of the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals and general welfare of the community. It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises posed or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces that are imposed or required by other Ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. If because of error or omission in the zoning maps, any property in the City is not shown as being in a zoning district, the classification of such property shall be RS-1 unless changed by amendment to the zoning map or by subsequent zoning ordinances.
16-2. Validity
In the event any court of competent jurisdiction should hold that any article, section, clause or provision of this Ordinance is invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
115
ARTICLE 17
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
For any and every violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, and for each and every day that such violation continues, said violation(s) shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Persons charged with such violation(s) may include:
1. The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, or any other person using the land, building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist.
2. Any person who knowingly commits takes part or assists in such violation.
3. Any person who maintains any land, building or premises in which such violation shall exist.
116
ARTICLE 18
EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING BUILDING PERMITS
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, size, construction or designated use of any building structure or part thereof for which a building permit had been granted by the City before the time of passage of this Ordinance; provided, that where construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of sixty (60) days subsequent to passage of this Ordinance or where it has bot been prosecuted to completion of this Ordinance or where it has been prosecuted to completion within eighteen (18) months subsequent to passage of this Ordinance, any further construction or use shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
117
ARTICLE 19
EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force immediately after its adoption by the City Council of the City of Guntersville, Alabama.
ADOPTED on the 3rd day of June, 2013.
(Seal)
__________________
Mayor
ATTEST:
City Clerk
I, BETTY JONES , City Clerk of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and correct copy of Ordinance No. 1042, which Ordinance was originally adopted at a regular meeting of the City Council on May 18, 22 and 25, 2013. This Ordinance was duly advertised and published as required by Title 11, Chapter 52, Article 4, Section 77.
City Clerk


SUBDIVISION  REGULATIONS


OF


THE CITY OF GUNTERSVILLE,   ALABAMA

GlJNTEKSVILLb PLAN fNG COMMISSION
SEPTEMBER 8, 1998
 

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
OF THE
CITY OF
GUNTERSVILLE, ALABAMA

ADOPTED SEPTEMBER 8, 1998


GUNTERSVILLE PLANNING COMMISSION


GUNTERSVILLE  BUILDING  OFFICIAL
EDWARD W. CRABTREE
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS


ARTICLE I
Purpose, Policy, and Title
Section 1-1. Purpose	1
Section 1-2. Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Section 1-3. Title . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

ARTICLE II
Authority and Jurisdiction

Section 2-1. Authority	4
Section 2-2. Jurisdiction	..........................................  s

ARTICLE III
Definitions

Section 3-1. Usage	6
Section 3-2. Words and Terms Defined	6

ARTICLE IV
Approval of Subdivision Plats

Section 4-1. Approval of Subdivision Plats Required	15
 
Section 4-2.
 
Approval Not Acceptance 	15
 
Section 4-3. General Procedure   	15
Section 4-4. Submission of Sketch Plat  ........................... . 16
Section 4-5. Submission of Preliminary Plat	19
Section 4-6. Submission of the Final Plat 	 	26
Section 4-7. Submission of Certified Plat	(Minor Subdivision) 	31
Development Standards
Section 5-1. Minimum Standards.	37
 
Section 5-2.
 
General Requirements 	37
 
Section 5-4. Design Standards ..................................... 42
Section 5-5. Blocks  ............................................... 47
Section 5-6. Lots	47
Section 5-7. Easements ............................................ 49
 
Section 5-8.
 
Drainage and Inundation .............................. 49
 
Section 5-9. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation  ....................... 50

ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
Section 6-1. Improvements 	51
Section 6-2. Permanent Reference Points 	59
 
ARTICLE VII
Assurance for Completion and Maintenance of Improvements
 
Section 7-1.
 
Completion of Improvements 	62
 
Section 7-2. Methods of Guarantee  ................................. 62
Section 7-3. Time Limits  .......................................... 64
Section 7-4. Improvement Requirements ............................ . 64
 
Section 7-5.
Section 7-6.
Section 7-7.
 
Reduction of Guarantees 	66
Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of
 
Maintenance of Improvements 	66
Occupancy 	66
Section 7-8. Release of Guarantee 	 	66
Section 7-9. Additional Rules for Subdivision Improvement Guarantees 
..................................................... 67
Section 7-10.Bonding of Sidewalk Improvements 	 	68
Section 7-11.Consumer Protection 	 	68
ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions
Section 8-1. Interpretation	70
Section 8-2. Conflict with Public and Private Provisions	70
Section 8-3. Severability.	70
Section 8-4. Saving Provision 	71
Section 8-5. Reservations and Appeals 	71
Section 8-6. Amendments 	71
Section 8-7. Conditions 	71
Section 8-8. Resubdivision of Land ................................ 72 Section 8-9. Vacation of Plats	72 Section                                              8-10.Violations 		73
 
Section 8-11.Penalties and Civil Enforcement	73

ARTICLE IX
Variances

Section 9-1. General .............................................. 74
Section 9-2. Conditions ........................................... 75
 
Section 9-3.
Section 9-4.
 
Procedures ........................................... 75
Special Requirements for Non-Residential Subdivisions	75
 
Section 9-5. Experimental Subdivisions ............................ 77
 
Section 9-6.
 
Comprehensive Group Housing Development  .............. 77

ARTICLE X
Effective Date

APPENDIX I
Sample Certificates

APPENDIX II
Street Sections

APPENDIX III
Subdivision Checklist




ll
 

ARTICLE I

PURPOSE, POLICY, AND TITLE

Section 1-1. Purpose

The purpose of this regulation is to establish procedures and standards for the development and subdivision of real estate within the Subdivision Jurisdiction of the City of Guntersville, Alabama. These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:

(a)	To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City;

(b)	To guide the future growth and development of the City, in accordance with the Strategic Growth Plan;

(c)	To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population;

 
(d)





(e)





IF\
\ .L.. J






(g)









(h)
 

To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the City of Guntersville and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the City;

To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;

To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public requirements and facilities;

To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the City, having particular
regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines;

To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and re-subdivisions, in
rder to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to insure accurate legal descriptions and monumentation of subdivided land;

Page 1
 
(i)



( j )








(k)
 

To insure public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision;

To prevent the pollution of air, soil, and water; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the City in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the land;

To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City and to insure appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
 

Section 1-2. Policy

 
(a)
 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as subject to the control of the City pursuant to the Strategic Growth Plan of the City of Guntersville for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the City.
 

(b)		Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until available public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreation facilities, transportation facilities, and improvements.

(c)		The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the Strategic Growth Plan of the City of Guntersville, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, zoning
ordinances, Strategic Growth Plan, and land use plan
of the City of Guntersville.

{d)	Approval of a subdivision plat shall be considered an amendment to the City of Guntersville Strategic Growth Plan and as such shall be approved by the Planning Commission.





Page 2
 

Section 1-3. Title

These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited, and referred to as the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Guntersville, Alabama.
























































Page 3
 
ARTICLE II

AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION

Section 2-1. Authority

By authority of Resolution of the Planning Commission of the City of Guntersville, Alabama	(hereinafter referred to as "Planning Commission"), said Resolution dated September 8, 1998 and adopted pursuant to the powers and jurisdictions vested through Title 11, Article II, Section 11-52-30 through 11-52-36 inclusive, of the 1975 Code of Alabama as amended, the Planning Commission does hereby exercise the power and authority to review, approve, and disapprove plats for subdivision within the Subdivision Jurisdiction of the City of Guntersville.

By the same authority, the Planning Commission does hereby exercise the power and authority to pass and approve the development of platted subdivisions of land already recorded in the Off ice of County Probate Judge if such
plats are entirely or partially undeveloped. The plat shall be considered to be entirely or partially undeveloped if:

(a)	said plat has been recorded with the Office of the Probate Judge without a prior approval by the Planning Commission, or

(b)	said plat has been approved by the Planning Commission where the approval has been granted more than three (3) years and no lots have been sold and/or no improvements have been made adjacent to a recorded right-of-way and the subdivision regulations have been amended or revised incorporating more stringent development standards.

In the case of either (a) or (b) above, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission a Certified Plat or a Preliminary and Final Plat in accordance with these regulations and shall install improvements within the requirements of these regulations prior to the sale of
lots.













Page 4
 

Section 2-2. Jurisdiction

(a)	From and after the effective date hereof, these regulations shall govern the subdivision of all land located in the City of Guntersville, Alabama, and in addition, for the purpose of extending the extraterritorial planning jurisdiction of the Planning Commission of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, to within one-half	(1/2) mile of the corporate limits of the City.	The jurisdiction is to include all land under same ownership that is contiguous to the one-half mile jurisdiction; as permitted by Section 11-52-30, · Code of Alabama, 1975, as supplemented and amended.

(b)	Any owner of land, which lies within the area of jurisdiction, who wishes to divide or resubdivide such land into two (2) or more lots, sites, or divisions, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, shall submit to the Planning Commission a plat of the subdivision, which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in these regulations, for approval.

(c)	No subdivider shall proceed with improvements or installation of utilities in a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been granted Preliminary Plat approval by the Planning Commission.

{d)	No subdivider shall proceed with the sale of lots or erection of buildings, excluding public utility structures, within a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been granted Final Plat approval
entered in writing on the plat and signed by the
Chairman of the Planning Commission and recorded in the
Off ice of the County Probate Judge and certified copies
of the recorded plat are filed with the Administrative
Officer except as provided herein.

(e) No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these subdivision regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the regulations.









Page 5
 
ARTICLE III

DEFINITIONS

Section 3-1. Usage

For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word
11 herein 11        means "in these regulations"; the word
"regulations" means "these regulations".

A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association of persons such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; a "building" includes a "structure"
and includes any part thereof; "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied".


Section 3-2. Words and Terms Defined

Administrative Officer - the person appointed by the Governing Body to administer and enforce these regulations.

Alley - a public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as a secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.

Applicant - the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.

Block		- a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad riaht-of-wav. shorelines of waterways, or
b	d	y li es of mu icipalities.

Bond	- See Improvement Guarantee
BUildina - anv structure built for the support, shelter, or
.	enclo ure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable
property of any kind, and includes any structure.

Building Setback Line - a line parallel to the property line in front of which no structure may be erected,



Page 6
 

Bulk Plane - An  imaginary inclined plane rising over a lot, drawn at a specified angle from the vertical, the bottom side of which is coincidental with the lot line(s) of the lot, and which together with other bulk regulations and lot size requirements, delineates the maximum bulk of any improvement which may be constructed on the lot. No portion of any structure may extend beyond the angle of bulk plane.

Certified Plat (Minor Subdivision) - A certified plat shall be defined as either:

a.	The division of a tract of land of legal record into lots of not less than 10 acres (435,600 sq. feet) each, for the purpose of selling said lots but not for the development of same, provided such
subdivision shall not require any new street or road to meet road frontage requirements for all lots created, or the extension of water or sewer facilities or the creation of any public improvements; OR

b.	The division of a tract of land into no more than 4 lots all fronting on an existing
paved public road and not requiring the construction or extension of any new roads or streets, municipal facilities or public improvements except sidewalks; OR

c.	The division of land owned by one or more individuals and/or corporations into homogeneous land use areas which constitute the General Plan of a Planned Unit Development district for the purpose of subsequent subdivision and development as provided for in the enabling ordinance for the Planned Unit Development district; OR

d.	The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots or tracts resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by the Zoning Ordinance; OR

e.	Instruments correcting surveying data or other details of previously recorded subdivision plat.

- The City of Guntersville, Alabama, together with its subdivision jurisdiction.


Page 7
 
City Clerk - The duly designated Clerk of the City of Guntersville, Alabama.

City Council - The City Council of the City of Guntersville, Alabama.

City Engineer - The duly designated Engineer of the City of Guntersville, Alabama.

City Specifications - All construction specifications which have been adopted by the Governing Body or as required by the Planning Commission and all utility departments.

Collector Street - See Street, Collector

Corner Lot - A lot which occupies the interior angle of two
(2) street	ights-of-way boundaries. The street
right-of-way forming the least frontage shall be
deemed the front of the lot except where the two (2)
boundaries are equal, in which case the owner shall
be required to specify which boundary is the front.

County		- Shall mean Marshall County to be the competent jurisdiction for procedural activities related to subdivision of land and/or development activities.

Crosswalk - A public right-of-way ten (10} feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian access to adjacent properties.

Cul-De-Sac - A minor street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.

Dedication - The transfer of property ownership from private to public.

Developer - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to be included in a given development, or the authorized agent thereof. In addition, the holder of an option or contract to purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less than thirty (30}    years, or other persons having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land shall be deemed to be a developer for the purpose of these Regulations.

Development - The act of combining raw lands, roads, utilities, buildings, financing and promotion into a completed operating property with npermanent ;; improvements.


Page 8
 

Development, substantial completion of - Completion and acceptance by the responsible agency of all streets, roads, alleys, curbs and gutters, surface drainage measures for prevention of soil erosion and private property, parks and open space, and utilities	(which shall be stubbed out to ownership tracts where appropriate); AND certification indicating that all required improvements have been installed or that sufficient bond exists to cover all costs of completion of the improvements; AND  additional certificates and dedications necessary to insure adequate access for public protection and utilities as well as conformance to applicable plans and ordinance requirements.

Depth of Lot - The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.

Double Front Lot - A lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.

Drainageway - A natural or artificial depression that carries surface water to a  larger watercourse or outlet such as a river, lake, or bay.
Easement - A grant by the property owner of use, by the public, a corporation, or person(s}, of a strip of land for specified reasons, or as created by operation of law.

Escrow - A deposit of cash with the local government in lieu of an amount required and still in force on a performance of maintenance bond.

Final Plat - A plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of these regulations and is in the proper form recording in the Off ice of the Probate Judge.

Flood - An overflow of lands not normally covered by water that results in significant adverse effects in the vicinity.

Floodplain - Those land areas in and adjacent to streams and watercourses subject to continuous or periodic inundation from 100-year flood frequency events.
Floodplains shall include all areas of the City which are designated as floodplain by the Federal Insurance Administration, by the United States Geological Survey or by the State of Alabama. Areas designated as floodplains by the Federal Insurance Administration shall not have their base flood elevations altered without prior approval from the Federal Insurance Administration.
Page 9
 
Floodway - The natural channel and the portion of the flood plain along the channel which must be retained solely for the passage of floodwaters to prevent an undue increase in flood heights upstream. For the
purposes of these regulations, the areas included in the floodway are designated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development	(HUD), Federal Emergency Management Agency or Community
Map. Along other small streams and drainage channels land lying within twenty-five	(25) feet horizontal distance of the top of the banks shall be considered to be within a floodway, unless the developer demonstrates to the Planning Commission that a
lesser distance, but not less than ten (10) feet, is adequate.

Land Subject to Flood - For the purposes of these regulations, land subject to flood shall be considered all land located within the geographic area subject to flooding as identified on maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Floor Area Ratio - Determine the FAR by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the area of that lot.

Group Development - A development comprising of two (2) or more structures, built on a single lot, tract, or parcel of land, designed for occupancy by separate families, firms, or other enterprises, and the land is not subdivided into the customary streets and lots.

Governing Body - The Mayor and the City Council of the City of Guntersville, Alabama.

Hardship - An unusual situation on the part of an individual property owner which will not permit him to enjoy the full utilization of his property which is given to others within the City. A hardship exists only when it is not self-created.

Health Department - Shall mean the County Health Department of the appropriate jurisdiction.

High Density - Those residential zoning districts in which the density is equal to or greater than one dwelling unit per 7,500 square feet.

Improvement Guarantee - Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Governing Body. All bonds shall

Page lO
 

be approved by the Governing Body whenever a bond is required by the regulations.

Lot -	A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development.

Low Density - Those residential zoning districts in which the density is equal or less than one dwelling unit per 15,000 square feet.

Major Subdivision - All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, including but not limited to subdivisions of four (4) or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new streets or extension of the local governmental facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.

Medium Density - Those residential zoning districts in which the density is between 10,000 and 15,000 square feet per dwelling unit.

Mini-Warehousing Establishment - A completely enclosed building without loading docks and consisting of individual, small, self contained units that are leased or owned for dead storage of business and household goods, or contractors' supplies.

Minor Subdivision - See Certified Plat

Monument - A permanent object serving to indicate a limit or to mark a boundary.

Noise Impact District (Noise Exposure District) - An overlay district or districts established for the general purpose of controlling conflicts between land uses and noise generated by aircraft and to protect the public health, safety and welfare from the adverse impacts associated with excessive noise. It is the intent of this district to regulate the height of
man-made structures and land uses within designated existing or projected airport noise impact areas by requiring acoustical performance standards which meet or exceed those specified in the Alabama Statewide Uniform Building Code.

Nonresidential Subdivision - A subdivision whose intended
use is other than residential, such as commercial or
industrial. Such subdivision shall comply with
Section 9-4, of these regulations.

Open Space - Shall be any land either publicly or privately owned which is designated as being permanently
Page 11
 
developed and used for recreation, conservation, or preservation.

Owner - Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations.

Owner's Engineer/Surveyor - Shall mean the engineer or land surveyor registered and in good standing with the State Board of Registration of Alabama who is the agent in his professional capacity of the owner of land which is proposed to be subdivided or which is in the process of being subdivided.

Planned Unit Development - Shall mean the use of land and density of buildings and structures different from those which are allowed as of right within the zoning district in which the land is situated.

Planning Commission - Shall mean the Planning Commission of the City of Guntersville, Alabama.

Preliminary Plat - Shall mean a tentative plan of the	"' complete proposed  subdivision submitted to the
Planning Commission for its consideration.

Probate Judge - Shall mean the County Judge of Probate for the appropriate competent jurisdiction.
Registered Engineer - An engineer properly licensed and registered in the State.

Registered Land Surveyor - A land surveyor properly licensed and registered in the State.

Resubdivision - A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.

Road, Dead-End - A road or a portion of a street with only one (1) vehicular-traffic outlet.

Setback - The distance between a building and the street line nearest thereto.

Sidewalk - Walkway constructed for use by pedestrians.

Single Tier Lot - A lot which backs upon an arterial street, a railroad, a physical barrier, or a residential or

Page 12
 
nonresidential use, and to which access from the rear of the lot is usually prohibited.

Sketch Plat - A sketch preparatory to the preparation of the preliminary plat (or Final Plat in the case of minor subdivision) to enable the applicant to save time
and expense in reaching general agreement with the
Planning Commission as to the form of the plat and
the objectives of these regulations.

Strategic Growth Plan - A Strategic Growth Plan for development of the City, prepared and adopted by the Planning Commission, pursuant to State law, and including any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.

Street - A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.

a.	Arterials - Arterial routes are heavy
traffic carriers of the City and function to
move intra-city and inter-city traffic. The streets which comprise the arterial system
may also serve abutting property; however, their major function is to carry traffic.

b.	Major Thoroughfares - Major thoroughfares perform the function of collecting traffic from residential, commercial, or industrial streets and carrying it to the arterials. They may perform an additional function by also serving abutting residential, commercial, or industrial property	Major thoroughfares should be designed to serve as city-wide routes providing access to inter­ city arterials.

c.	Collectors - These routes are important streets whose primary function is to collect traffic from an area and move it to a major thoroughfare or arterial while also
providing  substantial  service  to abuttir1g
land use. Typically, they should not have extensive continuity, or they may be used undesirably as major thoroughfares. Their development	in new growth areas is usually dependent upon the form taken by land subdivision, whether the subdivision is residential in nature, or a planned commercial, office, or industrial development.


Page 13
 
d.	Minor Streets - Minor streets comprise the remainder of the street system and have the primary function of servicing abutting land use. Through traffic should be stringently discouraged on these streets.

Subdivider - Any person who (1) having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who (2), directly or
indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or development, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, and who (3) is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct, or indirect common control with any of the foregoing.

Subdivision - Shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites, or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory being subdivided. It shall include all divisions of land
involving the dedication of a new street or a change
in existing streets.

Subdivision Jurisdiction - The territorial jurisdiction of the City of Guntersville Planning Commission over the subdivision of land including all land located in the corporate limits and all land lying within one-half	(1/2) mile of the corporate limits of the City and not located in any other municipality or its territorial jurisdiction.

Subdivision, Major - See Major Subdivision Subdivision, Minor - See Certified Plat
Thoroughfare Plan - The Thoroughfare Plan, prepared as an element of the Strategic Growth Plan.

Watercourse - A definite channel with bed and banks within which concentrated water flows, either continuously or intermittently.

Width of Lot - The mean horizontal distance between the two side lot lines.

Zoning Ordinance - The official Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Guntersville, Alabama.


Page 14
 

ARTICLE IV

APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS

Section 4-1. Approval of Subdivision Plats Required - Effects of Non-Compliance

From and after the date of filing a copy of these regulations with the Probate Judge, no subdivision plat of land within the planning jurisdiction of the City of Guntersville shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Guntersville, and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the Chairman of the Planning Commission. The Probate Judge, upon receipt of a copy of these regulations, shall not thereafter file or record a plat of a subdivision of land located within the planning jurisdiction without the approval of such plat as required herein. No street shall be accepted and maintained by the City nor shall any street lighting, water, or sewer be extended to or connected with any subdivision of land, nor shall any permit be issued by the Administrative Officer,
or his agent, or any department of the City of Guntersville
for the construction of any building or other improvement
requiring a permit, upon any land concerning which a plat
is required to be approved, unless and until the
requirements set forth in these regulations have been
complied with and the plat has been approved by the
Planning Commission and a copy of the recorded plat is on
file with the Administrative Officer as required herein.

Section 4-2. Approval Not Acceptance

The approval of a plat by  the Planning Commission shall not be deemed to constitute or effect the formal acceptance for maintenance by the City of Guntersville of any street or other public utility line, or other facilities serving the subdivision ..

Section 4-3. General Procedure

4-3-1.	Classification of Plats. Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for erection of a structure in such proposed
subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner
or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure
approval for such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure, which
includes one (1) required step for a certified plat
and two (2)	required steps for a major subdivision:


Page 15
 
(1)


(2)
 

Certified Plat (Minor Subdivision)
(a)	Sketch Plat (optional)
(b)	Final Certified Plat
Major Subdivision
(a)	Sketch Plat (optional)
(b)	Preliminary Plat
(c)	Final Subdivision Plat
 

4-3-2.		Official Submission Dates. For the purpose of these regulations, the date of the regular scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission, or the continuation meeting thereof, at which the proposed plat is first presented for the approval shall constitute the official submittal date of the plat and the statutory period required for formal approval or disapproval of the plat shall begin as provided herein.

4-3-3.		Requirements for Plat Submittal. The Administrative Officer shall refuse to review any plat submitted for approval, and shall refuse to place said plat on the agenda of the Planning Commission unless all the following requirements are met:


a.	the plat conforms to the existing zoning regulations for the property proposed to be subdivided with respect to minimum lot size and all other dimensional requirements; and
b.	the plat and all accompanying information
are complete, and all information called for
in these Regulations has been presented by
the established deadline for such
submittals.

 
Notwithstanding any provisions herein to the contrary, the Administrative Officer may refuse to permit the placement of more than one plat for the same property on the same aqenda, and may decline to review and/or place on the
Commission's agenda any plat that proposes to subdivide the same property as a plat already submitted and not yet disposed of by the Planning Commission.

Any appeal of the decision of the Administrative Officer shall be to the Chairman of the Planning Commission, whose decision may be appealed to the whole Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled and advertised meeting. The Planning Commission's determination shall be the final administrative determination the matter.

Section 4-4. Submission of Sketch Plat

The procedure for obtaining Sketch Plat concurrence is as follows:

Page 16
 








..;.
 

4-4-1.		Discussion of Requirements. Before preparing the Sketch Plat for a subdivision, the applicant should discuss with the Administrative Officer the
procedure for approval of a subdivision plat and the requirements as to general layout of streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, water, and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services. The
Administrative Officer shall also advise the
applicant,. where appropriate, to discuss the
proposed subdivision with those officials who must
eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision
plat coming within their jurisdiction.

4-4-2.	Application Procedure. Sketch plats, and relevant supporting materials, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Commission no less than thirty {30) calendar days prior to a regular commission meeting to be scheduled on the agenda of that meeting. Applications for sketch plat review shall include nine (9) copies of the proposed plat and a sketch vicinity map which shall be at the same scale as the Official Zoning Map. Other information which describes physical and legal aspects of the property and the surrounding environs may be submitted-with the application. The applicant is encouraged to appear at the Planning Commission meeting for review of the sketch plat and supporting information. {Sketch plat review is not a mandatory requirement for subdivision approval. However, this step is recommended of all applications for
Certified Plat approval.)

4-4-3.	Sketch Plat Requirements. A Sketch Plat, if
submitted, shall be drawn at an approximate scale of
200 feet to one inch and shall show the tentative
street layout, approximate right-of-way width, lot
arrangements, the location of the nearest water and
sewer lines, water courses, existing structures,
total acres, approximate number of lots, adjoining streets, north point, tract boundary, and proposed
use of land.
4-4-4.	Classification. Classification of the sketch plat as
preliminary to application for either a certified plat or a major subdivision, as defined herein,
shall be made by the Planning Commission as the first order of business during the scheduled review time. Applications which do not meet all requirements for a certified plat shall be classified as a major subdivision.

4-4-5.	Concurrence of Sketch Plat. Following review of the sketch plat, the Planning Commission will advise the

Page 17
 
applicant of specific changes or additions, if any, which will be required as prerequisite to consideration for preliminary and/or final approval of the subdivision plat. Recommendations made for the record by the Planning Commission shall constitute informal authorization to proceed with the subdivision application. However, prior to
granting subsequent approval the Planning Commission may require additional modifications to the preliminary plat and/or final plat to ensure compliance with these subdivision regulations.


















































Page 18
 

Section 4-5. Submission of Preliminary Plat

The procedure for obtaining Preliminary Plat approval is as follows:

4-5-1.	Application Procedure. Based upon the approval of the Planning Commission of the Sketch Plat (optional), the applicant shall file an application for approval of a Preliminary Plat. The application shall:

(1)	Be made on forms available at the Office of the Administrative Officer; and

(2)	Be accompanied by a filing fee, payable to the City Clerk, in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) per lot to cover the cost of advertising and administration; plus the applicant shall be responsible for the cost of all engineering reviews; and

(3)	Be accompanied by at least three (3) complete sets of black or bluelined prints of the proposed subdivision and nine sets of the plat and site plan drawings prepared in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision regulations, and;

(4)	Be submitted to the Planning Commission Secretary or City Clerk at least thirty ( 30 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting.

(5)	At the discretion of the Planning Commission, complete sets of the Preliminary Plat may be submitted in digital format.

4-5-2.		Public Hearinq. The Planning Com.mission shall conduct a public hearing on all proposed preliminary plats. Formal notice of the scheduled public hearing shall be sent by registered mail to all adjoining land owners of record. It is the responsibility of the applicant for preliminary plat approval to provide the Secretary of the Planning Commission with the correct names and addresses of all
adjoining land owners as they appear in the current records of the County Tax Assessor. Formal notices shall be postmarked no less than five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. Any change or modification to a Preliminary Plat submitted to the Planning Commission for public hearing may require a subsequent noticed public


Page 19
 
hearing if deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.

4-5-3.		Preliminary Approval. After the Planning Commission has reviewed the preliminary plat and construction plans, any City recommendations and testimony and exhibits submitted at the public hearing, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or additions. One (1) copy of the proposed preliminary plat shall be returned to the applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and the reasons therefore accompanying the plat and one (1) copy that shall be retained by the Planning Commission. Before the Planning Commission approves a preliminary plat showing park reservation or land for other local government use proposed to be dedicated to the City, the Planning Commission may obtain concurrence of the park or land reservation from the City Council. ·The approval of the preliminary plat shall not be
deemed final acceptance but rather an expression of approval of the layout as submitted on the preliminary plat.

4-5-4.		Effective Period of Preliminary Approval. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one (1) year at the end of which time final approval on the subdivision must have
been obtained from the Planning Commission, although
the plat need not yet be	signed and filed with the
Probate Judge. Any plat not receiving final approval
within the period of time set forth herein shall be
null and void, and the applicant shall be required
to resubmit a new plat for preliminary approval
subject to all new zoning restrictions and
subdivision regulations and filing fees.

4-5-5.		Zoning Regulations. Every plat shall conform to existing zoning regulations and subdivision regulations applicable at the time of final approval, except that any plat which has received preliminary approval shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to the Zoning Ordinance rendering the plat nonconforming as to bulk or use, provided that final approval is obtained within the one (1) year period.

4-5-6.		Resubmission of Preliminary Plat. The Planning Commission shall not consider, for a period of twelve (12) months, a preliminary plat which has been resubmitted for approval after Planning Commission disapproval, unless the applicant has complied with the Planning Commission's required

Page 20
 

changes and/or additions. Any resubmission shall be subject to a public hearing.

4-5-7.		Preliminary Plat Requirements. The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a convenient scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one (1) sheet is used. The sheet size shall be acceptable for filing in the Office of the Probate Judge but shall not exceed twenty four by thirty six (24" x 36") inches. The Preliminary Plat shall fulfill the following requirements:

1.		Preliminary plats shall be so designated and will contain the name of the proposed
subdivision OR the words "Resubdivision of .." if the proposed subdivision, or any portion
thereof, is a part of any previously approved subdivision of legal record.

2.	The name, address and Deed Book and Page of record of the legal owner AND the name and address of the agent or agents acting for the legal owner.

3.	North point referenced to a line established in the U.S. Public land survey, date and scale.

4.	A caption giving the location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter and section,
township, range, city, county and state including sufficient description to clearly define the lands; AND lot and block and subdivision name and parcel number(s) and legal Plat Book and Page of all portions which are a part of previously approved subdivision{s) of legal record.

5.	The name, address, and seal of the registered land surveyor preparing the plat or map.

6.	A vicinity map at the same scale as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Guntersville which shall show the location of the proposed subdivision and all existing and approved roads within twelve hundred	(1200) feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision.

7.	The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the tract of land being subdivided. Distances will be provided to the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings to the
Page 21
 
nearest second to achieve a positional accuracy of 1:10,000, corresponding to third order accuracy.
 

ii>;:
 

8.	Dimensions and area in acres or square feet of all proposed lots and other land areas and the bearings of the respective sides. All lots and blocks shall be numbered.

9.	Radii, central angle, arc distance, chord lengths, and points of tangency of all curves.

10.	The name, address, and legal Deed Book and Page of the ownership for all adjacent parcels as they appear in the current records of the County Tax Assessor's Office.

11.	Wooded areas, wetlands, unstable soils or slopes and any other adverse condition affecting the site.

12.	The location, widths, and names of all existing or platted streets, alleys, pedestrian ways or other public ways and easements, jurisdiction lines, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, water courses, culverts and drain pipes, water mains, bridges, and other permanent or temporary
buildings or structures, and other public places on or adjacent to the tract of land being subdivided.

13.	The location, widths, and names of all proposed streets, alleys, pedestrian ways or other public ways and easements.

14.	The location, widths, purposes, and names of all existing or proposed public rights-of-way and easements.

15.	Required and proposed minimum building setback lines.

16.	Land intended to be dedicated to parks, school sites, open space, or other public use, or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all
property owners in the subdivision with conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservations. Private property to be held in common and NOT dedicated for public use shall be so indicated ..




Page 22
 

17.	Zoning classification of the land to be subdivided and the zoning classification of all adjoining tracts of land.

18.	Flood plain district limits including the contour line of the floodway, the flood profile elevation (100 year flood).

19.	Site information including:
(a)	Acreage in total tract
(b)	Smallest lot size
(c)	Total number of lots
(d)	Linear feet in streets

20.	Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet.

21.	State Plane Coordinates shall be indicated on the Preliminary Plat.

4-5-8.		Construction Plans. At the time of submission of Preliminary Plat, the applicant shall also submit Construction Plans for all required improvements. Plans shall meet the minimum standards of design general requirements for the construction of public improvements as set forth in these regulations. Construction Plans shall be drawn at a scale of than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, and map sheets shall be of the same size as the Preliminary Plat. Construction Plans shall be prepared by a Registered Engineer. The following construction plans shall included:

(1)	Street plan containing the following information:

(a)	Location of all proposed and existing streets or rights-of-way in or adjacent to the subdivision.

(b)	Width of existing and proposed rights-of­ way.

(c)	Street names.

(d)	Plan and profile of all streets, showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred	(100) feet horizontal and one
(1)	inch equals ten (10) feet vertical.

(e)	Cross sections of proposed streets at a minimum of 100' stations.

Page 23
 
(f)	Curve data for the centerline of each street; Delta, Tangent, and Radius.

(g)		Location of all required sidewalks and crosswalks.

 
(2)










































{3}
 
Storm Drainage Plan containing the following information:

{a)		Location of proposed drainageways, streams and ponds in the subdivision.

(b)	Topography at five (5) foot contour intervals.

{c)		Location, size, and invert elevations of proposed drainage structures including culverts, bridges, pipes, drop inlets, and top elevations of head walls, etc.,
showing details on Drainage Plan, including conduit schedule.

{d)		Show construction details of typical manholes, inlets, junction boxes and other drainage structures proposed.

(e)	Area of land contributing run-off to each drainage structure along with run-off calculations of each area and drainage calculations for each drainage structure along drainage ditch.

(f)	Location of easements and rights-of-way for drainageways and maintenance access thereof.

(g)	Typical cross sections of each drainageway.

(h)	Direction of water flow throughout subdivision and compatibility with existing City or natural drainage.

Sanitary Sewer Plan containing the following information:

(a)	Location, size, invert ana cop elevations of all existing and proposed sewers in the subdivision and tie-points of the subdivision. Location of sewer laterals.

(b)	Direction of flow of each sewer line.


Page 24
 

(c)	Location of each manhole and other sewerage system appurtenances including lift stations, oxidation ponds, and treatment plants, if any.

(d)	Show construction details of typical manholes, connections, and other sewage structures proposed.

(e)	Plan and profile of sewage system.


(4)	Water Distribution Plan containing the following information:

(a)	Location and size of water distribution system including pipes, valves, fittings,
.hydrants, high-pressure pumping equipment, etc.

(5)	Electric Distribution Plan containing the following information:

(a)	Location of all poles and streetlights or subsurface facilities as necessary to serve each lot or parcel of land within the subdivision.
(b)	Street lighting in new developments is the responsibility of the developer along with
the initial purchase cost and installation
cost related to street lighting

The Electric Board of Guntersville will be responsible for the labor portion for maintaining the lights and the City will
be responsible for the replacement bulbs
and photocells.	Major replacement items
such as globes and posts or poles will be
the responsibility of the developer.

The City of Guntersville provides the energy used in accordance with current policies and therefore the lights shall be placed in a manner which will provide lighting to public roads and rights of
way.
Lights must be placed at distances of no
less than 300 feet and no greater than 350
feet apart.	If there is an exception it
must be approved by the City inspector and
also the Electric Board.	Final location approval must be given by the City.


Page 25
 

Light pol s must be constructed of fiberglass, metal, or concrete and must have a fixture mounting height between 12 and 25 feet.	The developer shall provide one replacement pole for every 4 poles that are installed or 1 extra pole whichever is greater.


Light fixtures must be either 175 watt mercury vapor or 100 watt high pressure sodium.	All lights must have an attached
photocell control.	Post top fixtures-must	.
have an attached weather proofing globe.
The developer must provide replacement
globes to the Electric Board in the amount
of 1 globe for every 4 installed or two
globes whichever is greater

The Electric Board will assist the developer in the electrical connections for the street lighting ..

(6)	Letter of approval from the appropriate municipal, county or state department or agency concerned with the approval of 1-5 above. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide the Planning Commission with the letter of approval prior to the Planning Commission's approval of the Preliminary Plat.

Section 4-6. Submission of the Final Plat

In accordance with these Subdivision Regulations, no street shall be accepted and maintained by the City nor shall any street lighting, water, storm sewer, or sanitary sewer be extended to or connected with any subdivision of land as defined herein, nor shall any permit be issued by an administrative agent or any department of the City for the construction of any building or other improvements
requiring a permit unless and until a subdivision plat has been approved by the Planning Commission and the filing requirements described herein have been satisfied.

4-6-1.	Application Procedure and Requirements. Following approval of the Preliminary Plat and within the time limits herein established, the applicant shall file with the Secretary of the Planning Commission an application for final approval of the proposed subdivision plat. The application shall:

(1)		Be made on forms available at the Office of the Administrative Officer.


Page 26
 

(2)	Be accompanied by the original tracing, and nine (9) black or blueline prints of the plat. The Planning Commission, at its discretion, may allow magnetic media filing of required prints of the Final Plat.

(3)	Comply in all respects with the Preliminary Plat, as approved, except for minor modifications not altering the design of the subdivision.

(4)	Be presented to the Secretary of the Planning Commission at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting.

(5)	Be submitted within one (1) year of the date of Preliminary Plat approval.

(6)	If improvements are not completed and approved by various municipal departments, be accompanied by an improvement guarantee, if required, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney and in an amount established by the Planning Commission upon recommendation of the City Engineer.

(7)	If improvements are completed at time of final plat, certificates from the municipal departments having jurisdiction stating that
all streets shown on the plat have been graded, drained, and surfaced with an asphalt or concrete driving surface in accordance with the typical street sections shown in Appendix II
and equal to or exceeding the regulation of the Alabama State Highway Department specifications (1985 edition) as hereinafter set out:

Base Course:	Crushed aggregate base course plant mix shall be in accordance with Section 301 of the specifications.	All materials
shall be in accordance with Section 825, type B, 100 percent
compaction.

Asphalt Paving:	Bituminous binder layer shall be 2 inches thick and placed in accordance with Section
414 of specifications.	Bituminous pavement shall be one inch thick and placed in accordance with Section 416, mix A of the specifications (siliceous aggregate) .
Page 27
 

Sub Grade:	Top 6 inch sub-grade,
100 percent compaction.	Below top
6 inches, 95 percent.

Curb and Gutter:	Except where otherwise specified, all streets must be installed with concrete curb and gutters with the curb having a height of 6 inches and backside having a distance of 12 inches from the curb.	Said improvements shall be made in
accordance with the requirements of the Guntersville Street Department, and have the written approval of
the building inspector.

4-6-2. Public Meeting. The Planning Commission shall consider the final plat at a public meeting.	The purpose of the final plat is to provide an accurate
and legal record or survey of the subdivision. It is in effect an "as-built" drawing. It will be approved if any conditions attached to the preliminary
approval have been fulfilled, and the city engineer
certifies that all required improvements have been
completed or are bonded.

4-6-3. Vested Rights. No vested rights shall accrue to any plat upon final approval until:

(1)	The plat is signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission; and

(2)	The signed plat is recorded with the Probate Judge; and

(3)	Certified copies of the recorded plat are filed with the Administrative Officer as herein provided.

Final approval of a subdivision plat is subject to all requirements for installation of improvements, conditions, or subdivision regulations adopted by the Planning Commission prior to the time of signing of
the final plat by the Chairman of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall not modify conditions to final approval of a subdivision plat.

4-6-4. Signing and Recording of the Final Plat. (1)Signing of Plat

Page 28
 

(a)	When an.improvement guarantee is required, the Chairman of the Planning Commission shall endorse approval on the plat after
the guarant e has been approved by the City of Guntersville and all the conditions of the resolution pertaining to the plat have been satisfied.

(b)	When installation of improvements is required, the Chairman of the Planning Commission shall endorse approval on the plat after all conditions of the resolution have been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed. There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the City of Guntersville as shown by a certificate signed by the City Engineer and Administrative Officer that
the necessary improvements have been
accomplished and accepted into the City's
maintenance program.



(2)	Recording of Plat

(a)	The Chairman of the Planning Commission will sign the original tracing of the subdivision plat and return the tracing to the applicant engineer.

(b)	The applicant is responsible for filing the plat with the County Probate Judge and to file a reproducible and five (5) copies of the recorded plat with the Administrative Officer within thirty (30) days of the date of signature unless a specific time extension for filing has been granted by
the Planning Commission during final plat
approval. No permits for construction of
buildings or other improvements shall be
issued by the City unless the recording
requirements are completed as herein
provided.

4-6-5. Final Plat Requirements. The Final Plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor, shall meet or exceed minimum technical standards for land surveying in the State of Alabama, and shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a convenient scale of not less than 1:100. The Final Plat, as submitted for approval, shall be prepared in in_k on linen or a suitable permanent mylar reproducible. The sheet size shall be
Page 29
 
acceptable for filing with the County Probate Judge, but shall not exceed twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x
36) inches. The Final Plat shall show the following:

(1)	Name of subdivision, north point, scale, and location.

(2)	The relation of the land so platted to the - Government Survey. The "point of beginning" as referred to in the written description shall be so indicated.

(3)	Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, block line, and minimum building setback lines whether straight or curved. This shall include the radius, central angle, point of tangency, tangent distance, and· arcs and chords.

(4)	The names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets, with reference to recorded plats by record name.

(5)	The exact position of the permanent monuments shall be indicated on the plat by small circle  "o".

(6)	Streets and alleys, rights-of-way, and street names.

(7)	Rights-of-way or easements, including location, widths, and purposes.

(8)	Lot lines and lot and block numbers.

(9)	Minimum building setback lines. In the instance of double frontage lots, the direction of the building fronts shall be clearly indicated.

(10)	Parks, school sites, or other public open spaces, any.

(11)	All dimensions should be to the nearest one­ hundredth (1/100) of a foot and angles within plus or minus one {l) second.

(12)	The following endorsements, dedications, and certificates shall be placed on the Final Plat (See Appendix Ifor sample certificates) :

(a)	Registered Surveyor's Certificate and Description of Land Platted.
Page 30
 

(b)	Dedication.

(c)	A notary's Acknowledgement of the Dedication Certificates referred to in "b" above.

(d)	A Certificate of Approval by Guntersville Electric Board or other applicable authority.

(e)	A Certificate of Approval by the Water and Sewer Board of the City of Guntersville or other applicable authority.
(f)	A Certificate of Approval by the Marshall County Gas District.

(g)	A Certificate of Approval by the City Engineer of the City of Guntersville.

(h)	A Certificate of Approval by the Planning Commission of the City of Guntersville.

(i)	A Certificate of Approval by The Marshall County Health Department if septic tanks and/or wells are necessary for development.

(j)	Any restrictions and/or special notations as may be required by other sections of these regulations, i.e., NEF Zone Contours.

The above certificates shall be lettered or typed on the Final Plat in such a manner as to insure that said certificates will be legible on any prints made therefrom.

4-6-6. Engineering Plan. At the time of Final Plat approval, the applicant shall also submit an engineering plan, or "as-built" plan, giving details of construction
and locations of the improvements which have been installed. The primary purpose of the engineering plan is to provide the City with a record of the location, size, and design of underground utilities for the City's use in the course of maintaining such improvements. If the installation of improvements is completed under an improvement guarantee the engineering plan shall be submitted to the City upon request of release of the improvement guarantee by the applicant.

Section 4-7. Submission of Certified Plat (Minor Subdivision)

4-7-1. Application Procedure. Based upon Planning Commission approval of the sketch plat	(optional), the applicant

Page 31
 

shall file an application for approval of a Certified Plat. The application shall be:

(1)	Made on forms available at the Office of the Administrative Officer; and

(2)	Accompanied by a filing fee, payable to the City Clerk for the City of Guntersville, in the
amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) per adjoining landowner to cover the costs of advertising, official notification and administration; the applicant shall be responsible for the cost of all engineering reviews; and

(3)	Accompanied by at least nine(9)sets of blackline or blueline prints of the proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with the requirements of the certified plat regulations. At the	· discretion of the Planning Commission, complete sets of the proposed subdivision may be
submitted on magnetic media; and

(4)	Submitted to the Recording Secretary for the Planning Commission or the Administrative
Officer no less than thirty (30) days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission.

4-7-2. Layout Requirements. The Certified Plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a convenient scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred	(100) feet and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if
more than one (1) sheet is used. The sheet size shall
be acceptable for filing in the Office of the Probate
Judge but shall not exceed twenty-four by thirty-six
(24 x 36) inches. The Certified Plat shall meet the
following requirements:

(1)	Certified plats shall be so designated and will contain the name of the proposed subdivision OR the words "Resubdivision of .." if the proposed subdivision, or any portion thereof, is a part of any previously approved subdivision of legal record.

(2)	The name, address and Deed Book and Page of record of the legal owner AND the name and address of the agent or agents acting for the legal owner.

(3)	A caption giving the location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter and section,
Page 32
 

township, range, city, county and state including sufficient description to clearly define the lands; AND lot and block and subdivision name and parcel number(s) and legal Plat Book and Page of all portions which are a part of previously approved subdivision{s) of legal record.

(4)	North point referenced to a line established in the U.S. Public land survey, date and scale. The property shown on a plat or map may be drawn to any scale provided that the dimensions and other information shown thereon are legible.

(5)	A vicinity map at the same scale as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Guntersville and shall show the location of the proposed subdivision
and all existing and approved roads within twelve hundred (1200) feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision.

(6)	The name, address, and seal of the registered surveyor preparing the plat or map.

(7)	The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the tract of land being subdivided. Distances will be provided to the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second to achieve a positional accuracy of 1:10,000, corresponding to third order accuracy.	State Plane Coordinates shall be indicated on the Plat.

(8)	Dimensions and area in acres or square feet of all lots and other land areas and the bearings of the respective sides. All lots and blocks shall be numbered where this provision is appropriate.

(9)	Approximate radii, central angle, arc distance, chord lengths, and points of tangency of all curves.

(10)	The name, address, and legal Deed Book and Page of the ownership for all adjacent parcels as they appear in the current records of the County Tax-Assessor's office.

(11)	Zoning classification of the land to be subdivided and the zoning classification of all adjoining tracts of land.

(12)	The location, widths and names of all existing or platted streets, alleys, pedestrian ways or
Page 33
 
other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, water courses, bridges, and other permanent or temporary buildings or structures, and other public places on or adjacent to the tract of land being subdivided.

(13)	Land intended to be dedicated to public use, or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision with conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservations. Private property held in common and NOT dedicated for public use shall be so indicated.

(14)	Flood plain district limits, including the contour line of the floodway, the flood profile elevation	(100 year flood) and the contour line two (2)	feet above the vertical distance of the flood profile elevation.

(15)	Wooded areas, wetlands, unstable soils or slopes and any other adverse condition affecting the site.

(16)	The Certified Plat shall be accompanied by the following executed endorsements at the time of submittal:

(a)	Registered Surveyor's Certificate and description of land platted.

(b}	Notarized dedication.

(c}	A Certificate of Approval executed by the City Engineer for the City of Guntersville.

(d)	Any restrictions and/or special notations which may be required by other provisions of these regulations.

(e)	Certification by the Administrative Officer that the property and the Certified Plat
has been inspected and reviewed and that it is found to be compliant with zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations.

(f)	A Certificate of Approval form for
execution following favorable action by the
Planning Commission for the City of
Guntersville.

4-7-3. Public Hearings. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on all proposed certified
Page 34
 

plats.	Formal notice of the scheduled public hearing shall be sent by registered mail to all adjoining
land owners of record.		It is the responsibility of the applicant for certified plat approval to provide the Secretary of the Planning Commission with the correct names and addresses of all adjoining land owners as they appear in the current records of the County Tax Assessor.	Formal notices shall be postmarked no less than five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing.	Any change or modification to a Preliminary Plat submitted to the Planning Commission for public hearing may require a subsequent noticed public hearing if deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.

4-7-4. Vested Rights. Final approval of a certified plat is subject to all requirements for installation of improvements, conditions, or subdivision regulations adopted by the Planning Commission prior to the time of signing of the final plat by the Chairman of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall not modify conditions to final approval of a certified plat. No vested rights shall accrue to any certified plat upon final approval until:

(1) the plat is signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission; and

(2)	the signed plat is recorded with the Probate Judge; and

(3)	certified copies of the recorded plat are filed with the Administrative Officer as herein provided.

4-7-5. Signing and Recording of the Certified Plat. The owner or his authorized agent i responsible for filing the approved certified plat as follows:

(1)	The Chairman of the Planning Commission will sign the original tracing of the certified plat and return the tracing to the owner or owner's engineer or agent.

(2)	The owner shall file the plat with the County Probate Judge and file a reproducible and five
(5)   copies of the recorded plat with the Administrative Officer within thirty (30)   days of the date of signature unless a specific time extension for filing has been granted by the Planning Commission during plat approval. No permits for construction or buildings or other improvements shall be issued by the City unless
Page 35
 

the recording requirements are completed as herein provided.



























































Page 36
 

ARTICLE V

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Section 5-1. Minimum Standards.

The following planning and design standards shall be complied with, and no higher standard may be required by the Planning Conunission, except where because of exceptional and unique conditions of topography, location, shape, size, drainage, or other physical features of the site, minimum standards specified herein would not
reasonably protect or provide for public health, safety, or
welfare. Any higher standard required shall be reasonable
and shall be limited to the minimum additional improvements necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.
In addition to the requirements established herein, all
subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws,
rules, and regulations:

(a)	All applicable statutory provisions.

(b)	The City of Guntersville Zoning Ordinance, building and housing ordinances, and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdiction.

(c)	The Strategic Growth Plan of the City of Guntersville.

(d)	If applicable, the special requirements and rules of the Marshall County Health
Department and/or appropriate state agencies.

(e)	The rules and standards of the State Highway Department if the subdivision or any lot contained herein abuts a state highway.

(f)	The standards and regulations adopted by all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the City of Guntersville.

(g)	Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above guides or policy and purpose of these
regulations establ shed in Article I, Section
1-1 of these regulations.

Section 5-2. General Requirements

5-2-1. Plats straddling Municipal Boundaries. Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in
another local government, the Planning Commission may

Page 37
 
request assurance from the City Attorney that access is legally established, and from the City Engineer that the access road is adequately improved, or that
an improvement guarantee has been duly executed and	I
is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of 	i
the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid
out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines.	l
5-2-2. Character of the Land. Land which the Planning
Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or
development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep
slopes, rock·formations, adverse soil formations or
topography, utility easements, or other features
which will reasonably be harmful to the safety,
health, and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding
areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless
adequate methods are formulated by the applicant and
approved by the Planning Commission, upon
recommendation of the City Engineer, to solve the
problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not
involve such a danger.

Land within the Floodway District shall not be platted for residential occupancy or building sites.
Land outside the floodway but subject to flood may be platted for residential occupancy provided each lot contains a building site that may reasonably lend itself to construction of a floor level above flood elevation, or for such other uses which will not increase the danger to health, life, and property. Fill may not be used to raise land in the floodway.
In other areas subject to flood, fill may be used providing the proposed fill does not restrict the flow of water and unduly increase flood heights or violate wet lands per U. S. Army Corps of Engineers.

5-2-3. Subdivision Name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The Planning Commission shall have final authority to designate the name of the subdivision which shall be determined at Preliminary Plat approval.

5-2-4. Population Densities. The population densities established by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Guntersville shall be observed.

5-2-5. waterboaies ano wacercourses.	L  a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of
Page 38
 

adjacent lots. The Planning Commission may approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for, safe maintenance of the water
body is so placed that it will not become a City
responsibility. No more than twenty-five percent
(25%)of the minimum area of a lot required under the
Zoning Ordinance may be satisfied by land which is
under water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure or design approved by the City Engineer.

Section 5-3. Street Plan.

The arrangement, character, extent, location, and grade of all streets shall be laid out according to good land planning principles and shall be integrated with all existing and planned streets. New streets shall consider topographical conditions, orientation to vistas, public convenience and safety, and the proposed uses of land to be served by them.

5-3-1. Continuation of Adjoining Street System. Proposed new streets shall extend existing streets or their projections at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the minimum required width, unless variations are deemed necessary by the Planning Commission for reasons of topography or design.
However, the creation of street intersections of three (3) or more streets converging together shall
not be permitted.

5-3-2. Access to Adiacent Properties. Land abutting a proposed subdivision shall not be left land-locked by such proposed subdivision. Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, it is desirable to provide for street access to an adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication and paved to the boundary of such property and a temporary turnaround shall be provided, if deemed necessary by the Planning Commission

5-3-3. Marginal Access Streets. Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, development which abuts, or has included within the proposed area, any arterial or major thoroughfare may require a marginal access street or other treatment which may be necessary to provide for the adequate protection of properties,
and to afford separation of through and local
traffic.

5-3-4. Private Streets. There shall be no private streets platted in a subdivision where abutting properties
Page 39
 
will be sold, whether immediately or in the future, to the public.	Private streets may be allowed in Planned Unit Developments	(PUD's) where a private
long-term maintenance agreement has been reviewed and approved by the City Attorney.

5-3-5. Private Reserve Strips. Private reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited.

5-3-6. Additional Width on Existing Roads. Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street width requirements.

(1)	The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street.

(2)	When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, a minimum of one-half (1/2) of the required right-of-way, measured
from the centerline of the existing street, shall be provided.

5-3-7. Street Names. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with others existing and named, shall
bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix, street,
avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc .. Street names are subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission.

5-3-8. Vacating a Street or Easement. No street or easement may be vacated unless such action is submitted to, and approved by, the Governing Body. The Governing Bodv mav reauest a study and reconunendation by the Pla ning Co mission before taking such action

5-3-9. Frontage on Improved Roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on, and access from, an existing public street including, but not limited to the following:

(a)	an existing federal, state or county highway; or

(b)	a street shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Conunission and of legal record in the Office of the County Probate Judge. Such street or highway must be suitably improved as required by the rules, regulations, specifications, or orders, OR be secured by an improvement
guarantee required under these subdivision
Page 40
 

regulations, with the width and rights-of-way meeting or exceeding the minimum requirements of these subdivision regulations.

Within a General Business District permitted uses and special exceptions shall be located only on frontage roads to arterials and major thoroughfares or have access through areas not zoned for residential or agricultural purposes.

5-3-10. Grading and Improvement Plan. Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to the City of Guntersville construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the City Engineer and Planning Commission in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat approval.

5-3-11. Topography and Arrangement.

(1)	Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Minor streets shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the Design Standards (Section 5-4) of these regulations.	(See Appendix II for street sections.)

(2)	All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares as established in the Strategic Growth Plan.

(3)	All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses.

(4)	Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.

Page 41
 
(5)






(6)










(7)
 
The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not necessarily be adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U­ shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout.

Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Planning Commission such extension is
not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts.

In business and industrial developments, the streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
 

Section 5-4.  Design Standards

The following design standards shall be considered minimum requirements and shall specifically apply to residential subdivisions. The requirements for non-residential subdivisions (See Section 9-4) shall be such as the Planning Commission deems appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated but in no event be less than the requirements of residential subdivisions.

5-4-1.	Right-of-Way Widths. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be not less than the following (per typical sections in Appendix II) :

(1)	Four-lane Arterial	120	feet
(2)	Collector Street	60	feet
(3)	Minor Street	50	feet

 
5-4-2
 

Pavement Widths.	Pavement width shall be not less than the following (per typical sections in Appendix II) :

(1)	Four-lane Arterial	60 feet

(2)	Collector Street	36 feet

Page 42
 
(3)	Minor Street	26 feet

5-4-3. Street Grades. Street grades shall not exceed the following unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer and approved by the Planning Commission:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
 
Major Thoroughfare                      8%

Collector Street                      8%

Minor Street with Bituminous Pavement 14% Minor Street with Concrete Pavement 14% Marginal Access Street                 14%
 
(6)	Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed five percent (5%} for a distance of not less than fifty (50} feet on minor
streets and one hundred	(100} feet from the centerline of Collectors and Major Thoroughfares	(streets).

(7)	Minimum grades of all streets shall not be less than one-half	(1/2) of one percent	(1%).

(8)	Surface cross-drainage shall be concrete and conform to the City of Guntersville standards.

5-4-4.		Horizontal Curves. Where a centerline deflection angle occurs, a circular curve shall be introduced, having a centerline radius of not less than the following:

(1)	Collector Street	200 feet
{2}	Minor Street	100 feet
(3)	Cul-De-Sac	50 feet
(4)	Alleys: Residential	(Special Cases} 35   feet Commercial		As Necessary

5-4-5. Tangents. Tangents of less than one hundred	(100) feet provided between reverse curves shall be approved by the City Engineer on all streets.

5-4-6. Vertical Curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to the following:

(1)	On roads with a R.O.W. of eighty (80) feet or more in width, minimum sight distance shall be six hundred	(600) feet, measured between points five (5) feet above the centerline of the road.

Page 43
 
(2)	On roads with a R.O.W. less than eighty (80) feet in width, minimum sight distance shall be three hundred	(300) feet measured between points five (5) feet above the centerline of the road.

5-4-7. Intersections. Street intersections shall be laid out as follows:

 
(1)













(2)



















(3)






(4)
 

Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees shall
not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least
one hundred	(100) feet therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one
point unless specifically approved by the Planning Commission.

Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practical, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five (125) feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where minor streets intersect major thoroughfares, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersections of major thoroughfares shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart. Where a city street
intersects a state highway, the design
standards of the State Highway Department shall
apply.

Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two
(2) minor streets shall be at least twenty (20)
feet; and minimum curb radius at an
intersection involving a collector street shall
be at least twenty-five	(25) feet.

Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In		illy or	olling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a five percent	(5%) grade at a distance of fifty (50) feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.


Page 44
 

(5)	Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would.create a traffic hazard
by limiting visibility, the applicant shall cut
such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.

(6)	The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be five percent	(5%) or less.

(7)	Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet.

5-4-8. Perimeter Streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant. The Planning Commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the applicant improves and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within his own subdivision boundaries.

5-4-9. Access to Arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial, the Planning Commission may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means:

(1)	The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the arterial and front onto a parallel minor street; no access shall be provided from the arterial, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots.

(2)	A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial.

(3)	A marginal access or service road (separated from the arterial by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points) .

5-4-10. Road Names. The sketch plat as submitted shall not indicate any names upon proposed streets. The Planning Commission shall approve all roads at the time of preliminary approval. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from
Page 45
 
other road names in the City of Guntersville so as not to cause confusion. A  road which is or is planned as a continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name.	Developer shall coordinate preliminary street names with manager of emergency 911 services and the Postmaster.	Names must be coordinated and addresses assigned by the City Building Official.

 
5-4-11. Excess Right-of-Way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one (3:1).

5-4-12. Railroads, Arterials. and Major Thoroughfares.
Railroad rights-of-way, arterials, and major
thoroughfares where so located as to affect the
subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as
follows:

( 1)		In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way, arterial, or major thoroughfare. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited".

(2)	In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.

(3)	Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at a grade shall, to the extent practical, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.

5-4-13. Cul-de-sacs. Permanent dead-end streets shall not exceed twelve hundred (1200) feet in length, and shall be provided with a turnaround having a roadway
Page 46
 










Ii;.
 

diameter of at least eighty (80) feet and a right­ of-way diameter of at least one hundred	(100) feet. Temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a turnaround having a forty (40) foot radius. Cul-de­ sacs shall not be used to avoid connection with an existing street or to avoid the extension of an important street.

Section 5-5. Blocks

a.	Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two
(2)	tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in
blocks adjacent to arterials, major thoroughfares, railroads, or waterways,
b.	The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block length in residential areas shall not exceed two thousand two hundred (2,200) feet or twelve (12) times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district, nor be less than four hundred	(400) feet in length. Wherever practical, blocks along arterials, major thoroughfares, and collector streets shall be not less than eight hundred (800)feet in length.

c.	In long blocks, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic.

Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet wide, may be required by the Planning Commission through the center of blocks more than eight hundred (800) feet along where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the Planning Commission for prospective use.

Section 5-6. Lots

Residential lots shall comply with the following requirements:

a.	Lot dimensions shall be not less than the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located and the requirements of the County Health Department. In cases where requirements conflict, the greater requirement shall govern.

b.	Each lot shall front upon a dedicated street having not less than a fifty (50) foot right-of-way.
Page 47
 

c.	Where land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further re-subdivision.

d.	Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and loading for the use contemplated.

e.	Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.

f.	Side lot lines shall be at right angles to streets, except on curves where they shall be radial.

g.	All residential lots shall have an area of at least seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet except in PUDs. Additional lot area is required when:

(1)	A lot is served by public water but not public sewer. In such case, said lot shall be not less than fifteen thousand	(15,000) square feet in area.

(2)		Public water or sewer is not provided. In such case, said lot shall be not less than twenty thousand	(20,000) square feet in area.

h.	All residential lots shall have a minimum width at the building line of sixty (60)	feet and a minimum width, at the street line, of thirty-five	(35)  feet. Corner lots shall have an extra width of fifteen (15) feet to permit adequate setback from side streets. The minimum lot depth of single-tier lots shall be one hundred and twenty-five	(125) feet. All other lots shall be a minimum of one hundred	(100) feet in depth. Greater lot width and depth is required when:

( 1)  A lot is served by public water but not public sewer. In such case, said lot shall be not less than eighty (80) feet in width and not less than one hundred and twenty (120) feet in
depth.	In no case less than minimum required
in 5-6 (g)(1).

(2)		Public water or sewer is not provided. In such case, said lot shall be not less than one hundred	(100) feet in width and not less than
Page 48
 

one hundred and fifty {150) feet in depth.	In no case less than requiredin 5-6(g) (2).

Section 5-7.  Easements

Utility and other easements shall be provided as follows:

a.	Easements for Utilities. Except where alleys/are provided for the purpose, the Planning Commission may require easements not exceeding ten (10) feet in width for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, and heat mains, or other utility
lines on each side of the	common rear lot lines and along side lot lines if necessary or advisable in the opinion of the Planning Commission. An   easement of 20 feet shall be provided around the perimeter of a subdivision, where no easement of at least 10 feet exists adjacent to the-subdivision property line.

b.	Where a subdivision is traversed by an existing or proposed water course, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such existing or planned drainageway. The width of such drainage easement or right-of-way shall be sufficient to contain the ultimate channel and maintenance way for the tributary area upstream.

Section 5-8. Drainage and Inundation

A drainage plan shall be made for each subdivision by the applicant's engineer, which plan shall take into consideration the ultimate or saturated development of the tributary area in which the proposed subdivision is located. Adequate provisions shall be made to provide drainage easements needed within the subdivision, taking into consideration the saturated development of the tributary area.

The storm sanitary sewer plans shall be worked out prior to the development of the other utility plans. Engineering considerations shall give preferential treatment to these gravity flow improvements, as opposed to other utilities
and improvements. Off-premise drainage easements and improvements may be required to handle the runoff of subdivisions into a natural drainage channel. But under-no condition shall storm drainage be emptied into the sanitary sewer system--or vice versa.

Low areas subject to periodic inundation shall not be developed or subdivided unless and until the Planning Commission establishes that:

Page 49
 

a.	The nature of the land use (i.e., recreational areas) would not lend itself to damage by water inundation to an appreciable extent;
b.	The area may be filled or improved in such a manner to prevent such periodic inundation; or

c.	Minimum floor elevations be required to prevent damage to buildings and structures, on site or adjacent thereto.

The Planning Commission may require whatever additional engineering information it deems necessary to make a decision on subdivisions and other development which contains an area of questionable drainage. Lakes, ponds, and similar areas will be accepted for maintenance only if sufficient land is dedicated as a public recreation area, or if such area constitutes a necessary part of the drainage control system. Such park land will be subject to approval by the City Council.

Section 5-9. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Developments must meet all ADEM requirements for storm
water permit.	Upon completion of curb installation and
backfill, a siltscreen must be installed during construction phase at back of curb to help prevent soil erosion and sediment deposits on streets. The minimum height requirement for the siltscreen is twenty-four	(24)
inches. Installation of the siltscreen shall be as per Best
Management Plan. Section 5-10. Wet Lands
Development must meet all requirements of applicable
government regulations regarding wetlands and the Clean Water Act.	Delineation of wetlands must be made by a qualified professional, approved by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, on final plat.	Mitigation, if required, shall
be done by developer before construction plans are approved by the Planning Commission.












Page so
 

ARTICLE VI

REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS

Section 6-1. Improvements

Approval of the Final Plat shall be subject to the installation of the improvements and utilities hereinafter designated and satisfactorily completed in accordance with the City of Guntersville specifications and standards, or the posting of an improvement guarantee with sufficient surety to secure the City the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities.

6-1-1.		Street and Alleys. After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the applicant, the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface, or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications
adopted by the Planning Commission and the City of
Guntersville, and shall be incorporated into the
construction plans required to be submitted for plat
approval.	(See Appendix II for Street Sections).

6-1-2.		Curbs and Gutters. Standard approved type curbs and gutters shall be placed on both sides of all new streets within the area of jurisdiction of these regulations in accordance with the City specifications. Subdivisions where the minimum lot size is thirty-five thousand	{35,000) square feet or more will not be required to install standard curb and gutter.	{See Appendix II for curb section
detail) .

6-1-3..	Sidewalks

(1)	Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement right-of-way of all roads as shown in Schedule II..

(2)		Sidewalks shall be provided as required in these regulations. A median strip of grassed or landscaped area at least two (2)	feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs. (See Appendix II for sidewalk detail).






Page 51
 
 SIDEWALKS RE UIRED 	
Development Density
 	Residential 	







l

*  Optional at the direction of the Planning Commission but where provided,
  four (4) feet minimum on either side of road with concrete curbs. 	

6-1-4.		Pedestrian Accesses. The Planning Commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten (10) feet in width. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.

6-1-5.	Neighborhood Recreation Areas

Recreation Standards - The Planning Commission shall require that land be reserved for Neighborhood Parks where such reservations would be appropriate as determined by the Planning Commission. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography, and general character and shall have adequate road access, for the particular purposes envisioned by the Planning Commission. The area
shall be shown and marked on the plat, "Reserved for Park and/or Recreation Purposes". The Planning
Commission may refer such proposed reservations to the City of Guntersville official or department in charge of parks and recreation for recommendation. The applicant shall dedicate all such recreation area to the City of Guntersville as a condition of final subdivision plat approval.

Size of Neighborhood Parks - Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be equal to six {6) percent of the gross subdivided area. In general, land reserved for neighborhood park purposes shall be a minimum of five (5) acres to assure facility
development. When the dedication of land involves an area of less than five (5)   acres, the recreation
area shall be located at a suitable location on the
edge of the subdivision so that additional land may
be added at such time as the adjacent land is
subdivided. If, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, the subdivided area is adequately served


Page 52
 

by existing public recreational facilities, this requirement may be waived.

Recreation Sites - Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and location suitable for use as a playground, playf ield, or for other recreation purposes, and shall be relatively level and dry. A recreation site shall have a total frontage on one {1) or more streets of at least fifty (50) feet.

Alternative Procedure - Where, with respect to a particular subdivision, the reservation of land required pursuant to this section does not equal the percentage of total land required to be reserved in Section 2, the Planning Commission may accept a cash payment in lieu of land reservation of an amount equal to seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) per acre.

This alternative procedure must be approved by the Planning Commission. Cash payments shall be placed in a Neighborhood Park Improvement Fund to be established by the City Council. Such deposit shall be used by the City of Guntersville for improvement of a neighborhood park, playground, or recreation area including the acquisition of property. Such deposit must be used for facilities that will be actually available to and benefit the persons in said subdivision and be located in the general neighborhood of the subdivision.

6-1-6.	Sewerage Facilities

General Requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the City of Guntersville construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed and approved in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the City of Guntersville.

Sanitary sewers shall be provided where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible as determined by the Planning Commission and the Water and Sewer Board. Individual disposal systems shall
be used in instances where no public sanitary sewerage system is available providing approval is received from the State and County Health Department.






Page 53
 
6-1-7.	Water Facilities

(1)	General Requirements

(a} Nece sary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend the public water supply system capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection.
 
(b)







(c)
 
Where a public water main is
accessible, the applicant shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of the City of Guntersville. All water mains shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter.
To facilitate the above, the location
of all fire hydrants and all water
supply improvements shall be shown on
the Preliminary Plat, and the cost of
installing same shall be included in
the improvement guarantee to be
furnished by applicant.
 

6-1-8.		Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire Hydrants shall be located no more than five hundred (500) feet apart. To eliminate future street openings, all underground
utilities for fire hydrants themselves and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat.

6-1-9.	Drainage and Storm Sewers

(a)	General Requirements. The Planning Commission shall not approve any plat or subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or floodwater runoff channels or basins. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by acceptable engineering methods as approved by the City Engineer. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried for a distance of more than six hundred	(600) feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that
point and basins shall be used to intercept flow
at that point.
(b)	Nature of Storm Water Facilities
(1)	Location.	The applicant may be required
by the Planning Commission to carry away
by pipe or open ditch any spring or
Page 54
 

surface water that may exist either previously to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of­ way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications of the City of Guntersville.

(2)	Accessibility to Public Storm Sewers.
Where a public storm sewer is
accessible, the applicant shall install
storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm water, subject to. the
specifications of the City Guntersville.

(3)	Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The City Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the facility based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.

(4)	Effect on Downstream Drainage Areas. The City Engineer shall also study the
effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Commission may withhold
approval of the subdivision until
provision has been made for the improvement of said potential condition in such manner as the Planning
Commission shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.
Page 55
 

(5)		Areas of Poor Drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area which is subject to floodii:ig ,- the Planning Commission may approve  such subdivision provided that the applicant fills the affected area of said subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and lots at a minimum of twelve  {12) inches above the
elevation of the maximum probable flood,
as determined by the City Engineer. The fill must not be-in violation of u.  s. Army Corps of Engineers regulations for
wetlands and development must have
proper permits, if required.	The plat
of such subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any
stream or watercourse, in a width which
shall be sufficient in times of high
water to contain or move the water, and
no fill shall be placed in the overflow
zone nor shall any structure be erected
or placed therein. The boundaries of the overflow zone shall be subject to
approval by the City Engineer. Areas of extremely poor drainage should be discouraged from development.

(6)		Floodway Areas. The Planning Commission may when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the floodway of any stream or drainage course. These floodway areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth,
waste material, or stumps, except at the
discretion of the Planning Commission.

(c)	Dedication of Drainage Easements

(1)	General Requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right of way
conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate
Page 56
 

for the purpose. Whenever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow.

(2)	Drainage Easements.

(a)	Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least twenty (20) feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road .lines and with
satisfactory access to the road.
Easements shall be indicated on
the plat. Drainage easements
shall be carried from the road
to a natural watercourse or to
other drainage facilities.

(b)	When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured by the applicant and indicated on the plat.

(c)	The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a distance to be determined by the Planning Commission.

(d)	Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall
be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainageways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density, nor for computing the area requirement of any lot.
Page 57
 
6-1-10.		Signs. The applicant shall deposit eighty-five Dollars ($85 00) to the City Clerk f6r each required sign within the subdivision.

6-1-11.		Oversize Facilities. The governing body may participate in the cost of oversized improvements within a subdivision, if in its judgement such oversized improvements are necessary to serve large areas of land not in the subdivision, and if the cost of such oversize improvements is an unreasonable burden on the applicant.

6-1-12.		Utilities. The applicant is required to place all utilities underground, except as provided below. The preliminary or certified plat shall specify whether proposed utilities are to be placed underground or aboveground, including electric service, telephone lines, and cable television lines. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the
Preliminary Plat. Easements centered on rear and/or
side lot lines shall be provided for utilities
(private and municipal); such easements shall be at
least ten (10) feet wide. Proper coordination shall
be established between the applicant and the
applicable utility companies for the establishment
of utility easements. Easements shall be indicated
on the plat. Applicants are encouraged to be
knowledgeable of City and utility company street
lighting standards.

The Planning Commission may, by majority vote, permit the installation of aboveground electric, cable television, or telephone service if it concludes that one or more of the following conditions are met:
(a)	Aboveground service would enhance the
public safety.	·

(b)	Aboveground service would be in the interest of preservation of the character of the area or adjacent areas, and/or the Planning Commission desires to pursue this goal for the area under development

(c)	The City Engineer certifies that installation of underground utilities is not good engineering practice due to physical attributes particular to the land being developed

(d)	As a variance pursuant to Chapter IX of these Subdivision Regulations

Page 58
 

6-1-13. Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without reimbursement from the City of Guntersville. The sharing expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as
determined by the Planning Commission, will be fixed
by special agreement between the City Council and
the applicant. Said cost shall be charged to the
applicant pro rata the percentage of his land
developed and so served.

6-1-14. Widening and Realignment of Existing Roads. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the Strategic Growth Plan or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to dedicate such areas for widening or realignment of such roads. Such roads and streets shall be dedicated by the applicant to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance whether the land is to be dedicated to the City in fee simple or an easement is granted to the City of Guntersville.

6-1-15. Bikeways. The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, require the installation of bikeways. Curb cuts and ramps shall be installed on streets where bikeways are required by these regulations. Bikeways shall be a minimum of four (4)	feet in width and placed adjacent to the sidewalk on one side of the street. Construction shall be approved by the City Engineer.

Section 6-2. Permanent Reference Points

Prior to the approval of the Final Plat, permanent reference points shall have been placed flush with the ground where practicable and in accordance with the following requirements:

6-2-1	Monument Specifications.

(a)	Cadastral Control Monuments of concrete not less than seven (7) inches square or eight
(8) inches in diameter, containing a ferrous rod not less than 0.75 inches in diameter
and not less than forty-eight (48) inches in
length and which shall be imbedded in the
center of the concrete for its full length,

Page 59
 




(b)














(c)
 
and marked on the top with a brass cap not less than three (3) inches in diameter.

Boundary Monuments of concrete not less than four (4) inches square or five (5) inches in diameter, containing a ferrous rod not less than 0.50 inches in diameter and not less than thirty (30) inches in length and which shall be imbedded in the concrete for its full length, and marked on the top with a cross, brass cap, aluminum cap, or other durable material securely imbedded. These monuments shall be placed not more than
1,400 feet apart along any straight boundary line.

Property Monuments of ferrous pipe or round	-
or square ferrous bars not less than 0.50
inches in diameter and not less than
eighteen (18) inches in length weighing not
less than 3.65 pounds per lineal foot. Any
durable metal or concrete monument may be
used in lieu of ferrous pipes provided that
they are uniform within the platted area and
have permanent magnets embedded near the top
and the bottom.
 

6-2-2.		Cadastral Reference Points. A minimum of two (2) cadastral control monuments shall be placed at accessible locations within the subdivision and shall he referenced by course and distance from an accepted corner of the government survey of Marshall County or previously placed and accepted cadastral control monuments which are not contiguous to the subject subdivision boundary. At the discretion of the Administrative Officer these monuments may also serve as subdivision boundary monumentation. Cadastral monuments shall appear on the final plat, together with the description in bearings and distances to an accuracy of 1:10,000, of their location from the reference monuments.

6-2-3.		subdivision Boundary Monumentation. The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in the field with boundary monuments which shall be placed at all corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any line and at all angle points along the meander line, said points to be not less than twenty (20) feet back from the bank of any river, stream, or major drainage way;  except  that when such corners fall within a street, or proposed future street, the monuments shall be placed on the side line of the street. The monuments shall be
Page 60
 

spaced so as to be within sight of each other and shall be placed not more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line.

6-2-4.		Internal Block Monumentation. Boundary monuments shall be placed at all internal boundaries, corners, and points not referenced above and at all block corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes radius, and at all angle
points in any line for the purpose of providing horizontal control within the interior of the subdivision.

6-2-5.		Individual Ownership Lot Monumentation. The corners of all lots not previously marked, outlots, parks and public access and land dedicated to the public shall be monumented in the field by property monuments. Witness corners shall be established not
less than twenty (20} feet back from the bank of the
river, stream, or major drainage way for lot lines
that extend to rivers, streams or major drainage
ways.

6-2-6.	Accuracy. Land surveys within the City Limits shall be at an accuracy of at least 1:10,000, and beyond the city limits an accuracy of not less than 1:7,500 is required. Calculations shall be presented upon request.






























Page 61
 
ARTICLE VII

ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS

Section 7-1. Completion of Improvements

Prior to Final Plat approval, the applicant shall complete, in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Commission and the City Engineer, all improvements required in these regulations, specified in the final subdivision plat, and as approved by the Planning Commission and to dedicate same to the City of Guntersville free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus
dedicated.

Section 7-2. Methods of Guarantee

In lieu of requiring the completion of all improvements prior to Final Plat approval, the City may, at its discretion, enter into a contract with the applicant whereby the applicant shall guarantee to complete all improvements, required by these regulations or otherwise specified by the Planning Commission, in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Commission. To secure this contract, the applicant shall provide, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission, one of the following guarantees:

7-2-1.		Security Bond. The applicant shall obtain a security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Alabama. The bond shall be payable to the City and shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the entire cost, as estimated by the applicant and approved by the City Engineer, of installing all contracted improvements. The duration of the bond shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the City, or

7-2-2.	Cash. The applicant shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face
... ..--111,._	; +-\.,,..,....,....    T.T.;  +-'h     rh.t:"l    ,.,; t-"tT     r'\"Y"      ;Yl    .O. n"Y"r'\t.o.J    taf;  t-h   :::::ti
VCl..1.UC:t	C::..1..L..1.J.-C:.L      VV..L\...J..L      \...l..L    '-...L'-:r    '-"..&-      ...Ll...1.      "- '-..L'-JVY    VY..&.. .Ll.    \.A.
bank. The use of any instrument other than cash and, in the case of an escrow account, the bank with
which the bonds are to be deposited, shall be
subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
The amount of the deposit shall be at least equal to the cost as estimated by the applicant and approved by the City Engineer of installing all required improvements. Interest accrued shall be payable to
the applicant.



Page 62
 


In the case of an escrow account, the applicant shall file with the Planning Commission an agreement between the financial bank and himself guaranteeing the following:	·

(1)	That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the Planning Commission and may not be used or pledged by the applicant as security in any other matter during that period;

(2)	And that in the case of a failure on the part of the applicant to complete said improvements, then the bank shall immediately make the funds in said account available to the City for use in the completion of those improvements, or

7-2-3.	Land or Other Property. The applicant may offer as a guarantee land or other property, including
corporate stocks or bonds. The value of any such property shall be at least equal to the cost as estimated by the applicant and approved by the City Engineer of the installation of all contracted improvements. The County Assessor shall establish the value of any property so used and, in so doing, shall take into account the likelihood of a decline in the value of said property during the guarantee period. The Planning Commission shall retain the right to reject the use of land and other property when the value of such property is sufficiently
unstable, when it believes that the property will be unusually difficult to sell, or for other reasons such as will inhibit the Planning Commission from exchanging the property for a sufficient amount of money to complete the required improvements.

When prooertv is offered as an improvement guarantee, the applicant shall:

(1)	Execute an agreement with the trustee, when it is not the Planning Commission, instructing the trustee to release the property to the City in the case of default. The agreement shall also state the property may be released only upon consent of the Planning Commission. The agreement shall be placed on file with the Planning Commission.
(2)	File with the Planning Commission an affidavit affirming that the property to be used as a guarantee is free and clear of any encumbrances or liens at the time it is to be put in trust. This affidavit must be
filed and recorded with the Probate Judge.
Page 63
 
(3}		Execute and file with the Planning Commission an agreement stating that the property to be placed in trust as an improvement guarantee will not be used for
any other purpose or pledge as a security in any other matter until it is released by the Planning Commission.

Section 7-3. Time Limits

7-3-1.		Deadline. Prior to the granting of Final Plat approval, the applicant and the Planning Commission shall agree upon a deadline for the completion of all required improvements, such deadline not to exceed two (2) years from the date of Final Plat approval. The Planning Commission shall have the power to extend that deadline for one (1) additional year where the applicant can present substantial reason for doing so.

7-3-2.		Failure to be Accepted. If any portion of the required improvements shall fail to be accepted for dedication in compliance with these regulations within the allocated time period, either for reason of incompletion or for reason of substandard construction, then the Planning Commission shall take the following action:

Where improvements have been guaranteed under Subsections 7-2-1, 7-2-2 or 7-2-3 of this ordinance, the Planning Commission shall declare whatever security has been pledged as a guarantee to be forfeit. Where the Planning Commission is not
already in possession of said guarantee, it shall immediately take the actions necessary to obtain it. Upon receipt of these securities, the Planning Commission shall use them, or receipts from their sale if that be necessary, to finance the completion of contracted improvements or the rebuilding of such improvements to the proper specifications. Unused portions of these securities shall be returned to
the applicant, bonding company, or crediting
institution, as is appropriate.

Section 7-4. Improvement Requirements

7-4-1.		Inspection and Certification. The City Engineer and the Administrative Officer shall regularly inspect for defects in the construction of the required improvements. The applicant shall pay to the City an inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per lot,
and the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the
Chairman of the Planning Commission unless such fee
has been paid at the time of application. These fees
Page 64
 

shall.be.due and.payable up?n demand of the City and no buildi g permits.or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the City Engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the City's construction standards
and specifications, the applicant shall be
responsible for completing the improvements.
Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by an
improvement guarantee, the applicant and the bonding
company shall be severally and jointly liable for
completing the improvements according to specifications.

Upon completion of these improvements, the City Engineer shall certify to the Planning Corrunission that the improvements meet plans and specifications.

Upon completion of the improvements, the applicant shall file with the Planning Commission a statement stipulating the following:

(a)	that all required improvements are completed satisfactorily;	the statement must be signed by all utilities, departments, etc. that signed the original plat;

(b)	that these improvements are in compliance with the minimum standards specified by the Planning Commission and the City Council for their construction;

(c}		that the applicant knows of no defects from any cause in those improvements;

(d)	and that these improvements are free and clear of any encumbrances or liens.

If the City Engineer has certified that the contracted improvements are complete and free from defect, then upon receipt of the required statements and agreements detailed above, the City shall accept those improvements. The City may, at its discretion, accept any portion of the required improvements provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received for that portion of the improvements.

7-4-2.		Change Orders to Require Approval. The City Engineer and/or Administrative Officer shall endorse all engineering and materials change orders to improvements specified in the final subdivision plat as approved by the Planning Commission. The Administrative Officer shall take appropriate action to ensure compliance with approved plans and
Page 65
 

specifications and the developer shall be notified when unauthorized changes to the plans are detected. As provided for in Section 7-3-2, noncompliant improvements will not be accepted and neither the Planning Commission nor the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be empowered to grant post­ installation variances for non-compliant improvements.

Section 7-5. Reduction of Guarantees

In those cases where improvement guarantees have been made under Subsection 7-2-1, 7-2-2, or 7-2-3 of these regulations, the amount of the guarantee may be reduced
upon acceptance, in compliance with these regulations, of a portion of the required improvements. An improvement guarantee shall be reduced upon actual acceptance of public improvements and then. only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears to the total public
improvements for the plat. In no event shall an improvement guarantee be reduced below twenty-five percent	(25%) of the
principal amount.

Section 7-6. Maintenance of Improvements

The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with the City Council, prior to acceptance, in an amount considered adequate by the City Engineer and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period of one (1) year after the date of their acceptance by the City of Guntersville.

Section 7-7. Issuance of Buildina Permits and Certificates of Occupancy

Where an improvement guarantee has not been given for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the improvements and dedication of same to the City, as
required in the Planning Commission's final approval of the
subdivision plat.

No building permit shall be issued for the final ten percent	(10%) of lots in a subdivision, or if ten percent
(10%) be less than two (2), for the final two (2) lots of a subdivision, until all public improvements required by the Planning Commission for the plat have been fully completed and accepted by the City.

Section 7-8. Release of Guarantee

Upon acceptance, in accordance with these regulations of the final portion of improvements, the City shall authorize
Page 66
 

the release of the remaining portion of the improvement guarantee.

Section 7-9.  Additional Rules for Subdivision Improvement Guarantees

When the Planning Commission is requested to accept an improvement guarantee for improvements expected to cost
more than $10,000.00, then the following rules shall apply.

1.	The amount of the guarantee shall be based upon one of the following:

a.	the sum of the monetary consideration for all signed contracts for improvements into which the developer has entered, provided that
contracts for all improvements indicated by the
construction plans for said improvements have
been executed; or

b.	where no such contracts have been executed, the sum of the estimates of the costs of all improvements indicated by the construction plans, as estimated by a registered
professional civil engineer paid by the City on a consulting basis; or

c.	where some, but not all such contracts have been executed, by the sum of the monetary consideration for all such contracts plus estimates of the cost of all improvements not yet contracted for, said estimates to comply with all provisions of Section 7-9 (1) (b).
2.	All costs of  developing construction estimates for
improvement guarantees shall be borne by the developer, who shall reimburse the City at its cost for said services. Failure to reimburse the City within 30 days of the
Planning Com. ission meeting at which the Final Plat is approved shall void the Final Plat, and the Chairman shall not sign the Final Plat.

3.	For purposes of determining a value for the improvement guarantee, the value of the improvements calculated pursuant to Section 7-9 (1) above shall be reduced by the value of improvements already installed and inspected by the City.

4.	All requests by developers to post Subdivision Improvement guarantees shall be made in writing at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which the Final Plat relating to said guarantees is to be considered.

5.	In addition to the monetary amounts required in Section
7-9	(1), any developer desiring to post an improvement
Page 67
 

guarantee shall add to the cost of improvements an administrative expense of ten percent	(10%} of the value of the improvements to be guaranteed. This amount shall be included in the improvement guarantee.

6.	The improvement guarantee shall be valid for a period not to exceed two (2)  years, and provide that the City shall have not less than ninety	(90)   days after expiration of the instrument of guarantee to make a demand against said guarantee for unfinished or noncompliant improvements.

7.	The developer agrees with the City that the city shall hire a State-licensed contractor to complete the work and a registered professional engineer to supervise any construction that is undertaken with proceeds from an improvement guarantee. The administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the value of the improvements, as required in Section 7-9   (4}   above, will be used to pay the professional fees of the individuals hired in this capacity.

8.	All improvement guarantees required to be posted to the Planning Commission as a condition of the granting of a Final Plat must be posted and accepted within 30 days after the Planning Commission meeting at which the Final Plat is approved. Failure to meet this deadline shall automatically void the Final Plat.

Section 7-10. Bonding of Sidewalk Improvements

Not withstanding any of the provisions of Section 7-1 through and including 7-8  herein, any developer may post a separate bond guaranteeing the construction of sidewalks required by the Planning Commission or these regulations. Said bond shall be valid for not less than two (2) years. The developer may specify, by notation on the Final Plat, that individual home builders are required to construct said sidewalks adjacent to their building sites as a condition precedent to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, thereto. Twenty-three	(23)  months after Final Plat is granted, however, the City shall call the sidewalk bond and complete any sidewalks not yet constructed or are
i.n	disrepair or are nonconforming to reqi..iirements set forth
in Article 6-1-3 of the City of Guntersville Subdivision Regulations, returning all unspent funds to the developer. In no event, however, shall the posting of a sidewalk bond in lieu of construction of sidewalks prevent the acceptance of all other improvements, or the issuance of Certificates of Occupancy pursuant to Section 7-7 herein.

Section 7-11. Consumer Protection

(1)	No building permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted or issued if any applicant or his authorized agent shall have violated any
Page 68
 

federal, state, or local law pertaining to consumer protection of real estate land aales, promotion, or practices, or any applicable conflicts of interest legislation with respect to the lot or parcel of land which is the subject of the permit or certificate, until so ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.

(2)		With respect to said lot or parcel of land, in the event a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy has been granted or issued, it shall be subject to revocation by the municipality until so ordered otherwise by a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that in no event shall the rights of intervening innocent third parties in possession of a Certificate of Occupancy be prejudiced by any such revocation.










































Page 69
 

ARTICLE VIII

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 8-1. Interpretation

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

Section 8-2. Conflict with Public and Private Provisions

8-2-1.		Public Provisions. The regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulations, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restriction different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall
control.

8-2-2.		Private Provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.

Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of these regulations, or the determinations of the Planning Commission, or the City in approving a subdivision or in enforcing these regulations, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with these regulations or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and determinations made thereunder.

Section 8-3. Severability.

If any part or provision of these regulations or
application thereof to any persQn or circumstances is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgement shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in all
Page 70
 

controversy in which such judgement shall have been
rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof
to other persons or circumstances. The Planning Commission
hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision, or application.

Section 8-4. Saving Provision

These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful
action of the City except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.

Section 8-5. Reservations and Appeals

Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, adopted September 8, 1987, as amended, are hereby repealed except as to such sections expressly retained herein.

Section 8-6. Amendments

For the purpose of providing the public health, safety, and general welfare, the Planning Commission may from time to time amend any article, section, sub-section, or provision imposed by these subdivision regulations. Prior to adoption of any amendment (or amendments}, a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission in the manner prescribed by law. Following its adoption, a copy of the amendment shall be certified by the Planning Commission to the Probate Judge of Marshall County.

Section 8-7. Conditions

Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to this City. The applicant has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the Planning Commission for desion, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land s as to conform to the physical and economical development of the City and to the safety and general welfare of the

Page 71
 
future owners in the subdivision and of the community at large.

Section 8-8. Resubdivision of Land

8-8-1.		Procedure for Resubdivision. For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the Planning Commission by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision.

8-8-2.		Procedure for Subdivisions Where Future Resubdivision is Indicated. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building
sites, the Planning Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent
streets. Easements providing for the future opening
and extension of such streets may be made a
requirement of the plat.

Section 8-9. Vacation of Plats

(A)	Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated.

(B)	Such an instrument shall be approved by the Planning Commission in like manner as plats of subdivisions. The Governing Body may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any oublic riohts in anv of its public uses, lmproveme ts, streets, or alleys.

(C)	Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys,
and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat.


Page 72
 

(D)	When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing.

Section 8-10. Violations

(A)		It shall be the duty of the Administrative Officer to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the City Attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith.

(B)	No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, and filed with the Probate Judge of Marshall County.

(C)	The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land, by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, or lease with the intent of evading these regulations, shall not be
permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements contained in these regulations.

(D)	No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations.

Section 8-11. Penalties and Civil Enforcement

Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision, transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the Planning Commission and recorded or filed in the office of the Probate Judge of Marshall County, shall forfeit and nav penalty of one hundred dollars -($100.00) for each lot- r-­ parcel so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes
and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. The City may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction or may recover the same penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.

Page 73
 

ARTICLE IX

VARIANCES

Section 9-1. General

Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve variances to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided the Planning Commission shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:

(A)	The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property;

(B)	The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property.

(C)	Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out;

(D)	The variances will not in any manner vary the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Strategic Growth Plan, or other adopted plans, policies, and regulations of the City.
















Page 74
 

Section 9-2. Conditions

In approving variances, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.

Section 9-3. Procedures

A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the applicant at the time when the Preliminary Plat is filed for the consideration of the Planning Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of thefacts relied upon by the petitioner. The variance, if approved by the Planning Commission, shall become part of the official record of the Planning Commission and shall be noted on the Final Plat.

Section 9-4. Special Requirements for Non-Residential Subdivisions

9-4-1.		General Procedural Requirements. It is recognized that the	applicant, in creating non-residential subdivisions, faces unique problems of lot design not normally encountered in residential subdivisions. For this reason, the initial emphasis of the Planning Commission shall be upon street layout and block arrangement. Generally, the procedural requirements shall be for the applicant to follow the regular procedure outlined in Article IV and to show the entire tract to be subdivided with necessary improvements and as many parcels as he cares to show but must include at least two (2) parcels. Then, from time to time, as prospective buyers express interest in lots sized to their required specifications, and following informal discussions with the Planning Commission if the aoolicant so requests, the applicant shall submit
dl ectly at a regular meeting of the Planning
Commission an amendment to the approved final
subdivision plat for approval. Regular procedural
requirements of the Planning Commission following
receipt of a final subdivision shall then apply. A
two-hundred dollar ($200.00) fee to cover
advertising and administrative costs of a Public
hearing shall accompany this application. Subsequent Public-Hearings may be held at the discretion of the
Planning Commission.

9-4-2.	Other Special Requirements. In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the street, parcel,
Page 75
 

and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity	The following principles and standards shall be observed:

 
(1)





( 2)















(3)







( 4)








(5)






(6)
 

Proposed non-residential street layout, lots and parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of development anticipated.

Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally extend to the boundaries of adjacent
existing or potential residential areas, nor connected to streets intended for predominantly residential traffic, but shall be connected insofar as is possible to arterials, major thoroughfares, or collector streets so designated on the City of
Guntersville Land Use Plan in such way that the number of intersections with such arterials, major thoroughfares, or collectors shall be minimized.

Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate and in accordance with Section 5-4 to accommodate the type and volume of
traffic anticipated to be generated thereon,
curb radii at driveway intersections shall
be at least 25 feet.

The applicant shall insure that the non­ residential subdivision as a whole may be self-sufficient with regard to providing necessary off-street parking. The subdivision, at his discretion, may make parking self-sufficiency a requirement of individual lots.

With respect to physical improvements, special requirements may be imposed by the Planninq Commission with the advice of the City Engineer within the non-residential subdivision.

Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from the non-residential subdivisions, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential
development and provisions for a permanently
landscaped buffer strip when necessary.

Page 76
 

Section 9-5. Experimental Subdivisions

The Planning Commission may waive, vary, or modify the standards and requirements of these regulations if, in its judgement, an unusual or experimental subdivision might prove of considerable merit toward:

A.	The use of unusual materials in constructing
required improvements.

B.	A new or untried design concept in the Guntersville area which appears promising.

Special attention may be given to experimental subdivisions which are related to low-cost housing design in an effort
to provide housing for lower income families. The Planning Commission shall require the applicant to provide a written proposal stating the natu e of the experiment and cost­ benefit study following the implementation of same.

9-5-1.		Conditions. In granting variances, modifications, and approval for experimental subdivisions, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgement, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied, modified, or approved. These may include, without being limited to: personal, surety, performance, or maintenance bonds; affidavits, covenants, or other legal instruments.

Section 9-6. Comprehensive Group Housing Development

A comprehensive group housing development including the construction of two (2) or more buildings together with the necessary drives and ways of access and which is not subdivided into the customary lots, blocks, and streets may be approved by the Planning Commission if in the opinion of the Commission any departure from the foregoing regulations can be made without destroying the intent of the regulations. Plans for all such developments shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission
whether or not such plat is to be recorded and no building permits shall be issued until such approval has been given.












Page 77
 

ARTICLE X

EFFECTIVE DATE

These Subdivision Regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of adoption.

ADOPTED THIS THE	DAY OF	E.('ff.i"°" <:i	, 1998.

PLANNING COMMISSION FOR THE CITY OF GUNTERSVILLE, ALABAMA



BY:   t...l\\\l.a.._	$
Chairman









































Page 78
 

APPENDIX I

SAMPLE CERTIFICATES





Example of (a)


STATE OF ALABAMA COUNTY OF MARSHALL
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
AND DESCRIPTION OF LAND PLATTED

I, (name of surveyor), a registered Surveyor of Guntersville, Alabama, hereby certify that I have surveyed the property of the (name of company of proprietor), a (corporation or proprietor) , situated in the City of Guntersville, Marshall County, Alabama and described as follows:

(Insert Legal Description)

And that the plat or map contained hereon is a true and correct map showing the subdivision into which the property described is divided giving the length and bearings of the boundaries of each lot and its number and showing the streets, alleys and public grounds and giving the bearings, length, width, and name of the streets, said map further shows the relation of the land so platted to the Government Survey, and that permanent monuments have been placed at points marked hereon of required type.

WITNESS my hand this the	day of -----' 19

(Name of Surveyor) Registration #	_








Page 79
 

Example of (b)




DEDICATION


I/We (Land Owner or developer, address), as proprietor(s), have caused the land embraced in the within plat to be surveyed, laid out and platted to be known as (Subdivision Name), a part of (Section Call Out), City of Guntersville, Marshall County, Alabama, and that the (Streets, Drives, Alleys, etc.) as shown on said plat are hereby dedicated to the use of the public.

Signed and sealed in the presence of:


Witness	Property Owner


Witness	Property Owner

[In any case that the developer and the land owner are not one and the same, two or more Dedication Certificates may appear on the plat in order to allow for the owner's signature to be fixed to said Plat. In which case one of the following notary's acknowledgements must appear for each Dedication Certificate (see example c-1 and c-2) .]


























Page 80
 


Example of (c-1}




COUNTY OF MARSHALL STATE OF ALABAMA
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I, , Notary Public in said State, hereby certify that (individual's name} as (title} of the (corporation name} is signed to the foregoing instrument, and who is before me on this day that, being informed, he as such officer and with full authority, executed the same voluntarily for and as
the act of corporation.

 
GIVEN under my hand and official seal this  	
 		19
 
day of
 




Notary Public































Page 81
 

Example of (c-2)




STATE OF ALABAMA COUNTY OF MARSHALL
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I	- , a Notary Public in and for said

County, in said State, hereby certify that	(owner's name), whose name is signed to the foregoing instrument, and who is known to me, acknowledged before me on this day that, being informed of the contents of the instrument, executed the same voluntarily.

GIVEN under my hand and official seal this	- day of
' 19




Notary Public






























Page 82
 

Example of (d)





CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE GUNTERSVILLE ELECTRIC BOARD

The undersigned as authorized by the Guntersville Electric Board of the City o Guntersville, Alabama, hereby approved the within plat for the recording of same in the Probate Office of Marshall County, Alabama, this	day of
 	       t    19
Guntersville Electric Board City of Guntersville, Alabama







































Page 83
 

Example of (e)




CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE WATER AND SEWER BOARD

The undersigned, as authorized by the Water and Sewer Board of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, hereby approved the within plat for the recording of the same in the Probate Office of Marshall County, Alabama, this the	day of
'19	-




Water and Sewer Board
City of Guntersville, Alabama








































Page 84
 
Example of (f)




CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE MARSHALL COUNTY GAS DISTRICT

The undersigned, as authorized by the Marshall County Gas District, hereby approved the within plat for the recording of same in	the Probate Office of Marshall County, Alabama, this the	day of	, 19




Marshall County Gas District












































Page 85
 

Example of (g)

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE CITY ENGINEER

The undersigned, as City Engineer of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, hereby approved the within plat for the recording of same in the Probate Office of Marshall County, Alabama, this the	day of		19




City Engineer
City of Guntersville, Alabama












































Page 86
 


Example of (h)



CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION

The within plat of (Subdivision Name), Marshall County, Alabama, is hereby approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Guntersville, Alabama, this the	day of
 		19



Planning Commission for the City of Guntersville, Alabama




Chairman







































Page 87
 

Example of (i}



CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE MARSHALL COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT

The undersigned, as authorized by the Marshall County Health Department, Alabama, hereby approved the within plat for the recording of same in the Probate Office of Marshall County, Alabama, this the	day of	, 19




Health Officer
Marshall County, Alabama




CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER

 
The undersigned, as Administrative Officer for the City of Guntersville, hereby certifies that the property and the certified plat has been inspected and reviewed and that it is found to be compliant with zoning restrictions and Subdivision Regulations, this the	day of  	 19
 




'....
 




Administrative Officer
City of Guntersville, Alabama





"·













Page 88
 

APPENDIX II
STREET SECTIONS


so'-o"   Min.Row

COMPACTED	ROADBED

s·	NOTE	5'
	

WIM. llOP( t  4•	

f'T.	

ION	
tlO t' t  .c•	





.TYPICAL SECTION FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS

GENERAL NOTES
1.	Bituminous Concrete Wearing Surface (Ref. AHO 416) should be varied by street type:
Residential - 26 ft. width - 120 lbs/sy Collector - 36 ft width - 150 lbs/sy
2.	Crushed Aggregate Base Course (Ref.AHO 301 & 825) thickness should be varied by street
type:
Residential - 6*   compacted thickness
Collector - 8# compacted thickness - in two (2) 4* layers
3.	A plain concrete ditch liner of 6*   thickness is required for ditch grades less than 1%.  A reinforced (6x6-6/6WWM) concrete ditch liner is required for grades of 5% or more.
4.	Construction materials, equipment and procedures shall be in general accord with Alabama State Highway Department Specifications for Highways and Bridges, latest
edition.
5.	The roadway shall be cleared and grubbed, stripped and unsuitable material excavated
to the satisfaction of the Engineer prior to placing and compaction embankments.
6.	Subgrade shall be compacted to not less than 100% proctor density as established by AASHO T-99. Embankment shall be placed in layers not to exceed six inches compacted thickness and compacted to not less than 95% proctor density.
7.	Base Course shall be Crushed Aggregate, placed in 2 layers; each layer shall be
compacted to not less than 100% proctor density as established by AASHO T-180, Method
c Specifications, or 85% solid volume, whichever provides the greater density.
8.	Subgrade, embankment, and base course material shall be placed at optimum moisture, not to exceed 2% deviation.
9. The Owner, or the Owner 4  s Engineer shall furnish composite records of tests and
inspection to the City Engineer prior to application for final inspection.  The tests and inspections shall be performed by an accepted testing laboratory. Density tests for earthwork and base material shall be performed on each layer or lift for each 1,200 square yards surface area. Three concrete test cylinders shall be tested for each day's pour, or each 50 C.Y. or increment thereof, hichever is the greater requirements.
10.	Concrete shall be Class A 5% air entrainment with a minimum Compressive Strength of
3,000 P.S.I. in 28 day
11.	Seeding for season as required by ALDOT Section 652 is required to be established on all areas disturbed during construction.









Page 89
 


 
\,
.,I1v•-•-•<--s
 


:I------	--	-- ------ --3-6-.-06--0,'--R--.O-.W----------------- ---,-.
 




-,------...
 


v;u.:u.:u: ,jI
 
 	0
 
.·2.1	00U81.CSU ..,&Cl[T ..l[AfWc; ..T    I
 
BITUMINOUS  'NEARING  SURFACE	\I
 
,...........	!	TY,.ICAI.. CACM SIOC	I	1501 S.  Y.  PLANT  KIX	ill
I	. ".'.·..1	/	-
 
!..1	a·	.......... ../
 
(WU1.I 011'."IC:  C:llAOCO  8AIC
COW,.&CTCO su•G..AOC	8" ...... TCJIU I. '"UC: ....1 cow ..ACTCO	"
 
.:.1	"	.
 
IM  '°l.ACI[	It -..._ .  . ,
 

I	-'
I	!
't.	1

'• "OTI[-  &OOITIOMAI.. CASCWC ..TS WAY  •C: llC:OUl ..CO "OI\ 0,.Al>cAGC AMO UTll..ITICS DCl"CNOl><O O>c THC: TO,.OGJl&,.MY • CltQiS  SCCTIONS 0111
,.,.0,.1..C 0' THC IT,.C::r;T,


COLLECTOR STREET WITHOUT CURB ANO GUTTER





;_






 	60' R.O.W. 	
41.0'

-CONCltCTI:  CUll8  &"0 C:UTTl:ft (TY,.tCAI.)


COWl"ACTCOS 801tAOC	8" (WIH.I OCNSC OllAOCD·•AU: WATCllllAI.
I	Cl"UG  MtXl  COM,.ACTCO  t>c  '°1.ACI:
i
£

COLLECTOR  STREET wiTH CURB >.ND GUTTER













Page 90
 





 

 	VUIU
.
! ........
 
50' R.O.W.
26.0'	4.0 .. 	
BXTOMDIOUS 11EARD1G SURFJICE
 
. .:.;,
 

......
..........
 
1201 s. Y. PLANT MIX
I
 
..	'J
-::1	,., .......      /
•	0	.../
I	.c
 
6" IMIN.J OCNSC  GllAOCO  8AIC MATC:RCAI. (,.UG WIKI COttP&.CTE.O IN    ..I.AC(.
 


NOTC1  AOOITIONAI. CAS(M<l<Ts  WAY  8C llCQUlllCO  P'Oll QllAINA<ll: ANO UTll.ITll[I OCP'CNOINQ ON THC TO,.OOllA ..HY, CllOSS SCC:Tl<lNS  011 "110,.1.( OP' THC JT•C:CT

MIHOR STREET WITHOUT CURB ANO GUTTER



 	50' R.O.W. 	
I
31.0'	I
 

CONClltil[TC: CUR• ANO
GUTT(ll (TYPICAi.i
 

a1TUWINOUS SUlll'ACC T•t:ATWC:MT
(AICGJ ••TM tOO. I S.. "t' ....\.ANT MIX
I

,•(NIM QC:fCSC G"AOC.O •ASC:
WA TC:lllAI. ("IJlo WIXI CO""ACTC:O IN   "I.AC(
 



MINOR STREET WITH CURB AHO GUTTER




CONSTllUCTION .IOfNTS •.o"o.c. -
cx ..•MSION .IOINTt •'..•U::- O&.Q ,.......c:... 10.a"








\..._  JOOQ 1.8.....S.I. CONC,.CTC:



HOH-MOUNTABLE CURB AHO CUTTER WITH SIOEWALK









Page 91
 



 
:I	F
 

65. 0'	I
Required  60.0'  Plant Mix 190 Lb.  Per  Sq.  Yd.	I
 
I	J·O'	'.	3().	.	.3C>_'_	'P	r3
,    g•  fS'	Ct0w11 To  8t For1t1..Dr
t.s,u roc--1:..Q.  1	•.....•. 11o7."  ·p., .".L.	.	ModlW11ga	''. '.,  o  •   • Pw n

Rtc1d. CMlblMtfH	,.	·	'-Rtti. C IOI\
Cui•.,,. Citllltt	••d.4	Co11111cltd  Thlclnt• Crvtht4 Atttttd• Bou  C«.nt   Cwb  1114  !Wiier
TfPt A, Ploal Ml114  Ale. Hwy.Dept. Spulflc1tlMa• Stcllu'!Ot·A
 

"..T..,l
 
RtQ 4, eJ.'z" CO"'f"Ocltd ThlclMU CrW.td  rtfolt !nt C01X1t,Typ• 8,Pl111t Miid
 
0.:
 
Al11. u.,. 0 tpl. S9•ctrlco1i.n ... sICllOft 3Ol·A
 
Ol
 

(/)
 

'1::1
 
TYPICAL  SEC1:10 N FOR' FOUR LANE ARTEfllAL  STREETS-  NO MEDIAtJ • 120'R.0.W.
 
CD
0	Pl
co	U:l
3	(1)
0-
 
\J:>
.	t>.l
   .

N
0
 
f	u•.o	I	2.4'	.J	u'.o	f	1ct-e .I
: I	·
 
0
CD	I	12 0	'2*-o
Ol
><

 


R• COiii>. C&irb& Out1et·
 
Slope  10•1
Aeqd.Ccm..Clrl a Orr
At••·"'\_ R•••· :;M'.o Plcrit Mia 180Lk. Ptt %Yd. '*1
 


Rt•d.Corii. CurUQulltt
 
Pini
 
CompoHcl••rd. Thlcl111u  Cruthe4 Anr•o•t•
 
Co.ru, T7ptA 1
 
Mlud, Alo.
 
0 tpl.SpKll lcollo11•· hetkft !Qi..
 
ftn( D • Co111poc11I Thlc\M ... CrutM4 A90re9ot1 Dut Coline, T,,t l!,l"bll I.nu'. Ala. H•r. 0.,1. S clflco1lo11t- S1c1l111 30!-A

TYPIC11\L	SECT11DU	FOR   .FOUR   LANE  ARTERIAL    smEETS· GRASSED   MEOIMl.   1201 R.0.Yl








 

ft"	r·  '·"'
 
r"'	....	f'·i - <\t!·JI
 

"· '....-
 

r...:i.,.,   .-::11	,,-,.  ·'-'   ,v,t.q
 

I'··"''....
 


"ti.ii
 
 

NOTE:
CONCRETE SHALL BE 3,000 PSI MINIMOM COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH AT 28 DAYS; 5% AIR E.NTRAJ:NMENT;
FINISHED AND CURED IN ACCORD WITH ACI MANUAL OF CONCRETE PRACTICE, LATEST EDITION
.J ,•.o









L    C:d l/z"  Tral\all'ena   OW11ray Jolnta  .u g'.o O. c.
2. ftrrrl'41 ;t4 Truanne P....-old ... BJti.m Cxpa1IOftJc(nt1 Jrt 30'..-0 O. C.


DETAILS   OF	CONCRETE	SIDEWALK






- 2.'·O._.'f, MN.







J-2t

OUTT[Jt	CUl'Tl!'.Jt
 

TYPICAL STREET
 

PLAN	VIEW INTERSECTION



Page 93
 






Friday, September 11, 2009. max
 
APPENDIX III

SUBDIVISION RECORD PRELIMINARY PLAT CHECKLIST



Name                of                Subdivision  		  Location  	  Owner  		 Address  		  Telephone  		  Agent  		  Address  		  Telephone  		  Surveyor  	  Address  		  Telephone  		 Date submitted for preliminary approval  		


CHECKLIST

Deed book and page of record of the legal owner. Date, north point, scale.
Caption - location by quarter section, township, range, city, county, state.

Acreage subdivided. Vicinity map.
 
Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the
tract.

Location of existing physical features on the property an adjoining properties.
 



-....
 

Names of adjacent subdivisions.

Names and addresses of record owners of adjoining land.




Page 94
 
Names, locations, width, dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks, rights-of-way and other open spaces, reservations, lot lines and building lines.

Dimensions and area in acres of all proposed lots and bearings of respective sides.

Lot and block numbers; smallest lot size, total number of lots.

Profiles of streets where required; linear feet in streets. ADEM permit applied for if greater than 5 acres.
Contours where required. Zoning classifications.
Construction plans of proposed utility layouts, sewer, water and electricity.

Sponsor transmits construction plans to Water, Electric, Sanitary and Health Departments for review and approval.

Conforms to general requirements and minimum standards of design.

One copy of preliminary plat retained by Planning Commission.

Approved	(date) for construction, subject to following modifications:  	

Variances granted:  	

 
Disapproved:
 
_._(date) for following reasons:  	
 


Signed:  	 Secretary of Planning Commission














Page 95
 
SUBDIVISION RECORD FINAL PLAT APPROVAL CHECKLIST


Name of Subdivision  	
Location  	 	i
Zoning District  		 Owner  	 Address  	  Telephone  		 
 
Preliminary approval granted Submitted for final approval
 
(date)
-(date)
 


CHECKLIST

Plat submitted in triplicate, original and two prints. Plat submitted within one year of preliminary approval. Scale not less than l" = 100' and on sheets 24" by 36". Primary control points and "ties" to same.
Tract boundary lines and vicinity map.

Right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights­ of-way.

Bearings of property lines and engineering data to locate
all lines including radii, angles, arcs, central angles of	:
all curves.

Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right­ of-way.

Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements. Number identify each lot or site and block numbers.
Purpose for which sites other than residential lots are dedicated or reserved.

Minimum and maximum building setback on all lots and other sites.

Location and description of monuments.

Page 96
 

Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.

Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name, date and number.
Certification by surveyor as to accuracy of survey and plat. Certification of title showing that applicant is the land
owner.

Statement by owner dedication streets, easements or rights­ of way and any sites for public use.

Title, scale, north point and date.

Certificate for approval by the Planning Commission. Certificate for recording by the Probate Judge.
Certificates of approval by:	Electric, Water, Sewer, Gas
Departments.

Any restrictions and/or special notations as may be required by other sections of these regulations.



Page 97
