CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF PRATTVILLE, ALABAMA 
____________ 
Published in 2011 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 25, 2011 
Effective: February 25, 2011 
____________ 
  
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
PRATTVILLE, ALABAMA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jim Byard, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Thomas M. Miller (District 4) 
Council President 
____________ 
Bill Gillespie, Jr. (District 1) 
Council President Pro Tempore 
____________ 
Willie L. Wood, Jr. (District 2) 
Dean R. Argo (District 3) 
Michael E. Renegar (District 5) 
Ray C. Boles (District 6) 
Nathan D. Fank (District 7) 
City Council 
____________ 
Gina P. Smith 
City Clerk 
____________ 
David A. McDowell 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Prattville, Alabama. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1992 Code as supplemented through July 6, 1993, and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1992 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Colleen Dalton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. David A. McDowell, City Attorney, Ms. Gina Smith, City Clerk, and Mr. Rod Morgan, Finance Director, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Prattville, Alabama. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Prattville, Alabama. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Prattville, Alabama, 2011. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2011-006 
[To Adopt and Enact a New Code for the City of Prattville, Alabama; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective] 
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Prattville, Alabama, as follows: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Prattville, Alabama," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 114, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 2, 2010, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar nor more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by hard labor for a period not exceeding six months or by any combination thereof; provided, that no fine or sentence of imprisonment or hard labor shall exceed the maximum fine or sentence established under state law for the commission of a substantially similar offense. Any corporation found to be in violation shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), at the discretion of the court trying the case. Any officer, manager, superintendent, agent or employee or a corporation shall be punished for a violation of this Code committed by such corporation, if such violation was the act or the result of the act or order of any such person. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense; and 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(4)  In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 2, 2010 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This Ordinance shall become effective upon its passage and execution as provided by law. 
ADOPTED THIS 15TH DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2011. 
	      By: Thomas M. Miller, President 
      Prattville City Council 
 	 
AUTHENTICATED THIS 15TH DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2011. 
      By: Gina P. Smith 
      City Clerk 	
 	 
APPROVED: 
      By: Bill Gillespie, Jr. 
      Mayor 	
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Prattville, Alabama," and may be so cited. The Code consists of parts I and II. 
(Code 1992, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt code of ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-7.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed; provided, these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Code or any ordinance which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content of such section may be repugnant thereto: 
General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. In case of conflict between this Code of Ordinances and any technical code adopted herein by reference, the more restrictive provision shall apply. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, or another ordinance, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be controlling. 
Acts. References to acts are to acts of the Alabama Legislature, as published in the Acts of Alabama. Acts passed after 1978 are referenced to the act number, which number includes the last two digits of the year of enactment. All other acts are referenced to act number and year of enactment. All references to acts are generally followed by a parenthetical reference to the page number in the Acts of Alabama upon which the act begins. The page number reference is for information purposes only. All references to acts are to such acts as amended. 
Acts by agents. When any provision requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing is sufficient. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Prattville, Alabama. 
City officials, officers and employees. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, officers or employees by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of Prattville," and shall be taken to mean the official, board, commission, department, officer or employee of this city having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated; and powers and authority granted to them shall be deemed to be grants of such powers and authority to their respective duly designated subordinates. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Prattville, Alabama, as designated in section 1-1. 
Code of Ala. 1975. The abbreviation "Code of Ala. 1975" means the Code of Alabama, 1975, as now or hereafter amended. Any reference to an act found in the Code of Alabama, 1975, by short title is a reference to such act as amended. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. However, if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-3-8, or a day on which the office in which the act must be done is closed as permitted by any law of the state, the last day shall also be excluded, and the next succeeding secular or working day shall be counted as the last day within which the act may be done. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-1-4. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate circumstances the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either…or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
Council, city council, governing body. The terms "council," "city council" and "governing body" means the City Council of the City of Prattville, Alabama. 
County. The term "county" means Autauga County, Alabama or Elmore County, Alabama or both such counties. 
Gender. A term importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to the other genders. 
Joint authority. All terms giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers, shall give such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, unless it is otherwise declared. 
May. The term "may" shall be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month, unless otherwise expressed. 
Must. The term "must" shall be construed as being mandatory and not permissive. 
Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and" and the term "and" may be read "or," where the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner" includes not only the owner of the whole, but also the owner of any part of the property, any tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of the property. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, corporations, associations, organizations, trustees, agents and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined herein. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time. In all cases where any provision shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Alabama. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city, and shall embrace all parts thereof within the designated right-of-way. In those instances where the context requires, the term "street" shall embrace only the area between the opposite curbs or curblines designated for vehicular traffic. 
Tense. Terms used in the present, future or past tense includes each of the other tenses. 
Writing or in writing. The term "writing" or "in writing" may be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1992, §§ 1-2, 1-12)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  History notes, editor's notes and state law references and other references or notes that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any previously repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1992, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Prattville, Alabama, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The section (chapter, article, division, or subdivision) should be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Prattville, Alabama, is hereby created to read as follows:…." The section (chapter, article, division, or subdivision) should be set out in full. 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1992, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contractor or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; violations of Code, ordinance, or state law. 
(a)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, an offense against the city, a violation, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, an offense against the city, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by hard labor for a period not exceeding six months or by any combination thereof; provided, that no fine or sentence of imprisonment or hard labor shall exceed the maximum fine or sentence established under state law for the commission of a substantially similar offense. 
(d)  Any corporation found to be in violation shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00, at the discretion of the court trying the case. Any officer, manager, superintendent, agent or employee of a corporation shall be punished for a violation of this Code committed by such corporation, if such violation was the act or the result of the act or order of any such person. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(Code 1992, § 1-8; Ord. of 9-6-1983(1), §§ 4, 5) 
State Law reference— Penalties for ordinance violations, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-14-9.  
Sec. 1-8. - Violation of orders, rules and regulations adopted. 
Any person who shall violate, or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any lawful order of any lawful officer of the city made in pursuance of and under such officer's authority as such officer, shall be guilty of an offense; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to violations of official duty imposed by this Code upon officers or employees of the city as such, unless the provision imposing the duty also expressly makes the violation thereof unlawful or punishable. 
(Code 1992, § 1-9)  
Sec. 1-9. - Imprisonment in default of payment of fine. 
If a fine is assessed against any party by the judge, upon conviction under this Code or any of the ordinances, and in the event the fines and costs are not then paid, the judge shall sentence the party so in default to work out the fine and costs under the direction of the city authorities, allowing not less than $10.00 for each day's service, within the limit prescribed by rule 10(g) of the Rules of Criminal Procedure for the courts of the state. 
(Code 1992, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-12.  
Sec. 1-10. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all ordinances are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code or any ordinance shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment or decree shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code or any ordinance. 
(Code 1992, § 1-14)  
Sec. 1-11. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-12. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-13. - Ordinances, resolutions and activities not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of the following ordinances or portions of ordinances. Such ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(1)  Annexing property into the city. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Describing the boundaries of the city. 
(4)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance, sale or security of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(5)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(8)  Providing for salaries, benefits, or terms or conditions of employment of city officers or employees not codified in this Code, or creating or amending any department, division or other agency of city government, or any employment classification or position, whether elected or appointed, not codified in this Code. 
(9)  Approving the incorporation of or the articles of incorporation of any board, council commission, authority or public corporation. 
(10)  Not codified in this Code that create, authorizes or incorporates any board, council, commission, authority or public corporation. 
(11)  Establishing or modifying council districts. 
(12)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(13)  Providing for local improvements or levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(14)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(15)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(16)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision, or prescribing or accepting subdivision regulations. 
(17)  Levying or imposing taxes not codified in this Code. 
(18)  Rezoning specific property or otherwise pertaining to zoning. 
(19)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(20)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(21)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(Code 1992, § 1-13)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Flying flags on city property. 
(a)  Where and when flags to be flown. The United States flag and the state flag shall be flown in front of the city hall at all times the city hall is open for business or the council is in session and shall also be flown inside the council chambers during all council meetings. The United States flag and the state flag shall be flown at the city cemetery and the fire stations during business hours. The United States flag and the state flag shall also be flown at all city parks at any and all times that there are scheduled and/or organized gatherings at those places, and at any other times ordered by the mayor or city council. 
(b)  Both flags to be flown. At no time shall the state flag be flown when the United States flag is not being flown, nor shall the United States flag be flown at any time when the state flag is not being flown or displayed. 
(c)  Size of flags. The United States flag and the state flag shall be no smaller than four feet by six feet nor larger than five feet by eight feet. If both flags are flown on one flagpole, then they shall be of the same size. In the event a square state flag is flown on a separate flagpole from the United States flag, then both flags shall be of the same size and/or width with the flagpoles being no further than 15 feet apart from each other. 
(d)  Distance between flags. When flying on two or more separate flagpoles, the flag of the United States shall be at the center and at the highest point of the group when a number of flags of states or localities or pennants of societies are grouped and displayed from the staffs. When flying on the same flagpole, the United States flag shall at all times fly above the state flag and the top of the state flag shall be flown not more than six inches nor less than one inch from the bottom of the United States flag. 
(e)  Height of flagpoles. All outdoor flagpoles shall be of at least 20 feet in height but not greater than 40 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2003-009, §§ 1—5, 5-20-2003)  
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— City council generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-21. - Standing committees of council established. 
Within the city council, there shall be the standing committees established by the city council consisting each of three members, in addition to such other committees the council may direct. 
(1)  Finance, personnel, planning, economic development. 
(2)  Fire and information technology. 
(3)  Maintenance—Vehicles, facilities and lots. 
(4)  Parks and recreation. 
(5)  Police and judicial. 
(6)  Sanitation. 
(7)  Streets, drainage and lights. 
(8)  Urban management and cemetery. 
(9)  Wastewater and stormwater. 
(10)  Liaisons—Heritage Center, Historic Prattville Redevelopment Authority (HPRA). 
(Code 1971, § 2-3; Code 1992, § 2-9; Ord. No. 2016-A-020, 11-15-2016 )  
Secs. 2-22—2-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , §§ 1—24, adopted Nov. 7, 2016, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former division pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Rules of order authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-52. 
 
Sec. 2-46. - Procedure for council meetings. 
The rules or order of procedure herein contained shall govern deliberations and meetings of the council of Prattville, Alabama. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 1, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-47. - Dates for regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the following dates: the first and third Tuesdays of each month. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 2, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-48. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings may be held at the call of the presiding officer by serving notice on each member of the council not less than 24 hours before the time set for such special meetings; or special meetings may be held as provided by Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-43-50, as amended, whenever two council members (or the mayor) making the request shall have the right to call such meeting. Notice of all special meetings shall be posted on a bulletin board accessible to the public at least 24 hours prior to such meeting. In the event of an emergency, the council may call a meeting with one-hour notice if circumstances require immediate action to avoid physical injury to persons or damage to property. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 3, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-49. - Quorum. 
A quorum shall be determined as provided by Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-43-48, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 4, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-50. - Time meetings convened. 
The regular meeting on the first and third Tuesdays of each month shall convene immediately following the 6:00 p.m. public hearing, at city hall, and all meetings, regular and special, shall be open to the public. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 5, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-51. - Order of business. 
The order of business shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pledge of Allegiance of the flag. 
(2)  Invocation. 
(3)  A call to order. 
(4)  Roll call. 
(5)  Approval of minutes. 
(6)  Comments by persons present regarding current agenda items only. 
(7)  Report of mayor. 
(8)  Report of standing committees and special reports. 
(9)  Report on status of city finances (second meeting of each month). 
(10)  Resolutions, ordinances, orders and other business. 
(11)  Comments by persons present (general). 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 6, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-52. - Council to receive report from finance director. 
The council shall receive a report from the finance director or his or her designee on the status of city finances during the second meeting of each month. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 7, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-53. - Speaking by members. 
No person, not a member of the council, shall be allowed to address the same while in session without permission of the presiding officer. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 8, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-54. - Permission for nonmember to address council. 
Persons wishing to address the council during item (6) of the order of business in section 2-51 shall restrict comments to current agenda items only. Persons wishing to express general comments shall appear before the council during item (11) of the order of business in section 2-51. Comments during these items shall be limited to no more than five minutes. The presiding officer may reduce or increase the comment period when necessary. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 9, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-55. - Speaking more than twice. 
No member shall speak more than twice on the same subject without permission of the presiding officer. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 10, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-56. - Motions to reconsider. 
Motions to reconsider must be by a member who voted with a majority and at the same or next succeeding meeting of the council. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 11, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-57. - Recording vote; calling for division on question. 
Whenever it shall be required by one or more members, the verbal "yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded and any member may call for a division on any question. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 12, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-58. - Recording vote; calling for division on question; voting by raising right hand. 
Whenever it shall be required by one or more members, the verbal "yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded and any member may call for a division on any question. Otherwise, when called upon by the presiding officer, members shall raise their right hand to signify the "yeas" and "nays." 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 13, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-59. - Deciding questions of order. 
The presiding officer of the council shall decide all questions of order with the right of appeal to the council by any member. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 14, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-60. - Presiding officer may allow another to preside. 
The presiding officer of the council may, at his or her discretion, call any member to take the chair, to allow him or her to address the council, make a motion, or discuss any other matter at issue. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 15, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-61. - Order of matters considered. 
Motions to lay any matter on the table shall be first in order; and on all questions, the last amendment, the most distant day, and the largest sum shall be put first. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 16, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-62. - All meetings open to public; exception for executive session. 
All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except when the council meets in executive session as authorized by state law. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 17, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-63. - Rules for meeting in executive session. 
The council may meet in executive session only for these purposes as authorized by state law: (1) job performance, general reputation and character, physical condition, professional competence, and mental health; (2) formal complaints or charges against an individual or legal entity; (3) discussions with the city's attorney; (4) security plans and measures; (5) criminal investigation and the identity of an undercover agent or informer; (6) negotiations to buy/sell/lease real property; (7) preliminary negotiations in trade competition; (8) negotiations between the body and a group of public employees; or (9) to discuss and vote upon a public or contested case hearing. 
When a council member makes a motion to go into executive session for an enumerated purpose, the presiding officer shall put the motion to a vote. If the majority of the council shall vote in favor of the motion to go into executive session, the body shall then move into executive session to discuss the matter for which the executive session was called. No action may be taken in an executive session. When the discussion has been completed, the council shall resume its deliberations in public. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 18, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-64. - Motions for adjournment. 
A motion for adjournment shall always be in order. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 19, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-65. - Alteration, amendment or temporary suspension of rules. 
The rules of the council may be altered, amended, or temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds of the members present. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 20, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-66. - Committee reports. 
The chairman of each respective committee, or the councilmember acting for him or her, shall submit or make all reports to the council when so requested by the presiding officer or any member of the council. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 21, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-67. - Certain officers to attend meetings. 
The city clerk, city attorney, chief of police, court department chief magistrate, city engineer, city planner, finance director, fire chief, human resources director, information technology director, parks and recreation director, public works director, and such other officers or employees of the City of Prattville, shall, when requested, attend all meetings of the council and shall remain in the council room for such length of time as the council may direct. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 22, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-68. - Adoption of ordinances or resolutions of a permanent nature. 
No ordinance or resolution of a permanent nature shall be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced unless unanimous consent be obtained for the immediate consideration of such ordinance or resolution, such consent shall be by roll call and the vote thereon spread on the minutes. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 23, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 2-69. - Use of Robert's Rules of Order. 
Robert's Rules of Order is hereby adopted as rules of procedure for this council in those situations which cannot be resolved by the rules set out in this division. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-019 , § 24, 11-7-2016)  
Secs. 2-70—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Positions enumerated. 
The city council shall appoint, define duties, set the terms of office and establish salaries of the following: 
(1)  City clerk. 
(2)  City treasurer-finance director. 
(3)  Municipal judge. 
(4)  Chief of police. 
(5)  Chief of the fire department. 
(6)  Parks and recreation director. 
(7)  Public works director. 
(8)  City prosecutor. 
(9)  City attorney. 
(Code 1992, § 2-10; Ord. of 10-21-1980; Ord. No. 2000-013, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 2011-015, 4-5-2011; Ord. No. 2014-022, 7-1-2014 )  
Sec. 2-92. - Reimbursement for use of personal vehicles for city business. 
(a)  The mileage reimbursement for business use of personal vehicles is hereby established at the prevailing deductible rate established by the Internal Revenue Service Revenue Procedure 95-54 No. 46,217. 
(b)  Each successive year the rate of reimbursement shall be adjusted according to the rates approved by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(Ord. No. 96-036, 11-19-1996)  
Sec. 2-93. - City clerk. 
The job description of the city clerk is as set out in the code of the state. The compensation of the city clerk shall be set by the city council from time to time as the council may determine. 
(Ord. No. 2000-013, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 2011-013, 4-5-2011)  
Sec. 2-94. - City treasurer-finance director. 
The job description of the city treasurer-finance director is as set out in the code of the state and as necessary to provide for the financial needs of the city. The compensation of the city treasurer-finance director shall be set by the city council from time to time as the council may determine. 
(Ord. No. 2000-013, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 2011-013, 4-5-2011)  
Sec. 2-95. - Code enforcement officer. 
The city council hereby creates the position of code enforcement officer to be responsible for but not limited to enforcement of this Code pertaining to weeded lots, abandoned vehicles, litter, and other pertinent nuisance ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 96-007, 2-20-1996)  
Sec. 2-96. - Employment policies and procedures manual. 
(a)  The personnel manual is hereby adopted. 
(b)  The rules and regulations set out in such manual are hereby declared, determined, and ordered to be the rules and regulations for employees of the city, without setting out such rules and regulations at length herein. 
(c)  One or more copies of such manual is on file in the human resources office. 
(Code 1992, § 15-1; Ord. of 8-2-1977, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-15-1994)  
Sec. 2-97. - Retirement. 
City personnel participate in the employee's retirement system of the state by authority of Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-27-6. 
(Code 1992, § 15-6)  
Sec. 2-98. - Retiring police officers may keep badge and duty sidearm. 
All police officers retiring after 25 years of honorable service are hereby granted, as part of their retirement benefits, their badge and duty sidearm without cost to those retiring officers. Such badge shall not be used as police identification. 
(Ord. No. 2001-013, 6-5-2001; Ord. No. 2014-039, 12-2-2014 )  
Secs. 2-99—2-124. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Social security for employees of state and subdivisions thereof, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-28-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-125. - Extension of coverage. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of March 6, 1951, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or this division, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of old age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734 of 81st Congress. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Code 1971, § 2-48; Code 1992, § 2-50; Ord. of 1-17-1978, § 1)  
Sec. 2-126. - Execution of agreements. 
The mayor, or other chief executive officer, is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state agency authorized to act to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in this division. 
(Code 1971, § 2-49; Code 1992, § 2-51; Ord. of 1-17-1978, § 2)  
Sec. 2-127. - Withholdings. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in this division are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1971, § 2-50; Code 1992, § 2-52; Ord. of 1-17-1978, § 3)  
Sec. 2-128. - Contributions. 
There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations for employers' contributions, which shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws and regulations to receive same. 
(Code 1971, § 2-51; Code 1992, § 2-53; Ord. of 1-17-1978, § 4)  
Sec. 2-129. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Code 1971, § 2-52; Code 1992, § 2-54; Ord. of 1-17-1978, § 5)  
Sec. 2-130. - Adoption of law; excluded positions. 
The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of title II of the Social Security Act as amended by Public Law No. 734, 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof, excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office, or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations; and further excluding: 
(1)  Elected officials; 
(2)  Part-time employees. 
(Code 1971, § 2-53; Code 1992, § 2-55; Ord. of 1-17-1978, § 7)  
Secs. 2-131—2-192. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-193—2-222. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TREE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-223. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby established a tree commission. The mayor and city council members who are chairman of the committee on streets, committee on sanitation and committee on parks and recreation shall serve as ex officio members of the tree commission. In addition, the mayor shall appoint five additional members from the city. Two shall be appointed for one year; two shall be appointed for two years; and one shall be appointed for three years. Following the initial appointment, two members shall be appointed annually to serve for three years. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-40, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 2-224. - Meetings. 
The tree commission shall provide in its minutes for regular periodic meetings. Meetings may also be called by the mayor, by either of the three council members, or by any three of the commission members, after giving not less than three days' notice of the date, time and place of the special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-41, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 2-225. - Functions. 
The tree commission shall make recommendations to the mayor and council on the following: 
(1)  Needs of the city in connection with its tree planting program; 
(2)  Recommend the type and kind of trees to be planted upon municipal streets, parks and other public places within the city; 
(3)  Assist the mayor and council in providing information regarding the protection, maintenance, removal, and planting of trees on public property and, where requested by the owner, on private property; 
(4)  Meet with the city planning commission and assist in making a master street plan by recommending the use and species of trees; 
(5)  Recommend to the mayor and council which trees are considered unwanted weed trees, and identify and recommend removal of dead, dying, diseased or insect-infested trees; and 
(6)  Make studies and report back to the mayor and council with recommendations on matters concerning trees in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-42, 4-19-2005)  
Secs. 2-226—2-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - INVESTMENT OF MUNICIPAL FUNDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-023, adopted July 15, 2014 , set out provisions intended for use as §§ 2-226—2-237. To preserve the style of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 2-241—2-252. 
 
Sec. 2-241. - Purpose. 
This article of the Code of Prattville is enacted to establish the city's investment policy for municipal funds. The purpose of the policy is to establish the city's investment scope, objectives, standards of prudence to be applied in investments, delegation of authority to invest, authorized investments, authorized institutions, safekeeping requirements, internal controls and reporting procedures. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-242. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article as the city's investment policy shall apply to all investment transactions of the City of Prattville, except for the retirement contributions on deposit with the Retirement Systems of Alabama as it is controlled by a separate legal entity from that of the City of Prattville. All financial assets of other municipal funds, including the general fund, special revenue funds, capital projects funds, enterprise funds, trust and agency funds, debt service funds, internal service funds and any new municipal funds created by the city council, unless otherwise specifically exempt, shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-243. - Objectives. 
(a)  The primary objective of the city's investment policy as established herein is to outline the criteria for maintaining the security of invested municipal funds. Criteria for managing the city's municipal funds investment portfolio shall be in the following priority: 
(1)  The preservation of capital and the protection of investment principal. 
(2)  To maintain sufficient liquidity to meet reasonably anticipated operating expenditures and capital outlays. 
(3)  To maximize investment returns given the safety and liquidity constraints and subject to prudent investment principles. 
(b)  The objective for return on investment of municipal funds should be that equaling or exceeding the average return on three-month U.S. Treasury bills or the average rate on federal funds, whichever is higher. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-244. - Prudent person rule and indemnification. 
(a)  The standard of prudence to be applied by the finance director and employees of the City of Prattville Finance Department shall be the "prudent person rule," as follows: 
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as a probable income to be derived. 
(b)  The "prudent person ruling" shall be applied in the context of managing the investment of municipal funds as provided herein. 
(c)  Neither the finance director nor city employees of the finance department, acting in accordance with this article and policies and procedures implementing the same and exercising due diligence, shall be held personally responsible for a specific securities credit risk or market price changes, provided that these deviations are reported immediately and that appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-245. - Ethics and conflicts of interest. 
All municipal employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment program or which would impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions. Employees of the city finance department and elected officials shall subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the city, particularly with regard to the time of purchases and sales. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-246. - Investment authorization. 
The finance director, mayor and council president are authorized to make investment decisions on behalf of the city within the perimeters of this article and subject to applicable state law and council policies. Two of the three authorized to make investment decisions on behalf of the city must be in agreement before any action is taken. To that end, the finance director, mayor and council president will be responsible for establishing the investment strategy for municipal funds based on staff expertise and administrative cost analysis. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-247. - Authorized financial dealers and institutions. 
(a)  All investments of municipal funds as provided for herein shall be made as directed by the city council pursuant to its authority in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-122, as amended, and made through qualified public depositors, organized under the laws of the United States or the State of Alabama and qualified as public depositors pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, Chapter 14A of Title 41, as amended, as participating and in good standing with the State of Alabama Security for Alabama Funds Enhancement Program. First consideration shall be given to such qualified public depositors located in the City of Prattville; provided, however, with the approval of the city council, by resolution duly adopted, the finance director may engage in an investment transactions of municipal funds with a securities dealers classified as "primary dealer" or "secondary dealer" affiliated with New York Federal Reserve Bank. 
(b)  The finance director shall annually review the audited financial reports of all qualified public depositors, financial institutions and primary dealers that administer city investments. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-248. - Investments. 
(a)  Municipal funds not presently needed for other purposes may be invested in any obligations in which sinking funds are authorized to be invested pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-81-19, as amended, or any amendments thereto and in addition in any of the securities or obligations as set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-81-21, as amended, or any amendments thereto. 
(b)  Investment portfolios shall be held by an independent custodian. Institutions holding city investments in any common trust fund shall have insurance against fraud, embezzlement and computer error. 
(c)  The finance director may further restrict investments of municipal funds based upon his evaluation of the city's investment objectives and strategy. 
(d)  The city's security interest in the investment securities must be perfected. To that end, the city must "take delivery" of the securities and all city investments will be acquired "delivery versus payment." Municipal funds shall not be transferred until securities are delivered. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-249. - Safe keeping and collateral. 
All investments in municipal funds as provided for herein and all financial institutions acting as a depository of municipal funds, shall be qualified public depositors organized under the laws of the United States and the State of Alabama and qualifying as public depositors pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, Chapter 14A, Title 41, as amended, as participating and in good standing with the State of Alabama Security of Alabama Funds Enhancement Program. To the extent that any such public depositor provides evidence of such qualification and participation in having deposited collateral to satisfy its compliance with such program then the finance director is hereby authorized to execute for and on behalf of the City of Prattville public deposit identification and acknowledgement forms which grant permission on behalf of the City of Prattville for the release of any collateral pledged directly to the city to secure its public deposits with such financial institution regarding the pledge of collateral for such deposits which will no longer be effective due to the implementation of the SAFE Program. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-250. - Selection of investment instruments and institutions. 
An informal quotation process may be conducted by the finance director when selecting among public depositors as determined by the finance director. Quotes will be secured from financial institutions that are qualified as public depositors pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, Chapter 14A of Title 41, as amended, that are participating in and in good standing with the Security of Alabama Funds Enhancement Program. If a specific maturity date is required for any investment instrument, quotes will be requested for approved instruments which meet the material requirements. When no specific maturity date is required, the most advantageous market yield, in the opinion of the finance director, will be selected. Financial institutions will be requested to quote a firm price or yield. Generally, deposits or purchases of investment instruments will be made based upon the highest effective yield consistent with policy restrictions; however, transaction cost may be considered. In the event that two financial institutions submit identical quotations, the investment will be made with the financial institution currently holding at that time the lower amount of municipal funds; provided, however, the investment of municipal bond or warrant proceeds will be considered separate from investment of other municipal funds. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-251. - Diversification. 
It is the policy of the City of Prattville to diversify its investment portfolios. Investments shall be diversified to eliminate the risk of loss resulting from over concentration of assets in a specific maturity, a specific issuer or a specific class of securities. Diversification strategies and guidelines for the per cent of the total portfolio that may be invested in any one investment instrument shall be determined and revised periodically by the finance director or his designated representative. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Sec. 2-252. - Reporting. 
The finance director will provide a monthly investment report to the mayor listing the investment balance in each fund and in each financial institution and/or security dealer. Each quarter the city council members will be provided with a similar report. 
( Ord. No. 2014-023, 7-15-2014 )  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Licensing Code, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Tax of interstate commerce; business of federal government. 
No provision of this chapter shall be construed so as to tax interstate commerce or any business of the United States government or any branch thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 3-6; Code 1992, § 3-6)  
Sec. 6-2. - Disposition of contraband beverages. 
Whenever any person shall have been convicted in the municipal court of possession or custody of any liquor, wine or malt or brewed beverage contrary to the provisions of this chapter or of any state law or any regulation of the state alcoholic beverage control board, or for engaging in the business of selling malt or brewed beverages without a license, and it shall appear that the police department has seized such liquor, wine or malt or brewed beverages and has the same in custody as evidence or otherwise, the municipal court shall enter an order declaring such liquor, wine or malt or brewed beverages to be contraband and ordering the chief of police to destroy the same or to sell the same to the state alcoholic beverage control board for account of the city. An appeal from any conviction upon which any such order depends shall carry with it an appeal from such order. 
(Code 1971, § 3-5; Code 1992, § 3-5) 
State Law reference— Confiscation and sale of contraband goods, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3-240 et seq.  
Sec. 6-3. - Public hearing, public notice, and advertising required for consideration of alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(a)  Every application for on-premises sales of any alcoholic beverages to include lounge liquor license, restaurant liquor license, class I club liquor license, class II club liquor license, retail beer license (on-premises), and retail table wine license (on-premises), to sell alcoholic beverages at any location within the corporate limits of the city, in addition to other advertisement requirements that may be required by law, the city shall publish in a local newspaper regularly published in the city, an advertisement giving notice of such application and notice of a hearing for public comment. The notice shall be published for two weeks prior to action by the city council. The advertisement in said notice shall read as follows: 
____________ has made application to the City Council of Prattville for a ____________ license for the premises located at ____________ , Prattville, Alabama. A public hearing will be set for ____________ ____________ .m., on ____________ , 20 ____________ for public comment on said application. 
(b)  In addition to the published notice required in subsection (a) of this section, the city shall also post a public notice sign on the premises where the business or sale is to be conducted continuously for a period of not less than 14 days. 
(c)  The city council shall set a public hearing for all proposed on-premises licenses. 
(d)  Applicants for the following types of licenses shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount shown opposite to the type of license at the time said completed application is delivered to the city. 
License Type 	Filing Fee* 
 
Lounge retail liquor license—class I\$50.00 
Lounge package store—class II \50.00 
Club liquor license—class I\125.00 
Club liquor license—class II\100.00 
Restaurant retail liquor license\50.00 
Retail beer license—off-premises\25.00 
Retail beer license—on-premises\50.00 
Retail table wine—off-premises\25.00 
Retail table wine—on-premises\50.00 
Special events retail license\25.00 
*Above filing fees are in addition to license fees 
(e)  All applications granted are required to be licensed according to the general licensing ordinance or Code of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 3-7; Ord. of 6-1-1993; Ord. No. 96-022, 4-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-002, 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 6-4. - Purchases by retailer of malt beverages from wholesaler not licensed by city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the retail distribution or sale of malt beverages to purchase malt beverages from any person who is not licensed by the city as a wholesale distributor of malt beverages. 
(Code 1971, § 3-2; Code 1992, § 3-2)  
Sec. 6-5. - Minor's presence in state liquor stores. 
No person under the age of 21 years shall enter or be allowed in any state-owned liquor store unless accompanied by such person's parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 1971, § 3-3.2; Code 1992, § 3-4; Ord. of 7-19-1988) 
State Law reference— Purchase, etc., by minor, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-1-5.  
Sec. 6-6. - Sale, distribution, etc., of alcohol to minors. 
No person shall sell, furnish, give to, or purchase for any person under the age of 21 years any malt or brewed beverages, any wine or liquor, or any other alcoholic or intoxicating beverages or attempt to sell, furnish, give to, or purchase for any person under the age of 21 years any of such beverages. 
(Code 1971, § 3-3.1; Code 1992, § 3-3; Ord. of 7-19-1988) 
State Law reference— Furnishing to minor by licensee or board, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-25(a)(3).  
Sec. 6-7. - Special events liquor license. 
(a)  Every individual, company, corporation, or organization who wishes to lease city facilities and requests a special events retail liquor license shall file a written application with the state alcoholic beverage control board and the city clerk. 
(b)  Upon receipt by the city clerk of the application, the police department shall conduct a background check as required for all liquor license applications. Upon receipt of the police department's investigation and the issuance of a special retail license by the state alcoholic beverage control board, the mayor shall be authorized to approve the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 3-8, 2-20-2001)  
Sec. 6-8. - Nude or nearly nude performances unlawful in alcoholic beverage establishments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a person is guilty of performing a nude or nearly nude activity when that person performs in a liquor or beer licensed place in such a manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal cleft, vulva or genitals, or any simulation thereof; or the showing of the covered male genitals in discernibly turgid state, or when any female performs in a liquor or beer licensed place in such a manner or attire as to expose to view the portion of the breast below the top of the areola, or any simulation. 
(b)  A beer licensee or a liquor licensee shall be guilty of permitting nude or nearly nude activity when having control of a beer licensed place or a liquor licensed place which he knows, or has reasonable cause to know, is being used by any person to perform on the premises in such a manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal cleft, vulva or genitals, or any simulation thereof; or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; or used by any female to perform in such place in such a manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola, or any simulation thereof, it permits such activity or fails to make reasonable and timely effort to halt or abate such activity or use. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994(1))  
Sec. 6-9. - Sale of draft beer for on-premises consumption only by retail licensees. 
The sale of draft beer for on-premises consumption only by retail licensees of the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board within the corporate limits and the police jurisdiction of the City of Prattville is hereby authorized and shall be legal subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Draft beer shall be sold and dispensed in open containers for consumption on the premises where it is sold; 
(2)  Draft beer cannot be repackaged for sale; 
(3)  No draft beer may be removed from the premises where it is sold and dispensed. 
( Ord. No. 2013-022, §§ 1—4, 6-4-2013 ; Ord. No. 2013-025, § 1, 6-18-2013 )  
Sec. 6-10. - Seven-day sale of alcohol in Elmore County portion of corporate limits. 
(a)  The City of Prattville, within the Elmore County portion of its corporate limits, authorizes the sale of alcoholic beverages, for on-premises and off-premises consumption, seven days a week, by properly licensed retail licensees of the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board serving the general public. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall not be permitted on Sundays until after 12:00 p.m. (noon). 
( Ord. No. 2017-012, § 1, 7-18-2017 )  
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-1-1 et seq.; general powers relative to animals, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-110; animal cruelty, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 3-1-10 et seq., 13A-11-14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by authorized agents of the city.  
Sec. 10-2. - Public nuisance animals. 
No owner, keeper or person acting for the owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent said animals from becoming a public nuisance. The term "public nuisance animal" means and includes any animal or animals that: 
(1)  Damages the property of anyone other than the owner. 
(2)  Damages or destroys gardens, flowers, or shrubs, or otherwise interferes with the welfare of the neighborhood. 
(3)  Without provocation, chases or approaches a pedestrian, bicycle rider, or vehicle in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack. 
(4)  Trespasses on private property in such a manner as to cause unsanitary conditions. 
(5)  Habitually makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to, barking, howling, whining, yelping or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbances or discomfort to neighbor or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept. 
(6)  Creates unsanitary conditions or offensive and objectionable odor in enclosure or surroundings and thereby creates unreasonable annoyances or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept. 
(Ord. No. 2001-007, § 4-28, 4-17-2001)  
Sec. 10-3. - Complaints of public nuisance animals. 
(a)  Whenever a person shall complain to the police department and/or code enforcement officer concerning a public nuisance animal, the police department/code enforcement officer will notify the owner or keeper of said animal, by written warning, that a complaint has been received and that the person should take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the specified nuisance within a reasonable period of time. 
(b)  If the warning given to the person alleged to be keeping the animal set forth in subsection (a) of this section is ineffective, then the complainant shall have the right to appear before the municipal court warrant clerk between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and complete an affidavit/summons against the owner or keeper of said animal. The restrictions of time will be in order for the warrant clerk to receive verification of the written warning. 
(Ord. No. 2001-007, § 4-28, 4-17-2001)  
Sec. 10-4. - Maintenance of enclosures. 
All premises where animals or fowl are kept, harbored or confined, shall be kept clean, sanitary and free of noxious odors and shall be maintained in such a manner as will effectually prevent the reproduction or propagation of flies; the presence on or about such premises of live larvae of flies under conditions which permit or favor growth or development shall be prima facie evidence of the reproduction or propagation of flies and of keeping or maintaining of such premises used for such purposes in violation of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 4-2; Code 1992, § 4-1)  
Sec. 10-5. - Stables required for horses, mules, or cows. 
Every person who shall maintain a horse, mule or cow shall provide a stable for said horse, mule, or cow which shall be kept clean and dry. Such stable shall have sufficient light to make cleaning practicable and sufficient ventilation to keep the air of such building pure at all times. No such stable shall be within 50 feet of any residence without the consent of the owner or occupant of such residence, or within 20 feet of any street. 
(Code 1971, § 4-3; Code 1992, § 4-2)  
Sec. 10-6. - Feed bins within stables. 
All stables where animals are kept shall have a feed bin for the storage of food that is of ratproof construction. All grain, malt or other animal food, except hay, stored or kept in such stable shall be kept in such feed bin. The feed bin shall be kept closed at all times except when momentarily opened to take food therefrom or when the same is being filled. No feed shall be scattered about outside such bin or in the stable, and all such feed found on the floor or in the stalls of such stable shall be removed daily and placed in the manure receptacle. No foodstuffs intended for human consumption shall be kept or stored in any stable or any other place where animals are kept. 
(Code 1971, § 4-4; Code 1992, § 4-3)  
Sec. 10-7. - Keeping of swine. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, stake out, or confine any live swine within the city limits except in those areas zoned FAR. 
(b)  In all FAR zoning districts, it shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, stake out, or confine any live swine in any building, structure, shed, corral, pen, or other enclosure, any part of which is within 300 feet of a dwelling, school, church, hospital, public building, public park, public school, playground, or public thoroughfare. 
(Code 1992, § 4-4; Ord. of 9-20-1977)  
Sec. 10-8. - Corrals in commercial and industrial districts. 
It shall be unlawful to keep any animal within any corral in a commercial or industrial district as defined by appendix A, Zoning, unless such corral shall have a minimum area of 1,000 square feet for each such animal and 200 square feet for each additional animal kept. 
(Code 1971, § 4-6; Code 1992, § 4-5)  
Sec. 10-9. - Corrals in residential districts. 
It shall be unlawful to keep any animal in any corral in a residential district as described or defined by appendix A, Zoning, unless such corral shall have a minimum area of 2,500 square feet for each such animal and 1,000 square feet for each additional animal there kept, to every portion of which such animal shall have free and unrestricted access. Such corral shall be located a minimum distance of 200 feet from any dwelling, other than the owner's dwelling, and from any church, school, hospital, public building, public park, or public playground, and 20 feet from any public thoroughfare. 
(Code 1971, § 4-7; Code 1992, § 4-6)  
Secs. 10-10—10-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
 
Sec. 10-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large means a dog unrestrained and not under the control of its owner or other person acting on behalf of the owner. Such control must be exercised either: 
(1)  By confinement within a fence, wall or other enclosure in such a manner as to effectively prevent the escape of the dog; 
(2)  By restraint by a leash, cord or chain, not less than ten feet in length, secured to a collar with swivel connections, in such a manner as to effectively prevent the escape of the dog; provided, however, that the length of the leash, cord or chain must be reduced in length to prevent the dog when so secured from entering premises other than that of the owner; 
(3)  If in a public place and off the premises of the owner, by a leash, cord or chain not more than six feet in length and secured to a collar, with swivel connection, in such a manner as to effectively prevent the escape of the dog. 
When on the premises of its owner a dog shall be deemed to be under restraint. 
Dog means any member of the canine family. 
Dog control officer means that person designated by the mayor who shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of this article. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining a dog within the city limits. 
Vicious dog means a dog that has bitten a human while not on the premises of its owner. A verified written statement stating that the dog has bitten a human off the premises of the owner, stating time, place and particulars shall be prima facie evidence of the occurrence, when filed with the dog control officer. 
(Code 1971, § 4-28; Code 1992, § 4-20) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7-1.  
Sec. 10-38. - Enforcement officers. 
(a)  Persons authorized by the city shall enforce the provisions of this article, attempt to catch and impound any dog running at large within the city, attempt to eliminate from the city stray, homeless, unclaimed and diseased dogs, cooperate with the county rabies inspector, and perform such other, further and additional duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  Upon request of a resident of the city, authorized agents of the city may enter upon the property under the requesting resident's control for the purpose of catching or trapping a dog at large. 
(c)  Authorized agents of the city shall have the right, for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety, to enter upon any property within the city limits for the purpose of capturing or impounding any female dog in heat which is at large. 
(d)  Upon verified written complaint that a dog has bitten a human being, or is suspected of having rabies, authorized agents of the city shall have the further right, in order to protect public health, welfare and safety, to enter upon any property within the city for the purpose of capturing and confining the dog, under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian, for a period of 14 days, in compliance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7A-9. 
(e)  Any expense incurred by the city in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be paid by the owner of such dog. 
(f)  If authorized agents of the city are unable to entrap a dog that has bitten a human being, or is suspected of having rabies, or is a female dog in heat, such authorized agent of the city shall summon a police officer whose duty shall be to shoot the dog, after taking such precautions as are necessary for the public safety. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner or custodian of a dog which has bitten a human being, or is suspected of having rabies, to fail to promptly turn over or deliver such dog to authorized agents of the city, unless such a dog has been turned over to a licensed veterinarian for 14 days' observation. 
(Code 1971, § 4-29; Code 1992, § 4-21)  
Sec. 10-39. - Impoundment. 
(a)  At large. Any dog that is found at large on any street, sidewalk, alley, thoroughfare or other place in the city may be caught and impounded. 
(b)  Upon premises other than owner. Any dog, whether or not wearing an inoculation tag or license, which is found upon the premises or property in possession of another may, at the request of the person in possession of such property or such person's duly authorized representative, be caught and impounded. 
(Code 1971, § 4-33; Code 1992, § 4-24)  
Sec. 10-40. - Interference with enforcement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, molest or interfere with any person authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article. 
(Code 1971, § 4-36; Code 1992, § 4-27)  
Sec. 10-41. - Running at large. 
(a)  Confinement of dogs on private premises. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining a dog to cause, permit or allow such dog to be at large on or about any place, lot or premises, or portion of same, within the city. It shall be unlawful for any individual to bring into "A Child's Place" at Pratt Park any animal, leashes notwithstanding, except that handicapped individuals with certified trained guide dogs may use said animals for the purpose for which they were trained in said park. 
(b)  Vicious dogs. All vicious dogs within the city shall be kept: 
(1)  Confined within a fence, wall or other enclosure in such a manner as to effectively prevent the escape of such dog; or 
(2)  Restrained by a leash, cord or chain not less than ten feet in length, and secured to a collar with swivel connections in such a manner as to effectively prevent the escape of the dog; provided, however, that the length of the leash, cord or chain shall be reduced to such length as to prevent the dog, when so secured, from entering premises other than that of the owner. 
(c)  Female dogs in heat. Every female dog in heat shall be confined by the owner in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog cannot come into contact with another dog, except for planned breeding. 
(Code 1971, § 4-32; Code 1992, § 4-23; Ord. No. 97-017, 5-6-1997)  
Secs. 10-42—10-79. - Reserved  
ARTICLE III. - VICIOUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 10-80. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shelter means the company, partnership, association, organization or corporation with whom the city contracts for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under authority of this article. 
Bite means to seize with the teeth so the skin of the person or animal seized has been wounded or pierced with a break or abrasion. 
Owner means any person having a right of property in the animal, or who keeps or harbors the animal, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who permits the animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
Premises means any real property titled in the name of, held in fee by, rented or leased to an individual, company or corporation. 
Severe injury means any injury which results in a broken bone, internal bodily injury or the death of any person or animal. 
Vicious animal means an animal that attacks, bites or inflicts severe injury to human beings, pets, companion animals, or livestock. The owner of any animal accused of being vicious is entitled to introduce evidence that the animal was provoked or that the animal's actions at the time of the alleged attack, bite or injury were justified. In regards to dogs specifically, no dog may be declared vicious based solely on the breed of said animal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-019, § 4-40, 8-17-2010)  
Sec. 10-81. - Confinement required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a vicious animal within the city limits unless the enclosure for said animal meets the conditions set forth by the provisions of section 10-83. 
(Ord. No. 2010-019, § 4-41, 8-17-2010)  
Sec. 10-82. - Vicious animal investigations; initiation; results. 
(a)  When any person claims that an animal is vicious, he shall make a sworn statement before a magistrate in the city setting forth the name of the animal's owner, the location where the animal is being kept in the city, and the reason he believes the animal to be vicious. The sworn statement may be completed by any person having contact with the animal. The sworn statement will be delivered to the dog control officer and the dog control officer will complete a vicious animal investigation. 
(b)  Dog control officers are authorized to initiate a vicious animal investigation in cases where a bite or severe injury to any person or other animal has been reported. 
(c)  In the event the vicious animal investigation leads the dog control officer to believe the allegation is founded: 
(1)  The dog control officer will file a summons for the owner of the animal with the municipal court; 
(2)  The animal in question will be impounded at the animal shelter or with a licensed veterinarian; 
(3)  A hearing date will be held in municipal court within 14 days of the date of service; and 
(4)  The animal will be held in impound until the owner complies with all orders of the court; however, the animal will be humanely destroyed if the owner fails to comply with all orders of the court within 20 days of the court's order. 
(d)  The owner will be required to pay all expenses involved and a fee of $20.00 per day per animal for each day the animal was housed at the animal shelter. The total amount of the daily housing fee is to be retained by the animal shelter. 
(e)  In the event the vicious animal investigation leads the dog control officer to believe the allegation is unfounded, the dog control officer will advise the complainant of his findings and submit the results of the investigation to his supervisor. 
(f)  A copy of all investigations made pursuant to this section will be kept on file in the police department. 
(g)  There is an annual $25.00 registration of animals deemed vicious by municipal court or penalty of $150.00 for nonregistration within two weeks required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2010-019, § 4-42, 8-17-2010)  
Sec. 10-83. - Enclosure specifications for vicious animals. 
Whenever a vicious animal is permitted to stay or remain in the city, the following requirements and any other requirements deemed necessary and appropriate for public safety by the supervisor shall be adhered to by the owner of said vicious animal: 
(1)  Owners shall provide an exterior perimeter fence suitable to contain an average animal of the same type. The perimeter fence shall be constructed of chainlink or wooden privacy type and shall be at least four feet in height. 
(2)  Owners shall provide an additional fence or pen of adequate size inside the perimeter fence to humanely confine the vicious animal. 
a.  This additional fence or pen may not share common fencing with the perimeter fence; 
b.  This additional fence or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached at all sides; 
c.  All four sides of this additional fence or pen must be sunk at least two feet into the ground or the fence or pen must be built over a concrete pad to prevent the animal from digging out; 
d.  This additional fence or pen must have an inward opening gate and shall be kept locked at all times by padlock or key lock except when tending to the care of the animal; 
e.  The sides of this additional fence or pen shall be from ground to top at least twice the height of the animal, the height of the animal being measured from its shoulders; 
f.  This additional fence or pen must not be positioned so that neighbors or passersby have access to the animal. It must be no less than 20 feet from any neighboring home; and 
g.  Signs shall be posted on each side of this additional fence or pen stating that a vicious animal is enclosed and shall specify the type of animal enclosed, i.e., a vicious dog. 
The fence/enclosure shall be inspected by the dog control officer, so long as the vicious dog remains, on a semi-annual basis, or at other times when deemed necessary by the dog control officer. 
(3)  Whenever the animal is outside the additional fence or pen provided for in this section: 
a.  It must be attended by the owner; and 
b.  It must be restrained by a secure collar and leash or rope no shorter than eight feet nor longer than ten feet in length and of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(4)  No vicious animal shall be allowed outside the owner's property except in emergencies or for normal or necessary medical or health related treatment. 
(5)  No vicious animal shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any object such as a tree, post or building, outside of its additional fence or pen as provided in this section. 
(6)  An electronic animal confinement system shall not be used to confine an animal classified as vicious. 
(Ord. No. 2010-019, § 4-43, 8-17-2010)  
Sec. 10-84. - Authority of dog control officer when enclosure deemed inadequate. 
When a vicious animal is not properly or securely confined pursuant to the provisions of this article, the supervisor shall order confinement of the animal with a licensed veterinarian or with the animal shelter until the owner in charge of such animal provides an enclosure which complies with the provisions of section 10-83. Provided, however, that if the owner in charge of such animal fails to provide a proper enclosure as provided by section 10-83 within 30 days, such animal shall be disposed of as directed by the supervisor. All costs of feeding and caring for such animal during said confinement shall be paid by the owner, provided however, that the daily cost of confinement at the animal shelter shall not exceed $20.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 2010-019, § 4-44, 8-17-2010)  
Sec. 10-85. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise specified in this article, violations of any section of this article are subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 2010-019, § 4-45, 8-17-2010)  
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to own, regulate, control, etc., cemeteries, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-40 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Prerequisites for burial in city cemeteries. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the dead in any city cemetery without notice to and consent of the planning director, and without having selected and paid for a plot therein. 
(Code 1971, § 6-1; Code 1992, § 7-1)  
Sec. 14-2. - Damage to property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously damage, deface, remove or destroy any tomb, monument, gravestone or memorial to the dead, or any fence or enclosure about any tomb, monument, gravestone, or memorial, or willfully destroy, remove, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub or plant, within the enclosure of any city cemetery. 
(Code 1971, § 6-2; Code 1992, § 7-2) 
State Law reference— Desecration of tombs, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-23.1.  
Sec. 14-3. - Unlawful entry—Public cemeteries. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authority, to enter or to remain or to be present in any public cemetery at any time between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise. 
(Code 1971, § 6-3; Code 1992, § 7-3)  
Sec. 14-4. - Same—Private cemeteries. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, remain or be present in a private cemetery without the owner's written permission at any time between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise. 
(Code 1971, § 6-4; Code 1992, § 7-4)  
Sec. 14-5. - Fees for plots and placement of markers. 
(a)  The rate to be charged for cemetery plots in Oak Hill Cemetery and Chapman Cemetery shall be $275.00 per plot for any plot sold from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(b)  Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the city shall charge a fee of $25.00 per plot for the placement of any permanent grave markers. 
(c)  Permanent grave markers may be placed on graves with the city personnel marking the location for placement of the marker. 
(Ord. of 9-21-1993)  
Chapter 18 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Elections, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Elections in compliance with state law. 
General municipal elections held in the city shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of applicable state law. 
(Code 1971, § 7-1; Code 1992, § 2-5) 
State Law reference— Municipal elections, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-1 et seq.  
Sec. 18-2. - Election districts; election of councilmember; term of office. 
At the municipal election in 2012, and every four years thereafter, the qualified electors residing in each of the above described districts of the city who are entitled to participate in such election shall elect one councilmember to the city council for that district. Each councilmember so elected shall be a bona fide elector of and must actually reside in the district from which they qualified for election. 
Each such councilmember shall hold office for a period of four years or until a successor shall be elected and qualified or until such councilmember shall resign, die, or move their residence outside of said district or otherwise be removed from office. 
This law shall not affect the duties, rights or tenure of office of the existing members of the city council or the mayor, who shall continue to hold and discharge the duties of said office as is incumbent upon them or as may hereafter be made incumbent upon them by law, until their successors shall be elected and qualified under this law. 
(Code 1971, § 2-2; Code 1992, § 2-3; Ord. of 11-5-1987, § 3; Ord. of 4-21-1992, § 3; Ord. of 4-2-1996, § 3; Ord. No. 2003-031, § 3, 10-7-2003; Ord. No. 2011-024, § 3, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 2011-024, §§ 3, 5, 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 18-3. - Election of mayor; term of office. 
At the municipal election to be held in 2012, and every four years thereafter, the qualified electors residing in the city who are entitled to participate in such election shall elect the mayor from at large. The mayor shall be a bona fide elector of and must actually reside within the corporate limits of the city. 
The mayor shall hold office for a period of four years or until a successor shall be elected and qualified or until the mayor shall resign, die, or move his/her residence outside of said city or otherwise be removed from office. 
This law shall not affect the duties, rights or tenure of office of the existing members of the city council or the mayor, who shall continue to hold and discharge the duties of said office as is incumbent upon them or as may hereafter be made incumbent upon them by law, until their successors shall be elected and qualified under this law. 
(Code 1971, § 2-1; Code 1992, § 2-4; Ord. of 11-5-1987, § 4; Ord. of 4-21-1992, § 4; Ord. of 4-2-1996, § 4; Ord. No. 2003-031, § 4, 10-7-2003; Ord. No. 2011-024, §§ 4, 5, 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 18-4. - Election districts; descriptions; incorporation of map. 
In accordance with state law and prior agreements resolving civil rights litigation related to voting, the city is hereby divided into seven single member districts to be designated as district 1, district 2, district 3, district 4, district 5, district 6 and district 7. 
The districts are the areas within the city that are enclosed by lines that follow existing corporate limits as of the date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, centerline of streets, roadways, alleys, railroads or extensions thereof; property lines; streams, creeks and rivers; or other lines as described in the metes and bounds description of district boundaries included as a part of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived as attachment 1 and as shown on the graphic depiction referred to as attachment 2. 
(Code 1992, §§ 2-1, 2-2; Ord. of 11-5-1987, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-21-1992, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-2-1996, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2003-031, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2003; Ord. of 5-4-2004; Ord. No. 2011-024, §§ 1, 2, 9-6-2011) 
Editor's note— Attachment 2 is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city.  
Sec. 18-5. - Candidate qualification fees. 
(a)  A qualification fee in the amount of $50.00 is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as mayor, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(b)  A qualification fee in the amount of $25.00 is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as councilmembers, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(c)  Such qualification fee shall be paid to the city clerk and deposited to the general fund at or prior to the time of taking out qualification papers by any such candidates. 
(d)  Any person desiring to qualify who is not financially able to pay the required fee may qualify provided such prospective candidate furnishes the clerk with an affidavit stating that he is financially unable to pay the required fee fixed by this section. 
(Code 1992, § 2-7; Ord. of 5-3-1988, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 6-2-1992, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 6-4-1996, §§ 1—5) 
State Law reference— Establishment of qualification fee, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-2.  
Sec. 18-6. - Voting places. 
The following places are hereby designated as voting places for each of the seven election districts in the city. 
(1)  District 1: Prattville Area Chamber of Commerce, 131 N. Court Street. 
(2)  District 2: First Missionary Baptist Church, 192 Seventh Street; Spring Hill AME Zion Church, 303 County Road 4 East. 
(3)  District 3: Saint Joseph Catholic Church, 511 N. Memorial Drive. 
(4)  District 4: Glynwood Baptist Church, 376 McQueen Smith Road North. 
(5)  District 5: Journey Church, 435 Sheila Boulevard. 
(6)  District 6: Trinity United Methodist Church, 610 Fairview Avenue. 
(7)  District 7: Doster Community Center, 424 S. Northington Street. 
(Code 1971, § 7-2; Code 1992, § 2-6; Ord. of 12-8-1988; Ord. of 6-2-1992; Ord. No. 2003-031, § 6, 10-7-2003; Ord. No. 2011-024, § 6, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 2012-014, 5-15-2012 )  
Sec. 18-7. - On-site voting location and poll hours. 
(a)  The city hall council chambers is designated as the voting site for absentee on-site voting. 
(b)  The hours of the polls will be set from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2000-008, 6-6-2000)  
Sec. 18-8. - Electronic vote counting system. 
For all elections held subsequent to the passage of the ordinance from which this section was derived, the use of the DS200 Electronic Vote Counting System, or any subsequent model device that the Autauga County Commission shall utilize which complies with Code of Ala. 1975, § 17-7-21, as amended, and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, is hereby authorized for the reporting, counting, and tabulating of any and all election results. 
( Ord. No. 2016-A-010, 4-19-2016 )  
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alabama Emergency Management Act of 1955, Code of Ala. 1975, § 31-9-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Alabama Emergency Management Act of 1955, Code of Ala. 1975, § 31-9-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-20. - Organization; purpose. 
The statement of purpose of the emergency management organization is as follows: It is an operational assumption of the civil preparedness program that existing agencies of government will perform emergency activities related to those they perform in normal times. Auxiliary groups will be formed and trained, under the direction and control of the operating department of government they are to support, and nongovernmental groups will be assigned emergency missions, as necessary, to develop a capability to augment or supplement existing agencies of government in responding to emergencies. A basic purpose of the local civil preparedness agency and its director shall be to provide for coordination of the operations of all such governmental and nongovernmental forces in emergencies, and to provide those unique civil preparedness skills and capabilities not available in existing government organizations. The director shall also inform the operating departments of government of those special conditions arising out of a nuclear attack that would call for a modification of traditional operating techniques. 
(Code 1992, § 9-2; Ord. of 2-16-1982(2))  
Sec. 22-21. - Emergency proclamation—Authorized. 
Whenever the mayor, or in the event of the mayor's absence or inability to act, the president of the council, determines that an emergency exists as a result of mob action or other civil disobedience causing danger of injury to or damage to persons or property, such official shall have power to impose by proclamation any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the city: 
(1)  To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the city thereby requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places; provided, however, that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firefighters and city authorized or requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew. 
(2)  To order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the city for the period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not be limited to, those selling gasoline or firearms. 
(3)  To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the city to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 2-1.1; Code 1992, § 9-3) 
State Law reference— Authority, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-82.  
Sec. 22-22. - Same—When effective. 
The proclamation of emergency issued by the mayor shall become effective upon its issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media. 
(Code 1971, § 2-1.2; Code 1992, § 9-4)  
Sec. 22-23. - Same—Termination; extending. 
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with this division shall terminate after 48 hours from the issuance thereof, or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided, however, such emergency proclamation may be extended for such additional periods of time as determined necessary by resolution of the governing body. 
(Code 1971, § 2-1.3; Code 1992, § 9-5)  
Sec. 22-24. - Same—Violating orders. 
Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with the orders of duly authorized law enforcement officers or personnel charged with the responsibility of enforcing the proclamation of emergency authorized herein shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1971, § 2-1.4; Code 1992, § 9-6)  
Secs. 22-25—22-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Alarm system installers, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-1A-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm business means the business by an individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure, or facility. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of fire or activation of an extinguishing system requiring urgent attention and to which the fire department is expected to respond. 
Alarm user or user means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure, or facility wherein an alarm system is used or maintained. 
Appellant means any person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this article. 
Applicant means any person filing an application for any permit or license required by this article. 
Communications center means the county emergency management communications facility used to receive emergency and general information from the public to be dispatched to the fire department personnel. 
Designated trunk lines means a trunk line used for receiving automatic dialers. 
False alarm means an alarm signal electing a response by the fire department, when a situation requiring a response by the fire department does not in fact exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or the alarm user. 
Notice refers to written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee, or given by depositing said notice in the United States Postal Service mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. 
Subscriber means any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains services for the maintenance of an alarm system from an alarm business. 
(Code 1992, § 6-201; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 1)  
Sec. 22-53. - Cumulative remedies. 
All remedies granted in this article shall be cumulative and the use of one or more by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 6-214; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 14)  
Sec. 22-54. - User instructions. 
(a)  Every alarm business selling, leasing, or furnishing to any user an alarm system which is installed on the premises located in the area subject to this article shall furnish the user with instructions to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for the alarm system at any time from the alarm business. 
(b)  Any commercial, church, and institutional alarm user shall instruct two designated employees in the use of the alarm system and shall enable an employee, on duty or available within one hour to operate the alarm system properly at any time. Such employee's name and telephone numbers shall be posted at the main entrance to the premises and shall be readable from an area accessible to fire department personnel. Such name and telephone number shall be filed with the communication center within two working days. 
(Code 1992, § 6-202; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 2)  
Sec. 22-55. - Alarm installation and regulations. 
All alarm businesses, in order to have their system monitored by the communications center, must install the system in accordance with all local and state codes recognized and enforced by the city. All alarm businesses must be qualified to install said equipment. 
(Code 1992, § 6-203; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 3)  
Sec. 22-56. - Penalties for false alarms. 
False alarms within the first 30 days after installation of an alarm system shall be allowable. Each false alarm after the first 30 days shall be subject to a fee of $25.00 per alarm call. Payment for alarm calls caused by acts of God will not be assessed and are not payable. 
(Code 1992, § 6-209; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 9)  
Sec. 22-57. - Alarm terminations. 
The following are conditions under which alarm monitoring by the communications center and emergency response by the fire department may be terminated: 
(1)  Anytime an alarm is set off or activated intentionally by any alarm user or any of its officers, agents, or employees, for the purpose of testing the response time of the fire department. 
(2)  After an alarm, the refusal or failure of the user or his designated representative to respond to check the premises with the responding units within one hour of the commencement of the alarm. 
(3)  Anytime the alarm is in the line or alarm position for a period of eight hours or more without being repaired or any attempt made to have it repaired. 
(4)  Any alarm user having excessive false alarms within any 12-month period may be terminated and/or disconnected from connections to the communications center and emergency response by the fire department shall cease. 
(5)  Any other reason that the fire chief finds, for good cause, that is in the best interest of the city. 
(6)  Failure to pay a penalty assessed by section 22-56 within 30 days. 
(Code 1992, § 6-210; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 10)  
Sec. 22-58. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Repeated false alarms. No person owning, using or possessing an alarm system shall cause or permit the giving of repeated false alarms. 
(b)  Telephone dialer systems. No person shall install, have installed, or operate an automatic telephone dialer that selects an emergency service trunkline to the police department or communications center except to a telephone number for such purpose as specified by the chief of the fire department. 
(c)  Audible alarms. No person shall own an audible alarm system that is not automatically silenced within 30 minutes after being activated unless a new act or circumstance triggers the sensor to activate such alarm. 
(Code 1992, § 6-211; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 11)  
Sec. 22-59. - Notification of alarm system maintenance. 
Any alarm business or user, prior to commencement of work or testing, and upon completion of work or testing on any alarm system monitored by the communications center, shall notify the communications center providing the following information: 
(1)  Proper identification of the alarm business or user and identification of the individual performing work for the alarm business or user. 
(2)  Exact location of the alarm user. 
(3)  Estimated time of completion of work or test. 
(Code 1992, § 6-213; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 13)  
Secs. 22-60—22-76. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 22-77. - Required. 
No person shall install an alarm system that requires the emergency response of fire department services without the applicant first obtaining a permit from the city. No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on an alarm business without first applying for and receiving an alarm business license prior to obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this article. No person shall engage in, conduct or operate as an alarm agent without first applying for and receiving an alarm agent permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this article. No person shall possess, own, or use an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm system permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 6-204; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 4)  
Sec. 22-78. - Applications; required information; denials; appeals. 
(a)  Permit application forms. All applications for any permit required by this article shall be filed with the city clerk's office upon such forms as may be prescribed by the chief of the fire department. Said forms shall request only such information as is reasonably necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit for which the application is made. Each application required by this article shall be signed by the applicant if acting as an individual, by a general partner if acting as a partnership, or by the chief executive officer of a corporation, or if a foreign corporation, by the local manager or officer of said corporation designated to sign at the local level. Each application for a permit for an alarm agent or an alarm business shall be accompanied by an application fee of $10.00; provided, however, that no application fee shall be required for the application of a renewal permit as required by the terms of this article. 
(b)  Alarm business and alarm agent permit applications. Every application for an alarm business permit or alarm agent permit shall require fingerprints and photographs of the applicant or agent applying for the application. If such applicant is not a natural person, the chief of the fire department shall request an investigation from the police department as he deems appropriate and necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(c)  Denial of application. The permit applied for shall be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant has knowingly or willfully given any false information of a material nature in connection with the application for a permit applied for hereunder. 
(2)  The applicant has violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has had a similar type permit revoked for good cause within the past year unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances since the date of said revocation. 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of any federal or state law or municipal ordinance which reasonably relates to the applicant's character, fitness and responsibility for engaging in the activity for which application is made consistent with regard for public safety. The fire chief shall regard any information received from the chief of the police department as confidential and shall consider the nature and seriousness of the offense, the circumstances surrounding the offense, the number of such offenses, the amount of time that has elapsed since the offense, the age of the applicant at the time of the offense, and any evidence of rehabilitation. 
(d)  Alarm system permit. An alarm system permit shall be required for the person owning, using, or possessing the alarm system. Alarm businesses shall procure and process the applications for their subscribers and submit the completed application to the city clerk's office. Where a proprietor alarm or audible alarm is in operation and not serviced by an alarm business, the application for the permit shall be filed directly by the applicant. Any application for an alarm system permit involving the proposed use of an audible alarm shall be accompanied by the names, addresses and telephone numbers of three individuals who may be contacted in the event the alarm is activated. 
(e)  Appeal from permit denial. Any applicant denied a permit applied for pursuant to the terms of this article may appeal such denial to the city council or by notifying the city clerk in writing of such appeal within 15 days of the denial of such permit. The city council shall conduct a hearing on such appeal within 30 days of notification by the applicant of such appeal, at which time the applicant may appear before the city council and present evidence as to why his application should be approved. The city council may reverse or uphold the denial of any permit applied for hereunder. 
(Code 1992, § 6-205; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 5)  
Sec. 22-79. - Fees; waivers; transferability and revocation of permits. 
(a)  Alarm business permits. The anniversary date of alarm business permits shall be on January 1. Applications for renewals of alarm business permits shall be processed in the same manner as original applications. 
(b)  Alarm agent permits. January 1 of each year shall be the anniversary date for alarm agent permits. Alarm agent permits shall expire three years after issuance and there is hereby imposed a permit fee of $30.00 for such permits, and said fee shall not be prorated nor refunded. Applications for renewals of alarm agent permits shall be processed in the same manner as original application and the fee for such renewal permit shall be $30.00 for each successive three-year period. 
(c)  Alarm system permits. No permit fee shall be imposed for an alarm system permit. Alarm system permits shall expire on the third anniversary date following its issuance. January 1 of the year of issuance shall be considered the original date of issuance and each January 1 thereafter shall be the anniversary date for all such permits. Applications for renewal of permits shall be processed in the same manner as applications for the initial permit. 
(d)  Permit fee waiver. Persons having an alarm system in operation on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall make application for a permit. Such permit fee shall be waived if the application is submitted within 90 days following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(e)  Transferability. Permits issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable upon approval of such transfer by the chief of the fire department. 
(f)  Revocation of permits. Permits shall be considered a privilege and not a right of the permittee. Failure of the alarm system to maintain reliability will necessitate the revocation or the cancellation of the permit and discontinuance of service by the city upon due notice to the permittee by first class mail or delivery in person by a designated city employee. In addition to any other punishment, fine, penalty, or fee prescribed herein, the chief of the fire department shall revoke any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  The violation of any of the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Where any alarm system actuates excessive false alarms; 
(3)  Where any alarm business permittee or alarm agent permittee is convicted of any federal or state law or municipal ordinance which reasonably relates to the permittee's character, fitness, and responsibility to engage in the business for which a permit has been issued; or 
(4)  For any reason for which an application may be denied under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 6-206; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 6)  
Sec. 22-80. - Notification of permit revocation. 
In the event the chief of the fire department revokes any permit issued under the terms of this article, he shall give notice to the affected permittee of said revocation that shall state the reasons therefor. Said revocation shall be effective immediately if served upon the permittee, or 72 hours after notice of said revocation has been given by depositing the same in the United States Postal Service mail addressed to the permittee at his last known address. Immediately upon revocation, the permittee shall discontinue the activity permitted under the authority of any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1992, § 6-207; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 7)  
Sec. 22-81. - Appeal from revocation of permit. 
Any permittee whose permit is revoked in accordance with the foregoing sections may appeal such revocation to the city council by giving notice of such appeal to the city clerk within 15 days after the revocation has become effective. When notice of the appeal is properly filed with the city clerk, the revocation shall be stayed pending a determination thereon by the city council that shall act upon such appeal in the same manner as set forth in this article. The city council may uphold or reverse the revocation of the permit after receiving all relevant evidence pertaining to the revocation and the appellant's arguments and evidence presented on appeal. 
(Code 1992, § 6-208; Ord. of 7-2-1991, § 8)  
Chapter 26 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire prevention regulations authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-43-59, 11-43-60; state fire marshal, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-19-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) means the organization, office, or individual responsible for approving equipment, materials, an installation, or a procedure. 
Company means a group of members usually organized and identified as engine companies, ladder companies, rescue companies, squad companies, multifunctional companies, or ambulance companies. 
False alarm means the willful and knowing initiation or transmission of a signal, message or other notification of an event of fire when no such danger exists. 
Fire alarm means the giving, signaling or transmission to any public fire station, or company or any officer or employee thereof, whether by telephone, spoken word or otherwise, of information to the effect that there is a fire at or near the place indicated by the person giving, signaling, or transmitting such information. 
Fire chief means the chief officer of the fire department serving the jurisdiction or a duly authorized representative. 
Fire code official means the fire chief or other designated authority charged with administration and enforcement of the code, or a duly authorized representative. 
Fire department means an organization providing rescue, fire suppression, emergency medical care, special operations, and related activities. 
Fire department connection means a connection through which the fire department can pump supplemental water into the sprinkler system, standpipe, or other system furnishing water for fire extinguishment to supplement existing water supplies. 
Fire hydrant means a valve connection on a water main for the purpose of supplying water to fire hose or other fire protection apparatus. 
Fire lane means a road or other passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus. 
Fire suppression means the activities involved in controlling and extinguishing fires. 
Fire watch means a temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department. 
ICC means the International Code Council. 
Incident commander (IC) means the individual in overall command of an emergency incident. 
Key box means a secure, tamperproof device with a lock operable only by a fire department master key, and containing building entry keys and other keys that may be required for access in an emergency. 
NFPA means the National Fire Protection Association. 
Personnel board means a board which the mayor shall select and convene on an as-needed basis. A personnel board is authorized to serve in a quasi-judicial capacity to: 
(1)  Hear grievances and appeals from eligible city employees in accordance with the guidelines established in these policies; and 
(2)  Conduct studies into personnel areas and make recommendations as requested by the city council or mayor. 
Should indicates a recommendation or that which is advised but not required. 
Standard means a document, the main text of which contains only mandatory provisions using the term "shall" to indicate requirements and which is in a form generally suitable for mandatory reference by another standard or code or adoption into law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-1.5, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 26-2. - References to standards. 
Unless stated otherwise, all references in this chapter to technical standards are to such standards as now or hereafter adopted.  
Sec. 26-3. - Fire department established. 
There is hereby established a department to be known as the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-1, 4-19-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority of cities to operate a volunteer or paid fire department, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-140.  
Sec. 26-4. - Fire chief—Appointment. 
(a)  The mayor, with approval of the city council, is hereby authorized to appoint a chief of the fire department, who shall serve subject to the supervision and control of the mayor. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department shall be the director of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-2, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 26-5. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  Subject to the supervision and control of the mayor in all matters, the fire chief shall administer the affairs of the fire department, which shall include the immediate direction and control of the fire and rescue forces. The chief is charged with responsibilities for the prevention, control, and suppression of fires and hazardous incidents and provide emergency medical and rescue services in the city limits. 
(b)  The responsibilities of the fire department shall include, but not be limited to, the activities of fire administration, fire training, fire prevention, firefighting, hydrant installation and maintenance, fire equipment maintenance and operation, emergency medical training and operation, building inspections, building plan review, code enforcement and fire investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-3, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 26-6. - Bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The fire prevention code of the city shall be enforced by the fire prevention bureau of the fire department, which is established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire chief. 
(b)  The fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed from the offices of the fire department by the fire chief. The position of fire marshal shall be a noncompetitive position in the city and the holder thereof, while so engaged, shall not forfeit the merit service status that such person held prior to the appointment. 
(c)  The fire chief may detail such members of the fire department as assistant fire marshals, inspectors, and fire prevention specialists as from time to time shall be necessary. 
(d)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made monthly to the fire chief and transmitted to the council. Reports of monthly activities shall be compiled for an annual report at the end of the calendar year. Such reports shall contain all proceedings under this article and the fire prevention code, with such statistics as the chief may wish to include therein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-4, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 26-7. - Arson investigative branch. 
(a)  Fire department employees assigned to the arson investigative branch by the fire chief are designated as law enforcement officers as defined by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-181, and rule 1.4, Alabama Rules of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  Arson investigators shall maintain public order and investigate the commission or suspected commission of offenses related to arson or fire prevention and are hereby authorized to be armed and empowered with the full authority of law enforcement officers to make arrests and to take other such actions as may be legal, proper and necessary for the enforcement of the laws of the city and state. 
(c)  Arson investigators as law enforcement officers shall meet the minimum standards set out in Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-21-46 and complete the Alabama Peace Officers Standards and Training Commission (A-POST) Law Enforcement Academy and maintain certification as law enforcement officers as required by A-POST. 
(Ord. No. 2006-014, § 10-4.5, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 26-8. - Temporary assignment to the arson investigative branch. 
(a)  Temporary members shall be assigned to the arson investigative branch from the fire department employees established within the fire department's arson investigative branch to assist with investigations and other related duties of the bureau of fire prevention. These members shall be appointed by the fire chief and shall serve on an as-needed basis. 
(b)  These temporary employees shall carry out all duties in accordance with the arson investigative branch SOPs (standard operating procedures) and guidelines and in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-210. 
(Ord. No. 2006-014, § 10-4.6, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 26-9. - Composition; rules, appointment, powers of fire force. 
(a)  Composition and rules. The fire force shall be composed of the fire chief and such other officers, firefighters, firemedics, EMTs and employees as the mayor may determine. The fire chief shall have immediate direction and control of the department and to such rules, regulations, and orders as may be prescribed by the city council. The fire chief shall promulgate all orders, rules and regulations for the government of the fire department. 
(b)  Appointment. The members of the fire department other than the fire chief shall be appointed from the list of eligibles prepared by the fire department and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the personnel board; provided, that in the case of riot, conflagration, or emergency, the fire chief may appoint additional firefighters and officers for temporary service, who need not be in the classified service. 
(c)  Powers. The fire chief and the chief's assistants are authorized to exercise the power of police officers while responding to, attending or returning from an emergency call or any incident which could cause harm to the city or its citizens. 
(d)  Certificate of appointment. The fire chief and the chief's assistants shall have issued to each of them a certificate of appointment signed by the mayor in which the date of appointment shall be stated, and such certificate shall be each such person's commission. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-5, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 26-10. - Nonemergency or post-emergency service and fees therefor. 
(a)  The city fire department may provide fire protection equipment for standby service for nonemergency or post-emergency instances if necessary after the normal fire service has ceased. 
(b)  The city shall charge a fee for the city fire department's services at the rate of $200.00 per hour for each company used in the operation. The charges for standby service shall be computed from the time the company leaves the fire station until the time of its return to the station and its placement back into service. 
(c)  The city, for its fire department's service, shall charge an additional fee for foam, chemicals, dirt, pipes, breathing air and the costs of any necessary technical or expert to control or assist in the incident, or any other extraordinary or like material or service needed, to restore the area to its original, before the incident, condition. 
(d)  The involved company or its legal entity, individual, or owner shall reimburse the city for all losses and damage to equipment while being used in connection with providing fire suppression and standby service; and the involved party shall indemnify the city, its fire department officers, agents and employees from all claims for damages or loss in its failure to prevent, control or extinguish any of the involved material, which shall be beyond the control of such officer, agent or employee. 
(e)  The billing for the services shall be by and through the city fire department, which shall forward bills for all services and charges, immediately after the incident, to the appropriate party. All monies collected shall be deposited into a city designated account. 
(f)  No charges shall be imposed for equipment or material in any case where the city fire department is aiding another paid fire department (e.g., federal, state, county or municipal) which has a reciprocal agreement for such service. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-6, 4-19-2005) 
State Law reference— False fire alarms, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-8.  
Sec. 26-11. - Service calls outside corporate limits of the city. 
Firefighting service shall be limited to the corporate limits subject to this section. The fire department is not authorized to answer or respond to any call for firefighting service outside the city's corporate limits except under the following conditions and circumstances: 
(1)  When requested by another municipal fire department, a volunteer department organized and existing under the laws of this state, or a state or federal fire department or a bona fide law enforcement agency, to render mutual aid to such department or agency. The city fire department will respond, if in the discretion of the chief, or in his absence the officer in charge, shall determine that it is in the best interest of the city to provide said assistance and provided personnel and equipment are available to meet the fire protection needs of the city after the dispatch of equipment and personnel for said assistance is made. 
(2)  When, in the opinion of the chief, or the officer in charge in the absence of the chief, there exists an actual danger or the real threat of danger to: 
a.  The residents of the city or to property located within the corporate limits of the city. 
b.  Property owned or leased by the city or any of its departments, agencies, commissions, boards or authorities wherever located. 
c.  The students, teachers or other personnel or property of any school including Prattville High School and the Autauga County Vocational School, or work or training center located in the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(3)  This section is not intended nor shall be interpreted to create an obligation on the part of the city to provide fire protection services outside the city limits. 
(4)  The fire department will respond and answer calls for fire protection services to any and all legal entities that have contracted fire protection services by written agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-7, 4-19-2005)  
Secs. 26-12—26-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fire prevention regulations authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-43-59, 11-43-60; state fire marshal, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-19-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-41. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter are to extinguish and prevent fires and to compel citizens to render assistance to the fire department through training and public relations in case of need and to establish, regulate the size, materials and construction of buildings, fences and other structures hereafter erected, and to require the same to be done in such manner as public safety and convenience may require, to remove or require to be removed, any building or structure or addition thereto which by reason of dilapidation, defect of structure or other cause, may have become dangerous to life or property or which may be erected contrary to law, to establish and designate from time to time fire limits within which limits, wooden buildings shall not be constructed, removed, added to or enlarged and to direct that any future buildings within such limits shall be constructed as required in the codes and regulations herein adopted by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-8)  
Sec. 26-42. - Code adopted; penalty. 
The International Fire Code, 2015 edition as revised, consisting of chapters 1—67 and Appendices A—I, K and L published by the International Code Council, Inc., at least one copy of which is on file in the city clerk's office, which provides rules and regulations for fire prevention standards be and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. When a provision of the International Fire Code is in conflict with a provision of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards, and the conflict relates to life and building safety performance requirements, the fire chief shall have the discretion to determine which provision shall apply. 
Amendments to the International Fire Code are as follows: 
506.1.3 All devices shall be installed and maintain at the owner/occupants expense. 
507.5.1.1.1 Hydrant for fire sprinkler systems. Buildings equipped with a FDC (Fire Department Connection) for a fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903 shall have a fire hydrant within 150 feet of the FDC. 
Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 150 feet where approved by the fire code official. 
903.3.7.1 Where sprinkler systems are installed and are required by code to have an (FDC) Fire Department Connection, all F.D.C.'s shall be 2½ inch national Standard Threads. 
903.3.8 Fire Department Connections. Where sprinkler systems are installed and are required by code to have an (FDC) Fire Department Connection, all F.D.C.'s shall be 2½ inch national Standard Threads. 
903.4.2 Alarms. An approved audible and visual device, located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. 
904.11.6.4 Commercial Hoods with Fire Suppression Systems. All systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and standards. All new installations, annual and semi-annual services (and when required by code or manufacturer recommendations) shall install new fusible links and CO2 cartridges with devices dated and stamped by the manufacture, with the same year date as the installation or service is taking place. 
2306.2.2 Above-ground tanks located inside buildings . Above-ground tanks for the storage of class I, II, IIIA liquid fuels are prohibited within the entire city. 
2306.2.3 Above-ground tanks located outside buildings. Above-ground tanks for the storage of class I, II, IIIA liquid fuels outside of buildings are prohibited except in the following locations. Aboveground storage tanks shall be allowed at the Prattville Airport and in properties zoned M2 and such storage is used in conjunction with those facilities and is necessary for manufacturing and/or processing for those facilities. In M2 properties, aboveground storage shall be allowed only in Protected above Ground Tanks as defined in NFPA 30. 
The applicant shall provide to the City Planning/Building Department, City Engineer, Fire Chief, and Director of the Autauga County Emergency Management detailed plans and specifications showing compliance to the most current edition of NFPA 30 and compliance with the currently adopted International Fire Code as well as any other state and/or federal laws that may apply. Inspections by the above stated departments shall be conducted to verify code compliance before storage tanks may be filled with any product. 
Appendix B is amended as follows: 
Section B105 - FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS 
B105.1 One- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration requirements for one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses shall be specified in Chapter 26 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION, Sec. 26-100. - Installation requirements of the city ordinance. 
Delete Table B105.1(1). 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-9; Ord. No. 2011-022, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 2016-007, 3-15-2016 ) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8.  
Sec. 26-43. - Modifications. 
The fire chief shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or duly authorized agent of the owner or lessee, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the fire department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-10)  
Sec. 26-44. - Appeals. 
Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire chief to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-11)  
Sec. 26-45. - Investigation of fires. 
The fire marshal's office of the fire department shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstance of every fire occurring in the city which is of suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to persons or by which property has been destroyed or substantially damaged. Such investigation shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such fire and the fire chief shall be immediately notified of the facts. The fire chief shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence and shall notify the proper law enforcement officials and the state fire marshal, if needed. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-12)  
Sec. 26-46. - Building permits and plan checking. 
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for building construction, building modification, building alteration, etc., a member of the fire department and/or the fire marshal, as delegated by the fire chief, shall review all plans submitted to evaluate the same for fire safety features, such as vertical separation, exits, exit corridors and stairs, combustibility of materials to be used, fire extinguishing apparatus and exit lights, and exitways and entranceways to and from such property. Single-family residences shall be exempt from this requirement, unless the owner or builder requests a fire department evaluation. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-13)  
Secs. 26-47—26-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-022, adopted July 5, 2011, repealed §§ 26-47—26-51, which pertained to fire protection equipment, and derived from Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), §§ 10-14—10-18.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE SCENE 
 
Sec. 26-76. - Delay by citizens in reporting fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to delay reporting immediately any fire or emergency discovered to the fire department (911) or the police department so that emergency vehicles may be dispatched. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-23)  
Sec. 26-77. - Report of fire injury or death. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to notify or delay the notification to the fire chief of a fire injury or death. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-24)  
Sec. 26-78. - Certain acts prohibited at or near fires or emergencies. 
It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts at the burning of a building or at any other incident, time, and place where any employee of the fire department is discharging or attempting to discharge an official duty: 
(1)  To possess any flammable, explosive or combustible material or substance, or any device in an arrangement or preparation with intent to willfully and maliciously use such material to set fire to or burn any building or property. 
(2)  To possess, manufacture, or dispose of a fire bomb containing a flammable liquid with a flashpoint of 150 degrees Fahrenheit or less having a wick or similar device capable of being ignited, excluding commercial manufactured devices primarily for the purpose of illumination. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-25) 
State Law reference— Criminal possession of explosives, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-44.  
Secs. 26-79—26-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FIRE HYDRANTS 
 
Sec. 26-100. - Installation requirements. 
(a)  All residential subdivisions, commercial developments, shopping centers and apartment developments shall have fire hydrants installed by the developer in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Fire hydrant spacing shall be installed according to the fire flow demand as outlined in accordance with the insurance service office grading schedule for municipal fire protection. 
(2)  Fire hydrants shall be of the type recommended by the American Water Works Association (AWWA), National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Standard 24, and approved by the public water system supplying such hydrants and the city fire department. 
(3)  Fire hydrants shall be equipped with not less than one 4½-inch outlet and two 2½-inch outlets with national standard threads. All outlets shall be male, with the direction of the discharge parallel to the street served by the hydrant. 
(4)  All fire hydrants shall be connected to and supplied by water mains of not less than six inches in size. The water mains shall meet the specifications established by the American Water Works Association and approved by the public water system supplying the hydrants. 
(5)  For all apartment and residential developments, the fire hydrants shall be placed at each street intersection and spaced intermittently not more than 800 feet apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary to permit all portions of the buildings to be accessed by hose lays of not more than 400 feet. 
(6)  In shopping centers and other commercial developments, fire hydrants shall be spaced not more than 500 feet apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary so as to permit all portions of the buildings located therein to be accessed by hose lays of not more than 300 feet. 
(7)  In industrial parks or manufacturing developments that are developed with streets, fire hydrants shall be placed at each intersection with intermittent hydrants between intersections spaced not more than 300 feet apart with additional hydrants located as necessary so as to permit all portions of the buildings located therein to be accessed by hose lays of not more than 300 feet. 
(8)  No fire hydrant shall be installed and deemed serviceable that has a fire flow of less than 500 gallons per minute and 20 pounds of residual pressure. 
(9)  The developer shall file with the planning and development department and with the fire department a map indicating the size of the mains, location of hydrants prior to the installation of the mains or the hydrants and prior to the construction of any buildings in any development, which map shall be approved by the fire chief or the chief's designated representative. Additionally, upon completion, the developer shall file with the appropriate city department three sets of as-built plans of fire hydrants and mains. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued in any area affected by this section for any development that has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of this section. All water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed under pressure, and ready for firefighting use, before any sheathing may be installed on walls and on roofs of any buildings in a development. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-26)  
Sec. 26-101. - Breaking, defacing, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, deface or carry away without lawful authority any part of any fireplug or hydrant. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-27) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-20.  
Sec. 26-102. - Unauthorized tapping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except in case of a fire under the direction of the fire department or by direction of some officer or person legally authorized to so direct, to open any fireplug or hydrant and allow the water to escape. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-28.1)  
Secs. 26-103—26-132. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FIRE LANES 
 
Sec. 26-133. - Creation and maintenance. 
It shall be the duty of the fire department or its authorized representative to create or establish and maintain, at the property owner's expense, such fire lanes as may be required for the protection of commercial properties within the city limits. It shall be unlawful to block or obstruct any designated fire lane when such lane is located on public property or private property dedicated to public use. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-29)  
Secs. 26-134—26-164. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FIRE PRECAUTIONS 
 
Sec. 26-165. - Sale, purchase, possession, and explosion of fireworks and pyrotechnics. 
(a)  Definition. When used in this division, the term "fireworks" or "pyrotechnics" means and includes one or more of the following: 
(1)  Sparklers; 
(2)  Squibs; 
(3)  Rockets; 
(4)  Firecrackers; 
(5)  Roman candles; 
(6)  Fire balloons; 
(7)  Signal lights; 
(8)  Torpedoes; 
(9)  Torpedo caps; 
(10)  Railroad and track torpedoes; 
(11)  Flashlight compositions; 
(12)  Firecrackers of all kinds; or 
(13)  Other devices or compositions which are used to obtain visible or audible pyrotechnic displays. 
(b)  Possession. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to have in possession, keep, store, use, manufacture, sell, offer for sale, give away, or handle any pyrotechnics within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, nothing in this section shall be held to apply to articles manufactured for use as signaling devices and used as such in the operation of railroads, boats, or airplanes, or other required emergency purposes; and provided further, nothing in this section shall be held to apply to a normal supply of flashlight compositions in the hands of photographers or dealers in photographic supplies. Exceptions: This section shall be forever waived for the purpose of the annual Independence Day celebration sponsored by the city at Stanley-Jensen Stadium. 
(c)  Police jurisdiction. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in possession, keep, store, use, manufacture, sell, offer for sale, give away or handle any pyrotechnics within the police jurisdiction of the city; provided, however, nothing in this subsection shall be held to apply to articles manufactured for use as signaling devices and used as such in the operation of railroads, boats or airplanes or other required emergency purposes, and provided further that notice in this subsection shall be held to apply to a normal supply of flashlight composition in the hands of photographers or dealers in photographic supplies. However, within the police jurisdiction, from June 20 through July 5 of each year and December 19 of each year through January 2 of the succeeding year, such period is excepted from this subsection within the police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-30) 
State Law reference— Fireworks, Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-17-210 et seq.; fireworks dealer's license, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-102.  
Sec. 26-166. - Barbeque grills and outdoor cooking. 
Barbeque grills and similar cooking equipment shall not be used or stored on balconies, terraces, or porches of multistory buildings. They shall be used only outside and at a safe distance, not less than ten feet, from the nearest building. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-31)  
Sec. 26-167. - Discharge of sparks, cinders, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or to cause, permit or allow the discharge, emission or escape into the open air in or upon any public place, public street or public avenue, or in or upon the premises or dwelling of another, of any live, hot or burning sparks, cinders or embers or other hot or burning material. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-32)  
Sec. 26-168. - Threatening to burn, damage or destroy property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing the contents thereof to send, deliver or cause to be received by another, or post on the premises of another, any letter or writing or any verbal message threatening to burn, damage or destroy, conditionally or unconditionally, any house, store, shop, barn, or other building, or any vehicle. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-33)  
Sec. 26-169. - Storage of explosives and blasting agents, class I liquids and liquefied petroleum gas restricted. 
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, in which storage of class I liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, and in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, shall be the city limits and the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-34)  
Sec. 26-170. - Cylinder filling stations. 
The fire prevention code is amended by adding section 1701.5.5, "Standards for Installation and Operation of Cylinder Filling Stations (For Motor Fuels Only)." 
1. No cylinder installation shall be made unless Interstate Commerce Commission cylinders are used. ICC cylinders with a water capacity of less than two hundred fifty (250) pounds shall be charged only at bulk storage or cylinder filling plants and not from mobile units such as delivery trucks, except those vehicles specially designed and equipped for cylinder filling, and except those cylinders installed as part of a system using LP gas as a motor fuel or as a fuel for farm equipment such as flame cultivators. ICC cylinders of two hundred fifty (250) water pound capacity or larger may be charged at the installation from mobile units provided they are equipped with fixed liquid level gauging devices, quick filling valves and vapor return valves, all of which are of an approved design, in addition to other required acceptable valves and fittings. 
2. Containers up to two thousand (2,000) water gallon capacities shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from a building, groups of buildings, house trailers and adjoining property lines. These distances may be reduced to not less than ten (10) feet for service station buildings of other than wood construction. Also, in heavily populated or congested area, the authority having jurisdiction (in most cases the Alabama LP Gas Board) shall determine restrictions of individual container capacity, total storage and distance of lien of adjoining property, as well as other reasonable protective measures. 
3. Container foundations shall be of substantial masonry or other noncombustible material. Containers shall be mounted on saddles that shall permit expansion and contraction, and shall provide against the excessive concentration of stresses. Corrosion protection shall be provided for tank mounting areas. Structural metal container supports shall be protected against fire in an approved manner. This protection is not required on prefabricated storage and pump assemblies, mounted on a common base, with container bottom not more than twenty-four (24) inches above ground and whose water capacity is two thousand (2,000) gallons or less if the piping connected to the storage and pump assembly is sufficiently flexible to minimize the possibility of breakage or leakage in the event of failure of the container supports. (According to NFPA Pamphlet No. 58, 58-93, 8.5(b)3.) 
4. Piping shall be wrought iron or steel (black or galvanized), brass or copper pipe; or seamless copper, brass or steel tubing and shall be suitable for a minimum pressure of two hundred fifty (250) psig. Pipe joints may be screwed, flanged, brazed or welded. The use of aluminum alloy piping or tubing is prohibited. (According to NFPA Pamphlet No. 58, 58.94, 8.8(c).) 
5. All piping shall be tested after assembly and proved free from leaks at not less than normal operating pressures. (According to NFPA Pamphlet No. 58, 58.94, 8.8(g).) 
6. Piping may be underground, aboveground, or a combination of both. It shall be well supported and protected against physical damage and corrosion. Piping laid beneath driveways shall be installed to prevent physical damage by vehicles. (According to NFPA Pamphlet No. 58, 58-94, 8.8(b).) 
7. All shut-off valves (liquid or gas) shall be suitable for liquefied petroleum gas service and designed for not less than the maximum pressure to which they may be subjected. Valves that may be subjected to container pressure shall have a rated working pressure of at least two hundred fifty (250) psig. (According to NFPA Pamphlet No. 58, 58-94, 8.8(d).) 
8. All materials used for valve seats, packing, gaskets, diaphragms, etc., shall be resistant to the action of LP gas. (According to NFPA Pamphlet No. 58, 58-94, 8.8(e).) 
9. An excess flow check valve and manual shut-off valve shall be installed in the liquid line at the outlet of the storage tank. 
10. An excess flow check valve and manual shut-off valve shall be installed at the dispensing hosepipe connection. 
11. Fittings shall be steel, malleable iron or brass having a minimum working pressure of two hundred fifty (250) psig. Cast iron pipe fittings, such as ells, tees, and unions shall not be used. (According to NFPA Pamphlet No. 58, 58-94, 8.5(f).) 
12. Storage tanks shall be properly grounded. 
13. Storage container, piping, pump, dispensing hose and scales shall be adequately protected from physical damage at trailer parks and similar locations by a chain-link fence of not less than four (4) feet in height, or least [sic] three (3) feet from the installation, and having an entrance-exit gate of the same height. Such facilities at a service station shall be protected from physical damage by such devices as railroad crossties, utility poles and a chain-link fence of not less than four (4) feet in height, except in reference to a self-contained installation unit, in which case no fence is required. 
14. Each cylinder filling station shall be provided with at least one (1) portable fire extinguisher of the dry chemical type with a minimum 8-B, Crating. 
15. All ICC cylinders of less than two hundred fifty (250) water pound capacity shall be charged by weight only except those cylinders into which is dispensed fuel for motor fuel purposes. 
16. No cylinder designed to be equipped with a safety cap shall be removed from a dealer's or agent's premises until such cap is properly installed, except when a safety guard or shield is an integral part of the cylinder. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-35)  
Sec. 26-171. - Routes for transportation of explosives and blasting agents. 
The routes established for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 31; 
(2)  U.S. Highway 82; 
(3)  U.S. Highway 82 bypass; 
(4)  Jensen Road; 
(5)  County Road No. 4 from Jensen Road to U.S. Highway 31 south; and 
(6)  Doster Road from U.S. Highway 31 south to the Doster Road cutoff. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-36)  
Sec. 26-172. - Routes for transportation of hazardous chemicals, etc. 
The routes established for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 31; 
(2)  U.S. Highway 82; 
(3)  U.S. Highway 82 bypass; 
(4)  Jensen Road; 
(5)  County Road No. 4 from Jensen Road to U.S. Highway 31 south; and 
(6)  Doster Road from U.S. Highway 31 south to the Doster Road cutoff. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009(02), § 10-37)  
Chapter 30 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city relative to health generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-130 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCES AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL VEHICLES AND SERVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ambulances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-18-1 et seq.; local ambulance ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-18-7. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any definition not specifically defined herein shall be defined as stated in the Alabama Department of Public Health Emergency Medical Service Rules. 
Advanced life support (ALS) means the treatment of potentially life-threatening medical emergencies through the use of invasive medical techniques specified as advanced life support techniques in these rules, which ordinarily would be performed or provided by physicians, but which may be performed by emergency medical technicians pursuant to these rules. 
Alabama Department of Public Health (ADPH) means the State of Alabama, Department of Public Health, as defined by Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-1-1 and any officer, agent or employee of the said department authorized to act for the department with respect to the enforcement and administration of these rules. 
Ambulance attendant means any person licensed by the state ADPH who for compensation has the duty of performing or assisting in the performance of an ambulance call. 
Ambulance call means the act of proceeding with an ambulance for the purpose of transporting any patient for compensation: 
Emergency means a response to a call in which it is believed that the illness, injury, or disability requires immediate medical services wherein delay of such services may endanger personal health or safety. This call shall be accomplished with use of all warning devices and lights. 
Nonemergency means a response that does not require the use of warning devices including but not limited to: Inter-hospital transfers, discharges to home, visits to physicians' offices and the transport of the deceased patients to funeral homes. 
Ambulance fee committee means a committee made up of the fire chief, an EMS officer as appointed by the fire chief, the finance director and the chairman of the fire committee. 
Basic life support means the use of equipment and procedures recognized by the state department of public health as being within the scope of practice of an EMT-basic. 
Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity; the number of current active ambulance services; the need to prevent market saturation to the extent that public health and safety is or reasonably may be adversely effected; the reputation and abilities of the service applicant; the experience of other jurisdictions with the applicant; and such other factors as may be lawfully considered in the decision to grant or deny an ambulance service. 
City means all areas within the corporate limits and the fire and EMS service area of the City of Prattville, Alabama. 
Emergency means any nonhospital occurrence or situation involving illness, injury, or disability requiring immediate medical services, wherein delay in the provisions of such services is likely to aggravate the condition and endanger personal health/safety. 
Fire and ambulance service means the city fire department. 
Fire chief means the chief of the city fire department or his duly authorized representative. 
Fire department dispatch center means the central communications center from which all E-911 dispatches originate for the city. 
Fire transport vehicle means any motor vehicle operated by the city fire and ambulance department that meets the criteria for advanced life support/emergency transport vehicle. 
Firemedic means an EMT-P/firefighter employed by the city fire and ambulance department. 
Ground ambulance means a motor vehicle including a convalescent ambulance that is intended to be used for, and is maintained or operated for, the transportation to a medical care facility of persons who are sick or injured. 
Hospitals means the area hospitals that the city fire department will transport to: 
(1)  Prattville Baptist Hospital; 
(2)  Baptist Medical Center South—Montgomery; 
(3)  Baptist Medical Center East—Montgomery; 
(4)  Jackson Hospital. 
Interfacility emergency ALS transfer means the transfer of a patient requiring advanced paramedic skill, such as the administration of TPA (tissue plasminogen activator), from one facility to another where more advanced procedures are to be performed. 
Licensed ambulance driver means any individual 21 years of age or older, or any person meeting the requirements under the ADPH, Emergency Medical Service Rule 420-2-1.15(2)(b), who successfully completes the course of instruction for emergency vehicle operation prescribed by the state board of health, and who has been granted a current, valid license by the state board of health. 
Licensed emergency medical technician-basic means any person 18 years of age or older who has successfully completed the Basic Emergency Medical Technician Course of Instruction, or its equivalent, as approved by the state board of health or its designee, and passed the state EMT-basic examination, and who has been granted a current, valid license by the state board of health of its designee. 
Licensed emergency medical technician-intermediate means any person 18 years of age or older who has successfully completed the Intermediate Emergency Medical Technician Course of Instruction, or its equivalent, as approved by the state board of health, and passed the state EMT-intermediate examination, as well as having met the requirements for becoming a licensed emergency medical technician-basic, and who has been granted a current, valid license by the state board of health. 
Licensed emergency medical technician-paramedic means any person 18 years of age or older who has successfully completed the EMT-Paramedic Course of Instruction, or its equivalent, as approved by the state board of health, and passed the state EMT-paramedic examination, as well as having met the requirements for becoming a licensed emergency medical technician-intermediate, and who has been granted a current, valid license by the state board of health. 
Medical control physician means a physician licensed to practice medicine in the state, knowledgeable in the applicable medical protocols, radio procedure and general operating policies of the South East Alabama Emergency Medical Service System region, the city fire department and the ADPH and a person from whom EMS personnel shall, subject to the provisions of this article, take medical direction in person, by radio, or by remote communications device. 
Medical direction and accountability means direction and advice provided from designated medical facilities staffed by appropriately trained physicians utilizing procedures for prehospital advanced life support care and mechanisms for medical accountability approved by the state board of health. 
Medical protocol means any diagnosis-specific or problem-oriented written statement of standard procedure, or algorithm, promulgated by the state department of public health and approved by the state SEMCC as the normal standard of prehospital care for a given clinical condition. 
Medical review means a monthly review of emergency medical reports and procedures by the off-line medical control MD for quality assurance purposes. 
Mutual aid call means request for emergency medical service issued by a dispatcher in one political jurisdiction to a dispatcher in a neighboring political jurisdiction. 
Off-line medical director means a physician who shall be from a broad-based medical specialty such as emergency medicine, internal medicine, surgery, family practice or general practice and shall hold and maintain a current ACLS (Advanced Cardiac Life Support) certificate of successful course completion or be board certified in emergency medicine. The physician must have successfully completed the state EMS medical directors course. The physician shall possess a current license from the Medical Licensure Commission of Alabama or obtain a variance as provided for in these rules. 
On-line medical director means a physician licensed in the state and working in a designated associate or resource hospital who successfully completes ACLS and ATLS (Advanced Trauma Life Support) certification every four years, or maintains board certification in emergency medicine or pediatric emergency medicine if the physician works in a designated children's hospital, and who has successfully completed the approved state EMS medical directors course. This physician is responsible for overseeing and coordinating the medical direction functions of the associate or resource hospital to which he is assigned. 
Owner means a person engaged in business as the owner, manager, officer or proprietor of a company, firm or organization providing private ambulance service within the city. 
Patient transport means the private ambulance provider will transport all categories of patients unless the fire department incident commander determines patient care or other circumstances dictate the patient would be better served by transport in a city fire department transport vehicle. Patient transport decisions will be based upon city fire department transport protocols or regional protocols where applicable: 
(1)  Category I—Emergency means patients whose conditions are life threatening or will most likely cause serious permanent physical impairment if not treated immediately; 
(2)  Category II—Urgent means patients whose conditions would most likely not cause loss of life or serious permanent physical impairment if treatment is deferred or delayed but whose condition is such that transportation to a medical facility is warranted; 
(3)  Category III—Nonemergency means individuals with minor medical conditions where the timeframe to treatment is not a critical factor. These patients will be directed to alternative forms of transportation. 
Permit means the written authorization issued by the fire chief pursuant to the provisions of this article for designating that: 
(1)  A particular ambulance company has met the minimum requirements of the state and all vehicles used for emergency transport have been inspected and found to be in compliance with the provisions of the ADPH, Emergency Medical Service Rule 420-2-1.01(4)(A), thereby authorizing its operation; 
(2)  A particular ambulance company has been issued a certificate of necessity from the fire chief; 
(3)  The ambulance company has applied for and has received a business license to operate in the city. 
Private ambulance means any motor vehicle meeting the criteria designated by this article for ground ambulances which are owned and operated by a company, corporation or LLC doing business within the city. 
South East Alabama Emergency Medical Service System (SEAEMS) means the regional EMS organization as recognized by state law and contract with the state department of public health to perform regional EMS functions. 
State Emergency Medical Control Committee (SEMCC) means the 11-physician committee authorized by the Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-18-6 to assist in the development of rules. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-48, 6-3-2008; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 10-48)  
Sec. 30-20. - Purpose. 
In order to lessen congestion caused by emergency vehicles on the public streets, to facilitate the prompt and coordinated dispatch of emergency transport units when needed to protect life, safety, and health, and to further promote health, safety and welfare of its citizens, it is hereby declared that the city designates the fire department as the emergency medical service for all 911 calls within the city limits and the fire and EMS service area pursuant to the procedures hereinafter stated. Additionally, the fire department will determine if the patient is to be transported by a private ambulance provider or by a fire department transport vehicle. The rules and regulations of private ambulances and municipal emergency transport vehicles in the city as set out herein are hereby established by the city council exercising sound legislative judgment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-47, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-21. - Other state laws and regulations. 
No portion of this article shall be construed in such a manner which is inconsistent with any federal, state or local law or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-58, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-22. - Ambulance service in general. 
(a)  Certificate, permits and fees required. No company shall operate an ambulance for hire on any street of the city until all of the following terms and conditions are met: 
(1)  A certificate of public convenience and necessity has been approved and issued by the fire chief. 
(2)  A city business license has been purchased. 
(b)  Fire/rescue transport; exceptions. The fire department ALS/emergency operations shall be exempt from all certificates, permits, business licenses and fees required by this article. 
(c)  Certificate required; exceptions. No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be required for any person operating an emergency ambulance or other vehicles under the following conditions: 
(1)  Rendering assistance during any catastrophe or major emergency when the ambulances authorized to operate in the city by certificate are either insufficient in number or inadequate for any other reason, as determined by the fire chief, incident commander, or the fire dispatch center. 
(2)  Operating an ambulance brought in solely for the purpose of a drill or training exercise. 
(3)  Operating any ambulance rendering requested assistance currently authorized by the city in cases of disaster or major emergency pursuant to provisions of a mutual aid agreement approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-49, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-23. - Fire and ambulance emergency transport service. 
(a)  The fire and ambulance department shall be the responder to all 911 calls of a medical or rescue nature. 
(b)  The fire and ambulance service will determine the patient category of all individuals at the time of response based upon medical protocols as defined by state department of public health emergency medical services. The fire department incident commander under the direction of the online medical director will determine if transportation is to be provided by a private ambulance or by the city fire department based on patient care protocol as defined by the state department of public health emergency medical services. 
(c)  The fire and ambulance service shall not refuse transport of any patient requiring ALS/emergency treatment to a hospital listed in this article, and shall provide emergency medical treatment and transportation without regard to the patient's ability to pay. 
(d)  The city shall collect transport fees in accordance with the ambulance fee schedule, in use at the time of transport, as established by the ambulance fee committee and approved by the city council. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained by the fire department administrative office and the finance director. 
(e)  The fire and ambulance emergency transport vehicle may transport any patient deemed appropriate by the firemedic and/or online medical control, regardless of the patient's transport category. Under such circumstances, however, the standard ALS/emergency fee shall be assessed to the individual. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-50, 6-3-2008; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 10-50)  
Sec. 30-24. - Duty of the fire chief. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the fire chief to administer the provisions of this article and to investigate or cause his designee to investigate all complaints involving any type of ambulance service within the city and take appropriate action where necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-51, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-25. - Operating regulations. 
(a)  Clean and sanitary bed linens shall be provided for each patient carried and shall be changed after the discharge of each patient. 
(b)  Each ambulance shall have a minimum of two ambulance personnel who hold current licensure as emergency medical technicians or ambulance drivers from the state department of public health. At least one member of the ambulance crew shall remain in attendance with the patient being transported while the other may serve as the driver. 
(c)  If the ambulance is considered advanced life support, at least one member of the crew must be an EMT-P. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-65, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-26. - Standards for vehicle and equipment. 
(a)  All motor vehicles used for the purpose of providing ambulance service hereunder shall be designed and constructed to transport ill, sick, or injured persons in comfort and safety, and shall be maintained in clean, sanitary and first-class mechanical condition at all times and comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(b)  All motor vehicles used for the purpose of providing ambulance service hereunder shall be equipped according to current federal, state and local standards and may be updated from time to time by the fire department subject to approval by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-66, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-27. - Inspection of equipment. 
(a)  All mechanical, safety and special equipment shall meet the Emergency Medical Service Rules, Alabama Department of Public Health ch. 420-2-1, and any future amendments related thereto. 
(b)  Prior to issuance of any certificate of operation and annually thereafter each vehicle requesting approval shall be inspected by a qualified garage which shall certify that the vehicle is in sound mechanical condition and meets all federal, state and local laws. 
(c)  Upon completion of said inspection the ambulance owner shall furnish the fire chief a letter on his business stationary certifying that all vehicles intended to be used in the city have been inspected and found to be in sound mechanical condition and safe for operation on the streets of the city as an ambulance as well as a copy of the ADPH ambulance inspection report and drug box inspection report. 
(d)  No ambulance that has been substantially damaged or altered shall be again placed in service until it has been reinspected and meets all federal, state, and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-67, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-28. - Radio dispatcher procedure. 
(a)  In the event an owner receives a private call for ambulance service which is of an emergency nature, immediately after receiving such call, said owner shall report to the fire department dispatch center such call, giving the location and the nature of the call, if known, and request clearance to use their warning devices giving both the location of the incident and, when determined, the destination of the patient. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a private ambulance attendant or owner to make an emergency ambulance call on the city streets without having been requested by a private individual or the city fire department, and subsequently being given route clearance by the fire department dispatch center. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-68, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-29. - Use of emergency warning devices. 
(a)  All private ambulances responding to emergency calls outside the city must obtain route clearance from the fire department dispatch center to travel and operate ambulances and warning devices upon city streets. 
(b)  After a private ambulance has responded to an apparent nonemergency call and arrived at the point of pickup, it shall be unlawful for the ambulance to proceed to the hospital or other designation with the use of emergency warning equipment except where serious medical conditions exist, such as in the case of category I or II patients. The fire department dispatch center, however, must be notified by the owner of the circumstances surrounding the call and the need to use emergency warning equipment upon the city streets. 
(c)  No clearance shall be necessary for patients being transported from a point of pickup to a physician's office, clinic or nursing home, nor shall a clearance be issued for the transport of a deceased patient from point of pickup to any funeral home or morgue. Emergency warning equipment is not authorized for such transports. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-69, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-30. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
When the driver of any ambulance has reasonable grounds to believe that an emergency exists, the driver of the ambulance may: 
(1)  Park the ambulance or stand in any place in order to provide medical services irrespective of the otherwise applicable provisions of law, ordinance or regulations. 
(2)  Proceed, with warning devices operating, past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits permitted by law, ordinance or regulation; provided, however, that any governing directives issued by the city's chief of police are obeyed and that life and property are not endangered thereby. 
(4)  Disregard, with warning devices operating, laws, ordinances and regulations governing directions or movements or turning in specified directions. 
The foregoing provisions shall not operate to relieve the driver of any ambulance from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-70, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-31. - Private ambulance personnel. 
Ambulance attendant applicants shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Each ambulance attendant must be the holder of a current valid driver's license. 
(2)  Each ambulance attendant must possess a current, valid EMT license issued by the state department of public health that identifies their level of certification. No one may perform the duties of an EMT in the city without a current, valid, state EMT license. 
(3)  Each ambulance attendant must be able to speak, read and write the English language. 
(4)  Each ambulance attendant shall not have been convicted of a crime that directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of ambulance attendant. 
(5)  Each ambulance attendant shall be not less than 18 years of age. 
The owner is required to ensure that all ambulance attendants meet the criteria established herein. The fire chief may establish a permit system which relates to the qualifications of an ambulance attendant following the determination that such is warranted. Said minimum requirements shall be updated from time to time by the fire department subject to the approval of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-71, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-32. - Suspension of ambulance attendant. 
(a)  The fire chief shall have the power to suspend an ambulance attendant operating within the city for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet the requirements referred to or authorized in section 30-31. 
(2)  Failure to comply with applicable federal and state laws. 
(3)  Failure to comply with accepted standard of care of patients. 
(4)  Receipt of complaint or allegations of misconduct from citizens, city officials or any other individual or entity where an investigation is conducted and it is determined a violation of the rules and regulations contained herein has occurred. 
(b)  The fire chief may at any time give notice in writing to the ambulance permit holder that an individual has been suspended from operating in the city. The notice shall outline the reason for the suspension. The notice of the suspension shall become final after the expiration of ten days from the date of the issuance of the notice of suspension and service of same upon the attendant, unless on or before the expiration of such ten days the ambulance permit holder and the suspended individual shall file with the city clerk and the fire chief a written appeal of such suspension. The appeal shall operate as a stay of suspension until such time as the city council shall grant a hearing and make a final adjudication. Provided, however, the fire chief may require immediate suspension for public safety purposes. If this requirement is made, the suspension shall take place during the period in which the appeal is pending. The hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of filing of the appeal, and such action and judgment of the city council, after hearing all the evidence and facts, shall be final. Such final judgment by the city council shall be appealable to the county circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-72, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-33. - Unlawful operation and prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly: 
(1)  Solicit on the streets the business of transporting injured or sick persons. This prohibition shall not be construed to prohibit lawful advertisements. 
(2)  Intercept any communication concerning any emergency medical incident on the streets and divulge or publish the existence, contents, substance, purpose, effect or meaning of such intercepted communication and no such solicitor, owner or person, not being entitled thereto, shall receive or assist in receiving any such message emanating through the radio medium of the police or fire department for his own benefit or for the benefit of another solicitor, owner, or person in the business of furnishing ambulance service. 
(3)  Use of a vehicle's siren or flashing red lights other than brake lights without prior authorization by the fire department dispatch center. 
(4)  Use of a uniform, insignia, badge, title, identification card, or vehicle marking that so closely resembles or mimics those of the fire department as to confuse the public. 
(5)  Own or cause to be operated an ambulance on any street without first having obtained a permit therefor in accordance with this article or unless exempted therefrom by the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Request the services of any ambulance which is not licensed or permitted in accordance with the provisions of this article or exempted therefrom by the provisions of this article. 
(7)  Perform duties as an ambulance attendant (e.g., EMT or paramedic) without meeting the qualifications of section 30-31. 
(8)  Permit or allow a person to perform duties as an ambulance attendant (e.g., EMT or paramedic) without meeting the qualifications of section 30-31. 
(9)  Give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance. 
(b)  The fire department may update this list of prohibited acts from time to time subject to medical protocols and federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-73, 6-3-2008) 
State Law reference— Following emergency vehicle, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-58.  
Sec. 30-34. - Private ambulance; ALS. 
Private ambulance services within the city shall have the following ALS/emergency duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Interfacility transfer of medically stable patients or ALS patients that require a paramedic to monitor fluids, EKG rhythms or administer medications. 
(2)  Patients who, during routine nonemergency transport, develop problems that require ALS procedures. 
(3)  Continuation of ALS instituted outside the city limits and its police jurisdiction to a facility inside the city. 
(4)  Transport of those nonemergency patients who desire private ambulance service and who directly call the private organization to transport the individual to the facility of his choice. 
(5)  Assist city fire department with patient care and transportation during situations involving mass casualties or when fire department ALS units are unavailable. 
(6)  Transport all patients according to city fire department transport protocol. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-59, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-35. - Nonemergency transport. 
In order to provide maximum ALS/emergency medical coverage for the citizens of the city, the fire department dispatch center shall inform individuals who request nonemergency transport when calling 911 that a private ambulance company will be dispatched to transport them to the facility of choice. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-60, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-36. - Reimbursement of nonemergency ambulance transport. 
The private ambulance service shall be responsible for the billing and collection of fees from privately transported individuals. The city shall not compensate private ambulance services for private ambulance transportation services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-61, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-37. - Procedures for nonemergency transport. 
(a)  Upon receiving a call of a nonemergency nature the 911 operator/dispatcher will determine the category of response necessary based on medical protocols. If a firemedic transport vehicle is not needed or not available, the 911 operator will dispatch a city fire department engine company to provide basic life support care and a private ambulance company to transport. 
(b)  If a firemedic transport vehicle responds to a patient, that patient will be transported by private ambulance or according to city fire department protocol. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-62, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-38. - Disposition of the deceased. 
(a)  Transport of individuals that are obviously dead, where the death is not of a suspicious nature and not under investigation by any law enforcement agency, shall be the responsibility of the family of the deceased. Arrangements may be made with a private ambulance service or funeral home for transport. Where family of the deceased cannot be located the transport of the body shall be coordinated with the appropriate county coroner's office. 
(b)  Transport of deceased individuals, where the deaths are being investigated by a local law enforcement agency, shall be the responsibility of that agency. 
(c)  Under normal circumstances firemedic transport vehicles should not be used to transport the bodies of deceased individuals. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-63, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-39. - Private ambulance service general rules and regulations. 
(a)  Central place of business. Each private ambulance service owner shall maintain a central place of business with at least one properly listed telephone for receiving all calls for ambulance service; where all business records and daily manifests herein required shall be maintained and available upon request and be generally responsible for the conduct and operation of its ambulances. Each owner shall, in writing, immediately notify the fire chief of any change of the business address or of the telephone number where said owner may be contacted at all times. 
(b)  Certificate holder's records and reports. Each certificate holder shall maintain a daily manifest upon which shall be recorded the date, the time call received and name of the individual calling, the time of arrival at requested location, the place of origin, the patient's name and address, the destination and the charges for each trip. Each such owner shall retain and preserve all daily manifests for at least 24 months, and such manifests shall be available for inspection by the fire chief or his duly authorized representatives upon request. Each certificate holder hereunder shall keep accurate records of the receipts and expenses from operations and such other operating information as may be required by the fire chief. Prehospital reports on all patients shall be retained for a period of not less than 90 days as shall all voice tapes of dispatches and instructions. Each such owner shall maintain such records at a place readily accessible for examination by the fire chief or his duly authorized representative. Each certificate holder shall provide to the fire chief an annual statement which includes the following: 
(1)  A list of the company's current service fees. 
(2)  A list of any legal claims pending, or resolved, in the past year. 
(3)  A statement showing the total number of calls made in the previous calendar year. 
(4)  EMS infractions as defined by state department of public health emergency medical service rules. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-64, 6-3-2008)  
Secs. 30-40—30-66. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL CONTROL BOARD 
 
Sec. 30-67. - Established. 
The city council hereby authorizes the establishment of an emergency medical control board (EMCB) that shall serve as an advisory and educational board for the fire department in regard to ambulance personnel qualifications, ambulance equipment and medical protocols of the ambulance within the city or in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-111, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 30-68. - Composition; qualifications and appointment of members. 
(a)  The emergency medical control board (EMCB) shall consist of a board whose membership shall be composed of the medical director, or his designee, of the Prattville Baptist Medical Center Emergency Department, which is located within the corporate limits of the city, the medical director of the fire department and the medical director of each ambulance service licensed and authorized by this article to operate in the city. Each director shall have one vote in the governance of the affairs of the emergency control board. The EMCB director shall be an ex officio member of the board. 
(b)  Board members are to be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Director of emergency department of associate hospital; 
(2)  Fire chief (1); 
(3)  City councilmember (1); 
(4)  County commissioner (1); 
(5)  County representative from the county firefighters association. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-112, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 30-69. - Director. 
The EMCB shall appoint a director who shall be responsible for the day-to-day affairs of the EMCB in carrying out its duties under this division. The EMCB director shall be a licensed physician currently practicing. The director shall serve for such period of time as shall be prescribed by the EMCB, but shall be removable at the discretion of the EMCB, which decision shall be final. In the case of absence or disability of the EMCB director, the EMCB shall designate a similarly qualified physician to perform the duties of the EMCB director. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-113, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 30-70. - Responsibilities and duties; relationship to the fire department. 
(a)  The EMCB shall serve without limitation: 
(1)  To develop and suggest criteria and make recommendations to the fire department concerning the issuance, renewal, suspension and revocation of all licenses, permits and certificates issued under this article; 
(2)  To recommend standards for patient care, including standards for vehicles and on-board equipment; 
(3)  To develop medical protocols and periodically revise same; 
(4)  To develop dispatch center medical protocols and periodically revise same; 
(5)  The EMCB shall promulgate standards for certification as a base station for physicians and standards for certification of the facilities to be used by base station physicians including, but not limited to, communication equipment, telemetry equipment and recording equipment. They shall also develop and periodically revise and administer educational material, programs and/or tests to ensure that base station physicians are appropriately knowledgeable of the local ambulance system and to certify qualified physicians; 
(6)  The EMCB shall recommend standards and promulgate protocols for effective control center, dispatch radio and other remote communication facilities including, but not limited to, telephone protocols, prearrival instructions, and phone patch procedures. 
(b)  All responsibilities and duties granted to the EMCB by this division may also be performed by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-114, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 30-71. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  With the exception of the offline medical director, no person shall serve as a voting member of the EMCB, nor as director, if such person is an officer, director, employee, or is otherwise affiliated with, directly or indirectly, any private ambulance owner whose activities are regulated hereunder. 
(b)  No person shall serve as a voting member of the EMCB, nor as director, if such person is an officer, director, employee, or otherwise affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a hospital, health service provider, or any other organization which is affiliated with, directly or indirectly, any ambulance owner whose activities are regulated hereunder. 
(c)  Upon the written request of any hospital in the city, the EMCB, in coordination with the EMCB director, shall investigate any alleged impropriety in regard to the selection of hospitals or other facilities as destinations for ambulance runs. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 10-115, 4-19-2005)  
Secs. 30-72—30-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICE CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
 
Sec. 30-101. - Application information for certificate of public convenience. 
Applications for a certificate of public convenience and necessity for the operation of an ambulance within the city shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant, and shall be filed with the fire chief or his duly authorized representative. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the fire chief and shall contain at least this minimum information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and the trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; if the applicant is an individual, the name, age and address of the applicant and the length of time the applicant has resided in the state; or if a partnership or association, the business name thereof and the name, age and address of each partner and the length of time each partner has resided in the state; or if a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and directors of such corporation, or if an LLC, the member/managers. 
(2)  The number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate and the class, size, design and color scheme of each vehicle. 
(3)  Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any crimes directly or indirectly related to the duties and responsibilities of operating ambulances. 
(4)  Whether or not the applicant, his associates, representatives, designees or employees have any claims or judgments against them for damages resulting from the negligent operation of an ambulance, or any other vehicle. 
(5)  The financial ability of the applicant to comply with the provisions of the article. 
(6)  The nature and character of the service that the applicant proposes to render; the facts showing the demand for such service; the experience that the applicant has had in rendering such service and the period of time, if any, that he has rendered it in the city or other jurisdictions. 
(7)  Documentation from the applicant's insurance carrier stating that the applicant has in full force and effect liability insurance with a minimum limit of $1,000,000.00 for any one individual and $2,000,000.00 for any one occurrence and that such coverage is or will be provided prior to the issuance by the fire chief of the permit to operate hereunder. 
(8)  Provide a copy of the certificate of liability insurance annually or at the time of the business license renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-52, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-102. - Investigation of applications. 
Upon receipt of a properly filed application for a private ambulance service certificate of public convenience and necessity, the fire chief shall cause an investigation to be made of the information provided in the application to determine if it is accurate and complete. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-53, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-103. - Determination of the public convenience and necessity of issuing such certificate. 
Upon receipt of the written investigative report provided for in section 30-102, the fire chief shall determine whether the certificate should be issued based upon the following considerations: 
(1)  Whether or not the public convenience and necessity require the operation of such ambulance or ambulances. 
(2)  Whether the applicant will be able to provide ambulance service of such permanence and quality to the entire city as to best serve the public interest. 
(3)  The experience that the applicant has had in rendering ambulance service. 
(4)  The past experience of the applicant in satisfying judgments, if any, to claimants as a result of injuries received by reason of negligent operation of the ambulance. 
(5)  The financial ability of the applicant to respond to damages to property resulting from the negligent operation of an ambulance. 
(6)  The character and condition of the ambulances and capabilities of ambulance attendant personnel to be used by the proposed ambulance business. 
(7)  An adequate communications system. 
(8)  An adequate ambulance response time. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-54, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-104. - Form, contents, and issuance of certificate. 
(a)  Every certificate issued hereunder shall be signed by the fire chief, and attested by the city clerk, and shall contain, in addition to the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized to be operated pursuant to such certificate along with any time limits or other restrictions which may be applicable. 
(b)  A copy of every certificate issued shall be filed with and maintained by the fire department and the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-55, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-105. - Causes for revocation, alteration or suspension of certificates or permits. 
Every certificate or ambulance permit issued hereunder shall be subject to revocation, alteration or suspension by the city if any of the following conditions should occur: 
(1)  The public convenience and necessity no longer warrant such operation; 
(2)  The owner has refused to render the full service authorized by his certificate; 
(3)  The owner has been convicted of a crime which directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of the certified occupation; 
(4)  The certificate was obtained by an application in which any material fact was intentionally omitted or falsely stated; 
(5)  The owner has persisted in permitting his motor vehicles to be operated in violation of any law; 
(6)  The owner has willfully and knowingly violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions hereof; 
(7)  The owner or his agent has, without good cause, induced or sought to induce a change of destination to or from a hospital or other place specified by the person hiring the ambulance; 
(8)  The owner or his agent has allowed the service to be operated in a negligent manner; 
(9)  The insurance coverage required herein has been canceled, reduced, withdrawn, suspended or terminated; 
(10)  The owner has allowed any of his vehicles or equipment to become damaged, deteriorated or unclean to the extent that it is unsatisfactory for public use; 
(11)  The owner fails to maintain the financial ability to comply with the terms of this article; 
(12)  The owner has failed to comply with the limitations imposed by the fire chief in the certificate; 
(13)  The owner has failed to comply with applicable federal, state or local laws or regulations or any other provisions of this article; 
(14)  The owner is found to be conducting business in the city without a current city business license; 
(15)  The owner employs paramedics, EMTs, drivers, dispatch personnel, or any person involved in billing and collection activities that do not at all times conduct themselves in an ethical and professional manner. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-56, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-106. - Procedure for revocation, alteration or suspension of certificate or permit. 
(a)  The fire chief or his duly authorized designee may at any time give notice in writing to the certificate or permit holder or person in control of the operation and maintenance of such ambulance service and the city clerk's office that the certificate issued for the operation and maintenance of such ambulance service has been suspended or revoked. The notice shall outline the reason for the suspension or revocation. The notice of suspension or revocation shall become final ten days after the notice of suspension or revocation is received unless, on or before the expiration of such ten days, the certificate holder shall file with the city clerk's office or the fire chief a written notice of appeal of such suspension or revocation. The appeal shall operate as a stay of suspension or revocation of the certificate until such time as the city council shall grant a hearing and make a final adjudication which shall be appealable to the county circuit court. This hearing before the city council will be held in a reasonable time. 
(b)  In the event the fire chief or his authorized designee determines the cause for suspension or revocation to be of a nature that can hinder patient care, as defined by the state department of public health emergency medical service, no stay will be granted. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10-57, 6-3-2008)  
Secs. 30-107—30-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Alabama Clean Indoor Air Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-15A-1 et seq.; local antismoking ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-15A-10. 
 
Sec. 30-126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person who is employed by an employer for compensation or profit. 
Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity, that employs five or more persons. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, employee lounges, conference rooms, lobbies, reception areas and employee cafeterias. 
Public or public places means any enclosed area that is used by the general public or is a place of business, employment or a public meeting area and includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Stores, offices and other commercial establishments; 
(2)  Public and private educational institutions; 
(3)  Healthcare facilities, nursery and convalescent homes; 
(4)  Indoor recreational facilities; 
(5)  Theatres; 
(6)  Government buildings; 
(7)  Public transportation vehicles; 
(8)  Elevators; 
(9)  Restrooms; 
(10)  Other areas as described in section 30-132. 
A private residence is not a public place. 
Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, regardless whether such service involves the exchange of money. 
Smoking or smoke includes the carrying, holding, or possession of lighted smoking materials in any form including, but not limited to, the possession of lighted cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or other tobacco products. 
(Code 1992, § 11-71; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 1)  
Sec. 30-127. - Penalty. 
The following shall be subject to punishment by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense: 
(1)  Any person who willfully smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under this article; 
(2)  Any business proprietor or person in charge of a public place who fails or refuses, five days after a warning, to designate smoking and nonsmoking areas as required herein or who, being asked to do so, fails or refuses to enforce the designations; or 
(3)  Any employer who fails or refuses to adopt and implement a smoking policy for the workplace which shall reasonably accommodate, insofar as possible as herein provided, the preferences of smoking and nonsmoking employees. 
(Code 1992, § 11-78; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 8)  
Sec. 30-128. - Effect on other provisions. 
Nothing in this article excuses noncompliance with any federal or state law, other city ordinances, or any rule or regulation that prohibits smoking. 
(Code 1992, § 11-79; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 9(a))  
Sec. 30-129. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article are enforceable by the county health department or a duly authorized representative thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 11-77; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 7)  
Sec. 30-130. - Smoking prohibited in city hall. 
The city hall is declared a smoke-free facility and smoking or the use of any tobacco products is prohibited inside of the building. 
(Ord. No. 97-015, 4-1-1997)  
Sec. 30-131. - Exceptions to areas prohibiting smoking. 
Section 30-132 and the restrictions imposed therein shall not apply to: 
(1)  Areas that are specifically designated as smoking areas in accordance with section 30-133; 
(2)  An entire room or hall that is used for private social functions, provided that the event is under the control of the sponsor of the function and not of the proprietor or person in charge of the establishment or hall; 
(3)  Taxicabs and limousines where the driver and all passengers affirmatively consent to smoking in such vehicle; 
(4)  A private, enclosed office provided that this exception shall not be construed to permit smoking in the adjacent hallways, lobbies or reception areas of such offices; 
(5)  Performers upon the stage, provided that the smoking is part of a theatrical production; 
(6)  A tobacco specialty retail shop; 
(7)  Establishments regulated by the ordinance adopted on April 15, 2003. 
(Code 1992, § 11-73; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 3)  
Sec. 30-132. - Smoking prohibited in public places. 
Except as provided in sections 30-131 and 30-133, smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited in any of the following public places: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment including, but not limited to, retail stores, restaurants, banks, office buildings and offices; 
(2)  Any vehicles of public transportation including, but not limited to, local trains, buses, taxicabs and limousines; 
(3)  Elevators; 
(4)  Restrooms; 
(5)  Libraries, schools or other educational facilities, museums, auditoriums and art galleries; 
(6)  Any public area of healthcare facilities, health clinics or ambulatory care facilities including, but not limited to, laboratories associated with the rendition of healthcare treatment, hospitals (with the exception of inpatient rooms), rest homes, doctors' offices and dentists' offices; 
(7)  Any indoor place of entertainment or recreation including, but not limited to, gymnasiums, theaters, concert halls, bingo halls, arenas and enclosed swimming pools; 
(8)  Any other enclosed area used by the public or serving as a place of work; 
(9)  Hospitals may set aside designated lounge areas for smoking provided they follow the requirements of section 30-133. Hospitals shall accommodate nonsmokers by prohibiting smoking in all patient rooms, except where all the occupants thereof consent to smoking; 
(10)  Any city owned or leased recreational facility where access is controlled by a fence, metal or otherwise; and within 20 feet of seating stands, whether permanent or temporary in nature, in all other city owned or leased recreational facilities; 
(11)  "A Child's Place" at Pratt Park, south of Doster Street, west of Doster Road and east of the city pool. 
(Code 1992, § 11-72; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 2; Ord. No. 95-013, 5-16-1995; Ord. No. 97-015, 4-1-1997; Ord. No. 97-016, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 2008-001, 1-3-2008)  
Sec. 30-133. - Designation of smoking areas. 
(a)  Smoking areas may be designated by proprietors or other persons in charge of a public place as designated in section 30-132, except in places in which smoking is otherwise prohibited by the fire department or by other statute, ordinance, or resolution. 
(b)  Where smoking areas are designated, each smoking area shall: 
(1)  Be set apart from nonsmoking areas; 
(2)  Be situated so existing barriers and functioning ventilation systems are used to minimize the irritating and toxic effects of smoke in adjacent nonsmoking areas; 
(3)  Be designated by appropriate signs which are clearly visible to patrons in or entering the area via the front entrance to the premises; 
(4)  Contain ashtrays, containers or other facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials; 
(5)  Not include service lines or cashier areas; and 
(6)  Not include meat or produce counter areas in any store. 
(c)  No public place within section 30-132, other than those places enumerated as exceptions under section 30-131, shall be designated as a smoking area in its entirety. 
(d)  Any facility or area may be designated in its entirety as a nonsmoking area by the owner or manager thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 11-74; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 4)  
Sec. 30-134. - Responsibility of proprietors. 
The proprietor or other person having control of any area within section 30-132 shall: 
(1)  Provide a seat in a nonsmoking area for any persons requesting such a seat; 
(2)  Post "Smoking" or "No Smoking" signs, whichever may be appropriate, or the international "No Smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a bar across it. The proprietor or other person having control of such building or public place shall clearly and conspicuously post such sign in every building or other area where smoking is regulated by this article; 
(3)  Request persons smoking in violation of this article to stop, or to leave the nonsmoking area and move to a designated smoking area. 
(Code 1992, § 11-75; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 5)  
Sec. 30-135. - Regulation of smoking in the workplace. 
Each employer shall implement and maintain a smoking policy for its employees. The policy shall contain, at a minimum, the following provisions and requirements: 
(1)  The employer shall accommodate, insofar as possible, the preferences of nonsmoking and smoking employees. An employer is not required by this provision to incur any expense of making structural or other physical modification to accommodate the preferences of nonsmoking or smoking employees. 
(2)  The smoking policy shall be announced within three weeks of adoption to all employees working in the place of employment and posted conspicuously in all workplaces under the employer's control. 
(Code 1992, § 11-76; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 6)  
Secs. 30-136—30-153. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING IN EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Alabama Clean Indoor Air Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-15A-1 et seq.; local antismoking ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-15A-10. 
 
Sec. 30-154. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business agent means an individual who has been designated by the owner or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge of said establishment. 
Employee means any individual who performs services for an employer in return for wages or profit. 
Enclosed means a space, structure, facility or any portion thereof, bounded by walls, with or without windows, continuous from floor to ceiling or deck above and served by heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) systems, and through which air can circulate from one portion to another including, but not limited to, offices, rooms, hallways, customer service areas, foyers, common areas, waiting areas, restrooms, lounges, and eating areas. 
Food and/or beverage establishment means any establishment which is required to have a business license from the city and which provides food and/or beverage under a permit from the health department and/or an on-premises liquor license from the alcoholic beverage control (ABC) board. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-003, § I, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 2003-005, § I, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 30-155. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, business agent, manager or other person having control of such food and beverage establishment to ensure compliance with all sections of this article pertaining to his place of business. A violator of this article may receive: 
(1)  In the case of a first violation, a fine of $100.00; 
(2)  In the case of a second violation, within 24 months of the first violation, a fine of $500.00; and 
(3)  In the case of three or more violations within 24 months of the second or current violation, a fine of $500.00 for each violation. 
(b)  No provision, clause, sentence or section of this article shall be interpreted as prohibiting the city from suspending or revoking any license or permit issued by and within the jurisdiction of the city for repeated violations of this article. 
(c)  If the owner, business agent, manager or other person having control of such food and beverage establishment attempts to enforce this article and a patron violates it (i.e., smokes in a smoke-free establishment), then the owner, business agent, manager or other person having control shall not be deemed to be in violation of this article and the patron shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)  In the case of a first violation, a fine of $100.00; 
(2)  In the case of a second violation within 24 months of the first violation, a fine of $500.00; and 
(3)  In the case of three or more violations within 24 months of the second or current violation, a fine of $500.00 for each violation. 
(d)  Each calendar day an owner, business agent, manager or other person having control of a food and beverage establishment operates in violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a separate violation; each calendar day a patron violates this article (i.e., smokes in a smoke-free establishment) shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-003, § III, 3-4-2003)  
Sec. 30-156. - Conflict with other laws, ordinances or regulations. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to amend or repeal any applicable fire, health or other law, ordinance or regulation so as to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by such fire, health or other law, ordinance or regulation. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to preempt the further limitation of smoking in the city by any local regulatory body within the limits of its authority and jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2003-003, § VI, 3-4-2003)  
Sec. 30-157. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority to enforce this article shall be held by the city, its subsidiary programs or designees. 
(b)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(c)  While in an establishment that is undergoing an otherwise mandated inspection, or at any other time deemed necessary by these entities, the city fire department or its designee, the county health department, shall inspect for compliance with this article. 
(d)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the city magistrate. 
(e)  Any fines or fees collected under this article shall be used for the enforcement of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2003-003, § IV, 3-4-2003; Ord. of 4-15-2003, § IV)  
Sec. 30-158. - Retaliation for enforcement prohibited. 
No owner, business agent, manager or other person having control of a food and beverage establishment shall discharge, refuse to hire, refuse to serve or in any manner retaliate or take any adverse personnel action or other adverse action against any employee, applicant, customer or person because such employee, applicant, customer or person takes any action in furtherance of the enforcement of this article or exercises any right conferred by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-003, § V, 3-4-2003)  
Sec. 30-159. - Designating food and beverage establishments as smoke-free or smoking. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the food and beverage establishment to designate his establishment as one of the following: smoke-free or smoking. 
(b)  For establishments designated as smoke-free, no smoking by any persons (i.e., employees or patrons) at any time will be allowed in any part of the enclosed areas of the establishment, except as detailed in subsections (g)(1) and (g)(2) of this section. 
(c)  For establishments designated as smoke-free, signage shall be posted conspicuously on or adjacent to each and every door to the establishment that is generally accessed by patrons or employees, plainly visible from the exterior of the building to persons entering through the door. Signage shall be no smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches, with white lettering on a red or black background, and include the following statements: "This establishment is a smoke-free facility" with letters no smaller that five-eighths inch tall (approximately 66 points); "Smoking is prohibited throughout this facility at all times" with letters no smaller than one-quarter-inch tall (approximately 36 points); and "City of Prattville Ordinance Book 2003, Page 003" with letters no smaller than one-eighth inch tall (approximately 20 points). 
(d)  For establishments designated as smoking, smoking by patrons shall be allowed throughout all enclosed areas generally occupied by patrons. 
(e)  For establishments designated as smoking, signage shall be posted conspicuously on or adjacent to each and every door to the establishment that is generally accessed by patrons or employees, plainly visible from the exterior of the building to persons entering through the door. Signage shall be no smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches, with white lettering on a red or black background, and include the following statements: "This establishment is a smoking facility" with letters no smaller than five-eighths inch tall (approximately 66 points); "Smoking is allowed throughout this facility at all times" with letters no smaller than one-quarter-inch tall (approximately 36 points); "There is no nonsmoking section" with letters no smaller that one-quarter-inch tall (approximately 36 points); and "City of Prattville Ordinance Book 2003, Page 003" with letters no smaller than one-eighth inch tall (approximately 20 points). 
(f)  For establishments designated as smoking, patrons shall not be offered a choice of a nonsmoking section; if ashtrays are made available/distributed for patrons, they shall be made available/distributed throughout all enclosed areas generally occupied by patrons. 
(g)  Two or more food and beverage establishments operating under separate business licenses or two or more sections of a single food and beverage establishment shall not be directly connected by any interior means of access including, but not limited to, doorways, windows, service bars, or service windows, unless each has the same "smoking" or "smoke-free" designation, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Two or more food and beverage establishments or sections of a single food and beverage establishment may be connected provided that each is served by a separate heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) system which shall be designed to maintain a zero percent pressure balance in all doorways, windows and other connections. 
(2)  HVAC systems serving split designations, as described in subsection (g)(1) of this section, shall be designed and certified by a professional engineer licensed in the state and having experience in the design of HVAC systems. System designs and statements certifying compliance with subsection (g)(1) of this section shall be submitted to the city fire department. 
(h)  Establishments required to post signage designating the status of the establishment as either smoking or smoke-free may utilize signage as follows: smoke-free may use the standard international sign for no smoking (cigarette with circle and slash through it) or language stating "no smoking," "smoke-free," or similar language that is approved by the fire inspector; establishments that are totally smoking or co-located with a smoke-free facility may utilize verbiage stating "smoking allowed" or similar language that is approved by the fire inspector. Signs must be posted as in the existing ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(i)  Food and beverage establishments may offer employees a separate smoking lounge if it is physically separated in its entirety by walls which extend from floor to ceiling or deck above, is served by HVAC systems which serve only that area, and the HVAC system shall be balanced so as to keep a zero percentage pressure environment in all doorways and windows, has a self-closing door and is available only to employees of the establishment. 
(j)  Smoking may be permitted in hotel, motel, inn, bed and breakfast and lodging rooms that are rented to guests designated as "smoking rooms." A facility which offers such rooms for rent to guests may add additional language to the required signage (see subsection (c) of this section) after "Smoking is prohibited throughout this facility at all times" stating "Lodging rooms are available for guests who smoke" in matching letters and signage. 
(k)  Food and beverage establishments will be listed in a listing by status (smoke-free or smoking) to be published annually by the city's finance department no later than March 1; the first listing will be done by July 1, 2003; the listing will be available to the public from the city's finance department and will also be posted on the city's web site. 
(Ord. No. 2003-003, § II, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 2003-005, § II, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 2010-024, 11-2-2010; Ord. No. 2011-005, 2-1-2011)  
Chapter 34 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Free public libraries, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-90-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Willful retention of reference center books beyond allowable period; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully retain or fail to return any book, periodical, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property belonging in or to or on deposit with the library, or any branch or bookmobile operated in connection therewith, for a period exceeding 30 days after notification by certified mail, return receipt requested, with the return card showing receipt by refusal by the addressee to the borrower's address on file with the library, such notification given after the expiration of the time during which, by the rules of the library, such article or other property may be kept. The notice shall bear on its face a copy of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 10-2; Code 1992, § 12-2)  
Chapter 38 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Selling of food products, goods, etc., from parked vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck, motor vehicle, wagon or other vehicle on any of the public streets within the city limits, for the purpose of selling or offering for sale fruits, vegetables, produce, any other food products, goods, wares or merchandise. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to prevent any person from selling any fruits or vegetables actually grown by such person by offering the same for sale by proceeding along a chosen route in such vehicle; provided that such person shall not stop or park a vehicle on any street within the city limits longer than is necessary to complete each sale, and when each such sale is completed, such person shall immediately proceed along the route chosen by such person and shall not at any time remain parked for the purpose of displaying merchandise or for soliciting sales for the same. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to repeal, alter, change or amend any provision in the license fee schedules adopted by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 12-3; Code 1992, § 6-32)  
Sec. 38-2. - Vehicles for hire; franchise or permit required; insurance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person transporting persons for hire by motor vehicle or otherwise, within the corporate limits of the city, to receive or discharge passengers on the streets, avenues, alleys or public places within the city without first obtaining a franchise or permit from the city to engage in such business. 
(b)  No franchise or permit shall be issued by the city until evidence of liability insurance coverage is submitted in an amount approved by the city council and a description of the facilities for the business are submitted and deemed adequate by the city council for the protection of the public. An applicant for such franchise or permit shall also be required to show proof of established headquarters in the city, which shall be other than on the public streets of the city. Such headquarters shall be maintained as long as the permit is held. 
(c)  The franchise or permit shall be for a term prescribed by the city council and may be revoked by the city council if it is determined necessary for the protection of the public. 
(Code 1971, § 18-1; Code 1992, § 6-33) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to license and regulate vehicles kept for hire and the use of streets by persons who use vehicles for business, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-101.  
Secs. 38-3—38-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAX ASSESSMENT, LEVY AND COLLECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Property taxes generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-23. - Assessment, levy and collection of taxes. 
The assessment, levy and collection of all city or municipal taxes, except as otherwise provided in this Code, shall be according to the laws, rules, regulations, etc., set forth in Code of Ala. title 11, ch. 51, art. 1, div. 2 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-40 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-35)  
Sec. 38-24. - County tax assessor to assess and equalize city taxes. 
The tax assessor of the county is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to make the assessment and equalization of the municipal taxes due the city, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-36) 
State Law reference— Assessment and equalization by county tax assessor, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-40.  
Sec. 38-25. - County tax collector to collect city taxes. 
The tax collector of the county is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to collect the municipal taxes due the city, except as otherwise provided in this Code, and he shall have the right and authority as authorized and provided by law to collect and enforce the collection of such municipal taxes and also the right and authority to enforce collection of such taxes by the sale of property for that purpose in accordance with the authority and power granted him under the provisions of Code of Alabama title 11, ch. 51, art. 1, div. 2 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-40 et seq.). All moneys for taxes so collected which legally belong to the city shall be paid over to the city by said tax collector. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-35) 
State Law reference— County tax collector to collect tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-43.  
Sec. 38-26. - Administrative fee. 
In addition to any penalties imposed by the provisions of this chapter for the failure of any person to comply with the provisions thereof, the city treasurer-finance director may further impose as an administrative fee to be collected together with any taxes levied under the provisions of this chapter, the sum of $10.00 for any final notices of collections generated by the revenue department and personally delivered or mailed by certified mail to any person obligated for the taxes sought to be collected. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-37)  
Secs. 38-27—38-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALES TAX, USE TAX AND SIMILAR TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local sales and use taxes, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-200 et seq.; state sales and use taxes, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-56. - Administration. 
The city treasurer-finance director is charged with the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this article. All taxes levied or imposed in this article shall be collected by the city treasurer-finance director. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-39.1)  
Sec. 38-57. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations, from time to time promulgated by the state department of revenue, for making returns for ascertainment, assessment and collection of the state sales, use, rental and lodging taxes, are hereby adopted, to the extent applicable, as the rules and regulations of the city for making returns for ascertainment, assessment and collection of taxes imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-39.2)  
Sec. 38-58. - Timely mailing treated as timely filing and paying. 
(a)  Date of delivery or payment. 
(1)  If any return, claim, statement or other document required to be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period on or before a prescribed date under authority of any provision of this article is, after such period or such date, delivered by United States mail to the officer or office of the city, which such return, claim, statement or other document is required to be filed or to which such payment is required to be made, the date of the United States postmark stamped on the cover in which such return, claim, statement or other document, or payment, is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment, as the case may be. 
(2)  This subsection shall apply only if: 
a.  The postmark date falls within the prescribed period or on or before the prescribed date: 
1.  For the filing, including any extension granted for such filing, of the return, claim, statement or other document; or 
2.  For making the payment, including any extension granted for making such payment; and 
b.  The return, claim, statement or other document, or payment was, within the time prescribed in subsection (a)(1) of this section, deposited in the mail in the United States in an envelope or other appropriate wrapper, postage prepaid, properly addressed to said officer or office with which the return, claim, statement or other document is required to be filed, or to which such payment is required to be made. 
(b)  Postmarks. This section shall apply in the case of postmarks not made by the United States Postal Service only if and to the extent provided by the state department of revenue. 
(c)  Registration of certified mail. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, if any such return, claim, statement or other document, or payment, is sent by United States certified mail: 
a.  Such registration shall be prima facie evidence that the return, claim, statement or other document was delivered to the officer or office addressed to; and 
b.  The date of registration shall be deemed the postmark date. 
(2)  The provisions of subsection (c)(1) of this section with respect to prima facie evidence of delivery and the postmark date shall apply to United States certified mail to the extent provided in regulations, if any, promulgated by the state department of revenue. 
(d)  Exception. This section shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  The filing of a document in, or the making of a payment to, any court; 
(2)  Currency or other medium of payment unless actually received and accounted for; or 
(3)  Returns, claims, statements or other documents, or payments, which are required under any provision of law to be delivered by any method other than by mailing. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-39.3)  
Secs. 38-59—38-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SALES TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local sales taxes, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-200 et seq.; state sales tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. In addition, the definitions in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 apply to this division. 
Automotive vehicle means, but shall not be limited to, instruments of conveyance such as automobiles, trucks, buses, tractors (crawler and pneumatic tried types), motorcycles, motorscooters, automotive industrial trucks, Ross Carriers, lift trucks, locomotive cranes, airplanes, motorboats with built-in motors, boats with outboard type motors attached thereto by attachments intended to be permanent rather that readily removable and which motors are controlled with remote controls built on or into the hull of said boat. The term "automotive vehicle" also includes power shovels, ditchers and similar machines which are self-propelled, but which are not primarily used as instruments of conveyance. 
Tax year or taxable year means the calendar year. 
Transient means a person to whom rooms or lodgings are rented for a period of less than 30 continuous days. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-40; Ord. No. 95-19, § 1, 6-20-1995)  
Sec. 38-91. - Sales tax levied. 
There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross sales, or gross receipts, as the cause may be, as follows: 
(1)  Upon every person, firm, or corporation (including the state, the University of Alabama, Auburn University and all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether such institutions are denominational, state, county or municipal institutions, and any association or other agency or instrumentality of such institutions) engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character; not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sale or sales of material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, and other watercraft of over five tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources, an amount equal to two percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein. Provided however, that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of such business at the rates specified, when his books are kept so as to show the rates specified, when his books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his books are not so kept he shall pay the tax as retailer on the gross sales of the business. 
(2)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within the city in the business of conducting or operating places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, musical devices, theaters, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games (including athletic contests, conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution whether such institution or association be a denominational, a state, county, or city school, or other institution, association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, golf courses, or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement or entertainment is offered to the public or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dance halls of every kind and description within the city, an amount equal to two percent of the gross receipts of any such business. Provided, however, notwithstanding any language to the contrary in the prior portion of this subsection, the tax provisions so specified shall not apply to any athletic event conducted by a public or nonpublic primary or secondary school or any athletic event conducted by or under the auspices of the state high school athletic association. The tax amount which would have been collected pursuant to this subsection shall continue to be collected by the public or nonpublic primary or secondary school, but shall be retained by the school which collected it and shall be used by the school for school purposes. 
(3)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property, an amount equal to one-half of one percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of such machines; provided, that the term "machines" as herein used shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(4)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, an amount equal to one-half of one percent of the gross proceeds of sale of said automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, or mobile home set-up materials and supplies including, but not limited to, steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes, and any other materials pertaining thereto; provided, however, where a person subject to the tax as provided for in this subsection withdraws from his stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer for use by him or by his employee or agent in the operation of such business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a fee of $0.83 per year or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Each such year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be, of such withdrawal and shall run for the 12 succeeding months or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. 
a.  Where any used automobile vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
b.  Sales of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, truck trailers, or semitrailers that will be registered or titled outside of Alabama, that are exported or removed from Alabama within 72 hours by the purchaser or his agent for first use outside of Alabama, are not subject to the sales tax. Sales of other vehicles such as mobile homes, motor bikes, all-terrain vehicles, and boats do not qualify for the export exemption provision and are taxable unless the dealer can provide factual evidence that the vehicle was delivered outside of Alabama or to a common carrier for transportation outside of Alabama. In order for the sale to be exempt from the tax, the information relative to the exempt sale shall be documented on forms approved by the states. 
(5)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements thereof which are made or manufactured for the use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to one-half of one percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof. Provided, however, the percentage rate therein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automobile vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(6)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within this state in the business of selling through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for human consumption, not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products and substitutes therefor, there is hereby levied a tax equal to two percent of the cost of such food, food products and beverages sold through such machines, which cost for the purpose of this subsection shall be the gross proceeds of sales of such business. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-41; Ord. No. 95-19, § 2, 6-20-1995) 
State Law reference— Levy of state sales tax, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-23-2, 40-23-37.  
Sec. 38-92. - Imposition of additional tax. 
(a)  In addition to the taxes set forth in section 38-91, there shall be an additional one percent tax levied under section 38-91(1), (2), and (6) commencing on May 1, 2011 and ending September 30, 2031 or at such time as all existing long-term bond debt is paid in full. 
(b)  The tax collected under this section herein, after deduction for expenses of collection, shall be expended only for debt service and the funding of reserve accounts. This additional one percent tax shall not be used to provide any future economic incentives after the adoption of this section or any future economic incentives not already in existence at the time of adoption of this section. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § 9, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 2006-008, 3-21-2006; Ord. No. 2011-009, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 2011-029, 12-20-2011; Ord. No. 2012-024, 10-16-2012)  
Sec. 38-93. - Applicability of state sales tax laws. 
(a)  The tax levied by section 38-91 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, provisions, rules and regulations promulgated under the Alabama Administrative Procedure Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-22-1 et seq.), direct pay permit and drive-out certificate procedures, statutes of limitation, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions for the corresponding state tax as are provided by Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-2A-7, 40-23-1, 40-23-2, 40-23-2.1, 40-23-4 through 40-23-31, 40-23-36 and 40-23-37, except for those provisions relating to the tax rate, and Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-38, except where inapplicable or where otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the tax provided in section 38-91 on any automotive vehicle, truck trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or travel trailer required to be registered or licensed with the probate judge, which is not sold through a licensed state dealer, shall be collected and fees paid in accordance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-104 and Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-107. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, the tax levied by this division shall be paid to the city through the city treasurer-finance director and all references in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-2A-7, 40-23-1, 40-23-2, 40-23-2.1, 40-23-4 through 40-23-31, 40-23-36, and 40-23-37 to a state official or state department or agency shall be to the city treasurer-finance director and all references in such statutes to the state shall be to the city. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, §§ 6-42, 6-59.1; Ord. No. 95-19, § 3, 6-20-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-201.  
Sec. 38-94. - Overpayments, underpayments; penalty and interest. 
As soon as practicable after the return is filed, the city shall examine it and ascertain the proper amount of the tax due as shown by the return. If the amount paid is greater than the amount due, as shown by the return, the excess shall be refunded to the taxpayer, or credited on any deficiency previously due by the taxpayer, in accordance with the law and under such rules and regulations as the city may adopt and promulgate. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, as shown by the return, the city shall notify the taxpayer of such deficiency and shall add thereto a penalty of ten percent of the amount due and interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, from the date of delinquency, that is, the date the same was due, which shall be collected as a part of the tax; provided the city, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, may waive or remit the penalty of ten percent or portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-49)  
Sec. 38-95. - Failure to pay tax; penalty and interest. 
Any person who fails to pay the tax herein levied within the time required by this division shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax due, together with interest thereon at the rate of one percent per month and fraction thereof, from date at which the tax herein levied became due and payable, such penalty and interest to be assessed and collected as part of the tax. Provided the city, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, may waive or remit the penalty of ten percent or portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-50)  
Sec. 38-96. - City to estimate tax due where no return made; penalties. 
If any taxpayer fails to make the return required by Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-7, the city shall issue written notice, by certified mail, or written notice delivered by its authorized agent, to such taxpayer to make such return forthwith, and if such taxpayer fails or refuses to make such return within 30 days from the date of such notice, the city shall make a return for such delinquent taxpayer upon such information as it may reasonably obtain, and shall assess the taxes due thereon, and shall add a penalty for failure to make such return and payment of 25 percent of the tax due, as assessed by the city, and interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the date such taxes were due. Provided the city, if a good and sufficient reason is shown for such delinquency, may waive or remit the 25 percent penalty, or a portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-51)  
Sec. 38-97. - Audits; assessments; extensions of time to pay. 
Whenever the city, in examining and auditing the records of any taxpayer, or from other information, shall ascertain that the amount previously paid by any taxpayer for any period to be deficient, the city shall compute any additional amount of tax due, notify the taxpayer, and demand payment therefor. If the amount demanded is not paid within ten days from the date of such demand, or if the taxpayer does not request an extension of time within ten days from the date of such demand, the city treasurer-finance director shall make an assessment against the taxpayer of the amount due and shall add a penalty of one percent per month from the date of such taxes or any part thereof becoming due; provided that the city treasurer-finance director may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive or remit the penalty, or a portion thereof. If, within ten days from the date of notice of a deficiency, the taxpayer requests in writing an extension of time, the city treasurer-finance director may grant an extension of not more than 30 days. If, at the end of such extended period, the deficiency has not been paid the city shall proceed with the assessment. Provided that if the city treasurer-finance director shall be of the opinion that there was a willful and fraudulent intent by the taxpayer to evade the tax due, the city may assess a penalty of 25 percent of the tax; provided that upon such appeal such action shall be reviewable. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-52)  
Sec. 38-98. - Notice of tax due; hearings before the city council. 
Whenever the city shall make an assessment against a taxpayer as herein provided, the city shall notify the taxpayer by registered or certified mail, or written notice delivered by its authorized agent, of the amount of such assessment, and shall notify the taxpayer to appear before the city council on a day named not less than 20 days from the date of such notice and show cause why such assessment should not be made final. Such appearance may be made by an agent or attorney. If no showing is made on or before the date fixed in such notice, or if such showing is not sufficient in the judgment of the city council, such assessment shall be made final in the amount originally fixed or in such other amount as is determined by the city council to be correct. If upon such hearing the city council finds the amount due to be different from that originally assessed, it shall make the assessment final in the correct amount and in all cases shall notify the taxpayer of the assessment as finally fixed, by the United States mail addressed to the taxpayer's last known place of business. Any assessment made by the city shall be prima facie correct upon appeal. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-53)  
Sec. 38-99. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever any taxpayer, who has duly appeared and protested an assessment by the city, is dissatisfied with the assessment as finally made, he may appeal to the circuit court of the county, in the same manner provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-7(5)b, provided no appeal shall lie in any case where the taxpayer has failed to appear and protest the assessment before the city council. 
(b)  Any notice, provided for by this division, of an amount due under this division shall be given or any action in court for the collection of such amount shall be begun within three years of the due date of such amount or three years within which any payment has been made on such amount due; provided, however, in the case of a fable or fraudulent return with intent to evade payment of taxes imposed by this division or a failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed or a proceeding in court for the collection of such tax may be begun at any time. 
(c)  The city treasurer-finance director and the taxpayer, before the expiration of the time prescribed herein, may agree in writing to an extension of the time during which such proceedings may be begun. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. The city treasurer-finance director shall also be authorized in such agreement to extend the period within which the taxpayer may file a claim for a refund of such taxes where such agreement is entered into before a claim for a refund is barred because of the lapse of time. The city treasurer-finance director shall adopt such rules and regulations as he deems necessary for the proper administration of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-54)  
Sec. 38-100. - Liens upon property. 
The tax, together with interest and penalties imposed by this division, shall be a lien upon the property of any person subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-55)  
Sec. 38-101. - Civil suits; limitations. 
The tax herein levied shall constitute a debt due the city and may be collected by civil suit brought at any time within three years after the tax has become due and payable. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-56)  
Sec. 38-102. - Jeopardy determinations. 
If the city finds a person liable for tax under any provisions of this division designs quickly from the city or to remove his property therefrom, or to conceal himself or his property therein, or to do any other act tending to prejudice or to render wholly or partly ineffectual proceedings to collect such tax unless such proceedings be brought without delay, the city shall cause notice of such findings to be given such person, together with a demand for a immediate return and immediate payment of such tax. Thereupon such tax shall become immediately due and payable. If such person is not in default in making such return or paying any tax described by this division, and furnishes evidence satisfactory to the city that he will duly return and pay the tax to which to city's findings relate then such tax shall not be payable prior to the time otherwise fixed for payment. If such person fails to appear and make such showing, then the city shall make such assessment final. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-57)  
Sec. 38-103. - Final return of retailer selling out; purchaser to retain part of purchase money. 
Any person subject to the provisions hereof who shall sell out his business or stock of goods, or shall quit his business, shall be required to make out the return required by law within 30 days after the date he sold out of his business, stock of goods, or quit business, or his successor in business shall be required to withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of the taxes due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from the city showing that the taxes have been paid, or a certificate that no taxes are due. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold purchase money as provided in this section and taxes shall be due and unpaid after the 30-day period, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes accrued and unpaid on account of the operation of the business by the former owner. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-59)  
Sec. 38-104. - Tax to be direct tax on retail consumer. 
Every person engaged in or continuing within the city in any business for which a license or privilege tax is required by this division shall, except otherwise herein provided, add to the sale price and collect from the purchaser on all sales upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds of which there is levied by this division a sales tax at the rate of three percent of the sales price. Upon all sales the gross receipts or gross proceeds of which are taxed by this division at a rate of less than three percent, there shall be added to the sales price collected from the purchaser by such person described in this section an amount equal to the prescribed percentage of such sales price. It shall be unlawful for any person described in this section to fail or refuse to add to the sales price and collect from the purchaser the amount required by this section to be so added to the sales price and collected from the purchaser; and it shall likewise be unlawful to refund or offer to refund all or any part of the amount collected, or to absorb or advertise directly or indirectly the absorption or refund of the amount required to be added to the sales price and collect from the purchaser, or any portion of such amount. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in a sum of not less than $25.00 or more than $100.00, or may be imprisoned in the city jail for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, and each act in violation of the provisions of this division shall constitute a separate offense. The requirement herein that there shall be added to the sale price and collected from the purchaser the amounts provided herein shall in no way relieve the person described in this section of the tax levied by this division, nor shall the inability, impracticability, refusal or failure to add to the sales price and collect from the purchaser the amounts provided herein relieve such person from the tax levied by this division. All taxes paid in pursuance to this division shall conclusively be presumed to be a direct tax on the retail consumer precollected for the pursuance of convenience and facility only. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-59.1)  
Sec. 38-105. - Tax additional to all other licenses and taxes. 
The tax imposed by this division shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes levied by law as a condition precedent to engaging in any business taxable hereunder, except as otherwise specifically provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-59.2)  
Sec. 38-106. - Unlawful to make confidential information public. 
(a)  Unless in accordance with a judicial order or as herein provided, the city, its agents, clerks or stenographers shall not divulge the gross receipts, gross proceeds of sales or the amount of tax paid by any person as shown by the reports filed under the provisions of this division, except to employees of the city for the purpose of checking, comparing and correcting returns, or any other legal representative of the city in any action in respect to the amount of tax due hereunder the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Any duly authorized agent of the tax collecting authority of any municipality, county, state or federal government shall have access at any reasonable time, upon request to the city treasurer-finance director to the information contained in the sales tax returns, statements or information secured by the city or employees for the purpose of arriving at an amount of any tax due from any person if such person is liable for, or if there is probable cause for believing such person might be liable for, the payment of any tax to such municipality, county, state or federal government. 
(c)  The city treasurer-finance director shall have authority to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations governing the release of the information as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any information obtained in accordance with subsection (b) of this section for any purpose other than ascertaining the amount of the taxes due the municipality, county, state or federal government. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-59.3)  
Sec. 38-107. - Rules and regulations, direct pay permits. 
The city shall, from time to time, promulgate such rules and regulations for making returns and for ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed under this division as it may deem necessary to enforce its provisions; and upon request shall furnish any taxpayer with a copy of such rules and regulations. The city may adopt rules and regulations providing for the issuance of permits to manufacturers to purchase tangible personal property without the payment to the vendor of the sales tax, and providing for such manufacturer to report such tax directly to the city, in instances where the city determines that it is practically impossible at the time of purchase for such manufacturer or his vendors to determine with any degree of certainty the applicability of such tax, and that such provisions will facilitate and expedite the collection of the tax which may be due from such consumer; and such provisions may also be made applicable to persons engaged in the business of mining, quarrying, compounding, or processing tangible personal property, railroads, transportation, companies and others. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-59.5)  
Sec. 38-108. - Discount; interest; penalty. 
(a)  Every person subject to this division shall be entitled to a discount in an amount not to exceed five percent of the first $100.00 in taxes levied and two percent of taxes levied over $100.00, provided the discount does not exceed an aggregate amount of $200.00 per month, to be paid to the city under the provisions of this division, and provided the returns are made and the taxes paid before the same become delinquent hereunder. If the returns are not filed within the time herein provided and the taxes not paid on the dates herein provided for, no such person shall be entitled to such a discount, but shall pay the city the full amount of the tax together with interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date the payment of the tax became delinquent and a ten percent late payment penalty. 
(b)  The proceeds derived from the taxes herein levied shall be placed in the general fund of the city subject to appropriation by its city council for any lawful purpose of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-59.6; Ord. No. 2007-004, 2-20-2007)  
Sec. 38-109. - Refunds. 
If upon examination by the city treasurer-finance director, it is determined that an amount of tax has been paid in excess of that properly due then the amount in excess shall be refunded to the taxpayer. Any taxes recovered by suit by any taxpayer shall be refunded in like manner, but shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or decree of the court issuing such order or decree. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-59.8)  
Secs. 38-110—38-133. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - USE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local use taxes, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-202 et seq.; state use tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-60 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-134. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. In addition, the definitions in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-60 apply to this division. 
Automotive vehicle means a power shovel, dragline, crawler, crawler crane, ditcher or any similar machine which is self-propelled, in addition to self-propelled machines which are used primarily as instruments of conveyance. 
Business means all activities engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, with the object of gain, profit, benefit or advantage, either direct or indirect, and not excepting subactivities producing marketable commodities used or consumed in the main business activity, each of which subactivities shall be considered business engaged in, taxable in the class in which it falls. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-225)  
Sec. 38-135. - Excise tax. 
(a)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property (not including materials and supplies bought for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repairing, or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other watercraft of more than five tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources) purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section, at the rate of two percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, and manufacturing of tangible personal property purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of any such machine, within the corporate limits of the city; provided, that the term "machine" as herein used shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(c)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, and mobile home set-up materials and supplies including, but not limited to, steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes and any other materials pertaining thereto purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sales of a new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(d)  An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock, or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery, or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use or in the operation of such machine, machinery, or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery, or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery, or used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, which is purchased at retail after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, for the storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of the city regardless of whether the retailer is or is not engaged in the business in the city. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-226; Ord. No. 95-19, § 4, 6-20-1995) 
State Law reference— General levy of state use tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-60.  
Sec. 38-136. - Tax imposed on agricultural machinery or equipment; rate; persons liable. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed and excise tax on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, which is purchased at retail after the effective date of this division, for storage, use or other consumption in this city, at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of such property. Provided, however, the one-half of one percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments and replacements, shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. 
(b)  Every person storing, using or otherwise consuming in this city such tangible personal property purchased at retail shall be liable for the tax imposed by this division, and the liability shall not be extinguished until the tax has been paid to this city; provided however that a receipt from a retailer located outside the city, in accordance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-67, shall be sufficient to relieve the purchaser from further liability for a tax to which such receipt may refer. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-232) 
State Law reference— State use tax on agricultural machinery, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-63.  
Sec. 38-137. - Regulations pertaining to tax. 
(a)  The tax levied by this division shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, provisions, rules and regulations promulgated under the Alabama Administrative Procedure Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-22-1 et seq.), direct pay permit and drive-out certificate procedures, statutes of limitation, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions for the corresponding state tax as are provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-7 and Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 23, art. 2 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-60 et seq.), except where inapplicable or where otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the tax provided in this division on any automotive vehicle, truck trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or travel trailer required to be licensed with the probate judge, which were sold by dealers that are not licensed in Alabama, or were sold by licensed Alabama dealers who failed to collect municipal or county sales taxes at the point of sale, shall be collected and fees paid in accordance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-104 and Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-107, respectively. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, the tax levied by this division shall be paid to the city through the city treasurer-finance director and all references in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-7 and Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 23, art. 2 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-60 et seq.), to a state official or state department or agency shall be to the city treasurer-finance director and all references in such statutes to the state shall be to the city. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-227; Ord. No. 95-19, § 5, 6-20-1995)  
Sec. 38-138. - Credit for sales or use tax paid to another city. 
(a)  Generally. If a sales or use tax equal to or greater than the amount of the city tax is paid to another municipality in the state under requirement of law the property which is the subject of such tax, when imported for use or consumption in the city, is not subject to the use tax, which is required to be paid in sections 38-135 and 38-136. If the amount of tax paid to the other municipality in the state is less than the city tax, then the difference between the out-of-city tax and the city tax must be paid. No credit will be allowed for taxes paid on tangible personal property in any municipality in the state which does not give credit for taxes paid on similar property in the city. The city treasurer-finance director shall require such proof of payment of tax to another municipality as he deems to be necessary and proper. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city treasurer-finance director shall adopt such rules and regulations as he deems necessary for the proper administration of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-228)  
Sec. 38-139. - Seller to collect tax; regulations; penalties. 
Every such seller making sales of tangible personal property for storage, use or other consumption in the city, not exempted under the provisions of section 38-137, shall at the time of making such sales, or if the storage, use or other consumption of the tangible personal property is not then taxable hereunder, at the time such storage, use or other consumption becomes taxable hereunder, collect the tax imposed by this division from the purchaser, and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the city. The tax required to be collected by the seller from the purchaser shall be displayed separately from the list, advertised in the premises, marked or other price on the sales check or other proof of sales. It shall be unlawful for any such seller to advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this division will be assumed or absorbed by the seller or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold or if added then it or any part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-8. The tax herein to be collected by the seller shall constitute a debt owed by the seller to the city. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-230)  
Sec. 38-140. - Penalty for failure to pay tax. 
Any person failing to pay any tax to the city of any amount of tax herein required to be collected and paid to the city, within the time required by this division, shall pay, in addition to the tax or amount of tax herein required to be collected, a penalty of ten percent thereof, plus interest, at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the date at which the tax or the amount of tax herein required to be collected become delinquent, that is, due and payable to the city. The city treasurer-finance director, if good and sufficient reason is shown, may waive and remit the ten percent penalty or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-233)  
Sec. 38-141. - City authorized to determine true amount of tax due; penalties. 
If the city is not satisfied with the return and payment of the tax or amount of the tax herein required to be paid to the city by any person, it is hereby authorized and empowered to compute and determine the amount required to be paid based upon the facts contained in the return or upon any information within its possessions of this section shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day after the close of the period, as the case may be, for which such amounts were required to be reported to the city until paid. If any part of the deficiency for which determination of an additional amount due is made due to negligence or international disregard of this division or authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of ten percent of such amount shall be added thereto. If any part of the deficiency for which a determination of an additional amount is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade this division or authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of such amount shall be added thereto. The city treasurer-finance director shall give to the retailer or person storing, using or consuming tangible personal property, written notice of his determination. Such notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the retailer or person storing, using or consuming tangible personal property at his address as the same appears in the records of the city and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-234)  
Sec. 38-142. - City to estimate tax due when no return is made; penalties. 
If any person making retail sales neglects or refuses to make a return required to be made by this division, the city treasurer-finance director shall make an estimate for the periods in respect to which such persons failed to make a return, based upon any information in his possession, of the amount of the total sales price of tangible personal property sold or purchased by such person, the storage, use or other consumption of which in this city is subject to the tax imposed by this division and, upon the basis of the estimate, compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to ten percent thereof. All amounts determined to be due under the provisions of this section shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day after the close of the periods, as the case may be, for which such amounts were required to be reported to the city until paid. If the neglect or refusal of any person to file a return as required by this division was due to fraud or an intent to evade this division or rules and regulations hereunder, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by such person shall be added thereto in addition to the ten-percent penalty as provided in this section. Promptly thereafter the city treasurer-finance director shall give to such person written notice of such estimate, determination and penalty, the notice to be served personally or by mail in the same manner as prescribed for service of notice by the provisions of section 38-141. The city treasurer-finance director, if good and sufficient reason is shown, may waive and remit the ten-percent penalty or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-235)  
Sec. 38-143. - Jeopardy determination; petition for redetermination. 
If the city treasurer-finance director believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax herein required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of such tax or the amount of tax herein required to be collected, noting that fact upon such determination an the amount thereof shall be immediately due and payable. If the amount specified in the determination is not paid within ten days after the service upon the person against whom the determination is made of notice thereof, such amount becomes final at the expiration of such ten days, unless a petition for redetermination is filed within such ten days, and the delinquency penalty and the interest provided in section 38-140 shall attach to the amount of the tax required to be collected as specified therein. The person against whom jeopardy determination is made hereunder may petition for the redetermination thereof pursuant to section 38-144, provided, however, that such petition for redetermination must be filed with the city treasurer-finance director within ten days after the service upon such person of notice of the determination; and provided further, that such person must within the ten-day period deposit with the city such security as the city treasurer-finance director may deem necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. Such security may be sold by the city in order to satisfy payment of any tax due hereunder. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-236)  
Sec. 38-144. - Redetermination; procedure; appeal. 
Any person from whom an amount is determined to be due under the provisions of section 38-141 or 38-142 may petition for a redetermination thereof within 30 days after service upon such person of notice thereof. If a petition for redetermination is not filed within the 30-day period, the amount determined to be due becomes final at the expiration thereof. If a petition for redetermination is filed within the 30-day period, the city shall reconsider the amount determined to be due, and if such person has so requested in his petition, shall grant such person, his agent or attorney on oral hearing and shall give such person ten days' notice of the time and place thereof. The city shall have power to continue the hearing from time to time, as may be necessary. The order or decision of the city upon the city petition for redetermination shall become final 30 days after service upon such person of notice thereof. All amounts determined to be due by the city under the provisions of section 38-141 shall become due and payable at the time they become final and, if not paid when due and payable, there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten percent of the amount determined to be due. Any notice required by this section shall be served personally or by mail in the same manner as prescribed for service of notice by the provisions of section 38-141. From the final determination as is provided for in this division, any taxpayer who has filed a petition for redetermination, may appeal to the circuit court of the county as provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2-22. On such appeal the court may, in its discretion, determine as to whether or not the penalty provided for in this section is to be imposed upon the taxpayer. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-237)  
Sec. 38-145. - Extension of time for making return. 
The city, for good cause, may extend the time, not to exceed 30 days, for making any return required under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-238)  
Sec. 38-146. - When notice of additional amount due must be mailed; exceptions. 
Except in the case of a fraudulent return, or neglect or refusal to make a return, every notice of a determination of an additional amount due shall be mailed within three years after the return is filed. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-240)  
Sec. 38-147. - Interest. 
All taxes or amounts herein required to be collected, not paid to the city on the date when the same became due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from and after the date when the same became due and payable until paid. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-241)  
Sec. 38-148. - Excess payments. 
If upon examination it is determined by the city that an amount of tax or an amount required to be collected has been paid to the city in excess of the amount property due, then the amount in excess shall be credited against any tax or amount required to be collected then due from such person and any balance of such excess shall be refunded to such person by whom such overpayment was made by certificate of overpayment issued by the city treasurer-finance director. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-242)  
Sec. 38-149. - Penalty for fraud or evasion. 
If fraud or evasion on the part of any person is discovered by the city, it shall determine the amount by which the city has been defrauded, shall add to the amount so determined a penalty equal to 25 percent thereof, and shall determine the same to be due from such person. All amounts determined to be due from any person under the provisions of this section shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 15th day after the close of the period, as the case may be, from which such amounts shall have been paid. The amounts so determined shall be immediately due and payable and, if not paid within ten days after the service upon such person of notice of the amount determined to be due, the delinquency penalty and interest provided in section 38-140 shall attach thereto. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-243)  
Sec. 38-150. - Tax lien. 
The tax or any amount required to be collected hereunder, together with interest and penalties imposed by this division, shall be a lien upon the property of the person required to pay such tax or other amount to the city. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-244)  
Sec. 38-151. - Records to be kept; city authorized to make regulations, enforce rules, etc. 
Every seller and every person storing, using or otherwise consuming the tangible personal property purchased from a retailer shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city may require. The city, or any person authorized in writing by it, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records and equipment of any person selling tangible personal property and any person liable for the tax imposed by this division and to investigate the character of the business of any such person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made by such person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid hereunder. The city treasurer-finance director is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this division and is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-245)  
Sec. 38-152. - Unlawful to make confidential information public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having an administration duty under this division to divulge or to make known in any manner whatever, the business affairs, operations of information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any retailer or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of any official duty, or the amount or sources of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person except as provided by law; provided, however, the city treasurer-finance director may authorize examination of such returns by other tax officers of the state or federal government. Any violations of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or by imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding six months, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-246)  
Sec. 38-153. - Disposition of funds derived from tax. 
The proceeds from the taxes herein levied shall be placed in the general fund of the city, subject to appropriation by the city council for any lawful purpose of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-247)  
Sec. 38-154. - Statute of limitations. 
At any time prior to the expiration of three years after any amount herein required to be collected has become due and payable, the city may bring an action in any appropriate court to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-248)  
Sec. 38-155. - Penalties. 
Any seller or other person failing or refusing to furnish any return hereby required to be made, or failing or refusing to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city, or rendering a false or fraudulent return, shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not exceeding $100.00 for each such offense. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report as aforesaid who makes any false or fraudulent return, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due as required by law to be made, shall for each such offense upon conviction be fined not less than $25.00 and not more than $100.00 or be imprisoned not exceeding six months in the city jail or subject to both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Any violation of the provisions of this division, except as otherwise herein provided, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-249)  
Sec. 38-156. - Severability. 
This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code or regulations of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes herein shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city, its general license code or regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § 6, 6-20-1995)  
Secs. 38-157—38-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TAX ON LEASING OR RENTING TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 38-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means all activities engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, with the object of gain, profit, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect, and not exceeding subactivities producing marketable commodities used or consumed in the main business activity, each of which subactivities shall be considered business engaged in, taxable in the class in which it falls. 
Gross proceeds means the value proceeding or accruing from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property, without any deduction on account of the cost of the property so leased or rented, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest paid or any other expense whatsoever, and without any deduction on account of loss, and shall also include on the part of the person claiming exemption under Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-223(4) an amount equal to the rental paid on any tangible personal property acquired under such exemption and thereafter diverted to the use of such person. 
Leasing or rental means a transaction whereunder the person who owns or controls the possession of tangible personal property permits another person to have the possession or use thereof for a consideration and for the duration of a definite or indefinite period of time without transfer of the title to such property. The detention by the user thereof of freight cars, oxygen and acetylene tanks and similar property, in respect of which detention a demurrage or per diem is made against the user of such property, shall not be deemed to constitute a transaction whereunder property is leased or rented to another within the meaning of this division. 
Tangible personal property means personal property which may be seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched, or is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. The term "tangible personal property" shall not include stocks, bonds, notes, insurance, or other contracts or securities. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-260)  
Sec. 38-182. - License required. 
If any person shall engage in or continue in any business for which a privilege tax is imposed by section 38-183 as a condition precedent to engaging or continuing in such business, he shall apply for and obtain from the city a license to engage in and to conduct such business for the current tax year upon the condition that he shall pay the taxes accruing to the city under the provisions of this division; provided, that no license shall be issued under the provisions of this division to any person who has not complied with the provisions of this division, and no provision of this division shall be construed as relieving any person from the payment of any license privilege tax now or hereafter imposed by law. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-261)  
Sec. 38-183. - Privilege or license tax within city. 
There is hereby and imposed by law, a privilege or license tax upon each person engaging or continuing in this city in the business of leasing or renting tangible personal property at the rate equal to the applicable sales and use tax rate, 2½ percent, of the gross proceeds derived by the lesser from the lease or rental of tangible personal property, excluding automotive vehicles, truck trailers, and/or semitrailers which will remain at the rate of one percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lesser from the lease or rental of tangible personal property; provided further, that the tax levied in this division shall not apply to any leasing or rental, as lessor, by the state or any municipality or county in the state including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any corporation organized under the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, title 11 ch. 54, art. 4 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-54-80 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-262; Ord. No. 2001A-014, § 6-262, 11-6-2001)  
Sec. 38-184. - Exemptions. 
There are exempted from the provisions of this division, and from the computation of the amount of tax levied, assessed or payable under this division, the gross proceeds derived by the lessor from the lease or rental of tangible personal property: 
(1)  That are exempted from taxation under the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 12, art. 4 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-220 et seq.) except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided; and 
(2)  Where the lessor is a participating provider who rents or leases oxygen or durable medical equipment (as defined by Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-9-30) to a recipient of benefits under the Medicare or Medicaid program orders from a duly licensed physician. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-264)  
Sec. 38-185. - Collection of tax. 
The provisions of this division shall be administered and the tax herein levied shall be collected in accordance with the procedures set forth in division 2 of this article the administering and collecting the tax herein levied, and for such purposes there are hereby incorporated into this division by reference; provided, that wherever in the said provisions of the term "gross proceeds of sales" or "gross receipts" shall appear, the same for purposes of this division shall be construed to mean gross proceeds as defined in this division; provided further, that a sale of tangible personal property to any person engaging in the business of leasing or renting such tangible personal property to others, if such tangible personal property is purchased for the purpose of leasing or renting it to others under a transaction subject to the tax levied in this division, shall be deemed to be a wholesale or sale at wholesale for the purpose of administering divisions 2 and 3 of this article; provided further, that a sale of tangible personal property previously purchased at wholesale for the purpose of leasing or renting under a transaction subject to the privilege or license tax levied in this division shall be deemed to be a retail sale or a sale at retail for the purpose of administering the sales tax provisions, regardless of whether such person who theretofore leased or rented the said tangible property to some other person; provided further, in the event of the repeal of division 2 of this article, such repeal shall not operate to eliminate the tax collection procedures contained therein to the extent they are incorporated in this article by reference, unless the ordinance providing for such repeal shall clearly indicate such result. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1994, § 6-265)  
Secs. 38-186—38-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
Sec. 38-211. - Tax levied within city limits; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed by law, a privilege or license tax upon every person engaging within the corporate limits of the city in the business of renting or furnishing any rooms or lodgings to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms or lodgings are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration, said tax to be in an amount equal to 8.5 percent of the charge for any rooms or lodgings, including the charge for use or rental of property and services furnished which are required to be included in the computation of the tax levied in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-26-1. 
(b)  In addition to the privilege or license tax set forth in subsection (a), there shall be an additional $1.50 lodging fee per occupied room per night levied on the charge for any rooms or lodgings commencing on the 1st day of August, 2013. 
(c)  The additional $1.50 lodging fee collected under subsection (b) shall be expended only for leisure services department capital improvement projects. 
(Code 1992, § 6-182; Ord. of 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 97-022, 9-16-1997; Ord. No. 2002-029, 11-19-2002; Ord. No. 2013-024, 6-18-2013 )  
Secs. 38-212—38-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TOBACCO TAX 
 
Sec. 38-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adoption of state law definitions means any words or phrases used in this article and not herein defined in Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 25 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-25-1 et seq.), shall have the meanings ascribed to them therein. 
Dealer means any wholesale dealer or retail dealer as herein defined. 
Retail dealer means any person, other than a wholesale dealer, who sells or delivers tobacco within the city. 
Retail price means the retail selling price of the tobacco before adding the amount of the tax assessed herein or any other tobacco tax imposed under the laws of the state. 
Sold or sale means any transfer, of tax or possession or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration or any agreement therefore, including rewards, prizes and premiums of tobacco products given as a result of operation on punch board shooting galleries or other activities. 
Store or stored means the storage or warehousing of tobacco products in any manner, or the withdrawal or use of the same for any purpose other than for resale or reshipment outside the city. 
Tobacco means cigarettes, cigars, and all other forms of tobacco including granulated, plug, cut, crimp, ready rubbed and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such a manner as to be suitable for smoking, chewing, dipping and/or sniffing. 
Wholesale dealer means a person who sells or delivers, within the city at wholesale only, tobacco products to retail dealers for the purpose of resale only. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 6-60, 6-4-1998)  
Sec. 38-232. - Tax imposed in the city; amount. 
In addition to all other taxes now imposed by law, every wholesaler, jobber, dealer or distributor who sells, stores or delivers any tobacco products for sale within the city shall pay a tax to the city and a tax is hereby fixed and levied, which tax shall be at a tax rate of the wholesale purchase price as per section 38-237 for the sale, storage and/or delivery of all tobacco products sold within the corporate limits of the city. The tax levied by this section shall be collected by the city treasurer-finance director. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 6-61, 6-4-1998)  
Sec. 38-233. - Required records and reports. 
Every wholesaler, jobber, dealer or distributor shall, at the time of selling or delivering any tobacco products within the city, make a true duplicate invoice of the same, which shall show full and complete details of the sale or delivery of such tobacco products. Every such wholesale and retail dealer shall keep a record of the purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of tobacco products. All such invoices and records, along with all cancelled checks and memoranda pertaining to any such purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of tobacco products shall be retained for a period of two years, and shall be subject to inspection by an agent of the city, who shall have the power and authority to enter upon the premises of any dealer at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining such invoices, records, canceled checks, or other memoranda. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 6-62, 6-4-1998)  
Sec. 38-234. - Monthly statement and payment. 
The tax levied hereunder on all tobacco products shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrued. On or before the 20th day of each month, every wholesaler, jobber, dealer or distributor who sells, stores or delivers any tobacco products for sale within the city and every retailer who sells, stores or delivers any tobacco products for sale within the city that were not purchased though a wholesaler, jobber, dealer, or distributor who sells, stores or delivers tobacco products for sale within the city, shall: 
(1)  File with the city clerk a true and correct monthly statement in writing, on a form approved by the city clerk, of all tobacco products sold or delivered during the preceding month, for which he is or shall be liable for the payment of the license tax; 
(2)  In each and every instance, upon the filing of said statement, furnish to the city clerk such additional information, either oral or in writing, as the clerk may require as to the sale or delivery of any tobacco products covered by such statement; 
(3)  At the time of making such statement, pay to the city clerk the amount of the license tax for the preceding month covered by such statement; and 
(4)  Maintain on premises a report from vendors supplying tobacco products purchased by retailers for resale. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 6-63, 6-4-1998)  
Sec. 38-235. - Unlawful acts; punishment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is required to file statements with the city clerk as set forth hereunder to fail or omit to file such statements, and it shall also be unlawful to make false statements to or fail to pay the amount of tax, and each day after which said statements or payments are due shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 6-65, 6-4-1998)  
Sec. 38-236. - Provision for interstate commerce. 
This article shall not be applied so as to impose any unlawful tax or unlawful burden on interstate commerce or any business of the United States government or any branch or agency thereof, or apply to the tobacco products mentioned herein stored by a wholesaler, jobber, dealer or distributor for the purpose of resale or reshipment outside the city which are actually so resold or reshipped. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, § 6-66, 6-4-1998)  
Sec. 38-237. - Schedule of taxes on tobacco products. 
The schedule of city taxes on tobacco products shall be as follows: 
(1)  Cigarettes. 
a.  Each package of 20; "20 Cigarettes" stamp, 5 cents per pack. 
b.  Each package of 25; "25 Cigarettes" stamp, 6.25 cents per pack. 
c.  Each package of 30; "30 Cigarettes" stamp, 7.50 cents per pack. 
d.  Any variations of package size will be assessed at one-quarter cent per cigarette. 
(2)  Cheroots, stogies, cigars, etc., at retail price. 
a.  3 1/3 each or less, 5 cents per pack of five or 1 cent per cigar in any other package. 
b.  Over 3 1/3 and not more than .05, 5 cents per pack of five or 1 cent per cigar in any other package. 
c.  Over .05 and not more than .08, 5 cents per pack of five or 1 cent per cigar in any other package. 
d.  Over .08 and not more than .10, 5 cents per pack of five or 1 cent per cigar in any other package. 
e.  Over .10 and not more than .20, 5 cents per pack of five or 1 cent per cigar in any other package. 
f.  Over .20, 5 cents per pack of five or 1 cent per cigar in any other package. 
(3)  Little cigars. Not weighing over three pounds per 1,000. 
(4)  Smoking tobacco. 
a.  1 1/8 ounces or less, 3 cents per ounce. 
b.  Over 1 1/8 ounces, not exceeding two ounces, 3 cents per ounce. 
c.  Over two ounces, not exceeding three ounces, 3 cents per ounce. 
d.  Over three ounces, not exceeding four ounces, 3 cents per ounce. 
e.  Additional tax for each ounce or fractional part thereof over four ounces, 3 cents per ounce. 
(5)  Chewing tobacco. Each ounce or fractional part thereof, three-quarter of one cent per ounce. 
(6)  Snuff. 
a.  Five-eighths ounces or less, three-quarter of one cent per ounce. 
b.  Over five-eighths ounces, not exceeding 1 5/8 ounces, three-quarter of one cent per ounce. 
c.  Over 1 5/8 ounces, not exceeding 2½, three-quarter of one cent per ounce. 
d.  Over 2½ ounces, not exceeding five ounces (cans, packages, gullets), three-quarter of one cent per ounce. 
e.  Over three ounces, not exceeding five ounces (glass, tumblers, bottles), three-quarter of one cent per ounce. 
f.  Over five ounces, not exceeding six ounces, three-quarter of one cent per ounce. 
g.  Additional tax for each ounce or fractional part thereof over six ounces, three-quarter of one cent per ounce. 
(Ord. No. 98-008, exh. A, 6-4-1998)  
Secs. 38-238—38-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BUSINESS LICENSES AND TAXES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Business licenses, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-301. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any commercial or industrial activity or any enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, or livelihood, including the lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, which is engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, within a municipality. 
Business license means an annual license issued by the city for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession, or any other activity in the city, by whatever name called, which document is required to be conspicuously posted or displayed except to the extent the taxpayer's business license tax or other financial information is listed thereon. 
Business license remittance form means any business license return, renewal reminder notice, or other writing on which the taxpayer calculates the business license tax liability for all or part of the license year and remits the amount so calculated with the form. 
Department or department of revenue means the state department of revenue, as created under Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2-1 et seq. 
Designee means an agent or employee of the city authorized to administer or collect, or both the municipality's business license taxes, which may include another taxing jurisdiction, the department of revenue, or a private auditing or collecting firm as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3. 
Finance director means the treasurer/finance director of the city. 
Gross receipts means the measure of any and all receipts of a business from whatever source derived, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable laws and constitutional provisions, to be used in calculating the amount due for a business license. Provided, however, that: 
(1)  Gross receipts shall not include any of the following taxes collected by the business on behalf of any taxing jurisdiction or the federal government: all taxes which are imposed on the ultimate consumer, collected by the taxpayer and remitted by or on behalf of the taxpayer to the taxing authority, whether state, local or federal, including utility gross receipts levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 21, art. 3 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-21-80 et seq.); license taxes levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 21, art. 2 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-21-50 et seq.); or reimbursements to professional employer organizations of federal, state or local payroll taxes or unemployment insurance contributions; but no other deductions or exclusions from gross receipts shall be allowed except as provided in this article. 
(2)  A different basis for calculating the business license may be used by the city with respect to certain categories of taxpayers as prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90B. 
(3)  For a utility or other entity described in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-129, gross receipts shall be limited to the gross receipts derived from the retail furnishing of utility services within the city during the preceding year that are taxed under Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 21, art. 3 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-21-80 et seq.), except that nothing herein shall affect any existing contract or agreement between a municipality and a utility or other entity. The gross receipts derived from the furnishing of utility services shall not be subject to further business license taxation by the city. 
(4)  Gross receipts shall not include dividends or other distributions received by a corporation, or proceeds from borrowing, the sale of a capital asset, the repayment of the principal portion of a loan, the issuance of stock or other equity investments, or capital contributions, or the undistributed earnings of subsidiary entities. 
License form means any business license application form, renewal reminder notice, business license remittance form, or business license return by whatever name called. 
License year means the calendar year. 
Municipality means any town or city in this state that levies a business license tax from time to time. The term shall also include the town's or city's police jurisdiction, where the business license tax is levied in the police jurisdiction. 
Person means any individual, association, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity of any kind, except for any nonprofit corporation formed under the laws of the state which is operated to enable municipalities that become members of such nonprofit corporation to finance or refinance capital projects and related undertakings, on a cooperative basis, and whose board of directors or other governing body consists primarily of elected officials of the municipality. 
Retailer means a person who sells to the consumer or any other person for any purpose other than for resale in the form of tangible personal property. A person selling both at wholesale and retail shall keep such person's books so as to show separately the gross proceeds of wholesale sales and the gross proceeds of retail sales. The books, invoices, records, and accounts provided for in this section shall at all times be open to examination by the state department of revenue, by the finance director, revenue officer, and by any other person designated by the city. 
Revenue officer means the employee charged by the city with the primary responsibility of administering this business license tax article and related matters thereto. 
Taxing jurisdiction means the city, or the department of revenue acting as agent on behalf of the city pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-180 et seq., as the context requires. 
Taxpayer means: 
(1)  Any person subject to or liable under this article for any business license tax; 
(2)  Any person required to file a return with respect to, or pay or remit the business license tax levied under this article or to report any information or value to the taxing jurisdiction; 
(3)  Any person required to obtain, or who holds any interest in, any business license issued by the taxing jurisdiction; 
(4)  Any person who may be affected by any act or refusal to act by the taxing jurisdiction under this article; or 
(5)  Any person required to keep any records required by this article. 
USC means the applicable title and section of the United States Code, as amended from time to time. 
Wholesale sale means a sale by a wholesaler to a licensed retail merchant, jobber, dealer, or other wholesaler for resale. Included in this category are sales to schools, hospitals, nursing homes, counties, municipalities, the state, and contractors for use in their businesses. 
(b)  Other terms. Other capitalized or specialized terms used in this article, and not defined above, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3, unless the context therein otherwise specifies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-2, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-302. - Levy of tax. 
Pursuant to the Code of Alabama, the following is hereby declared to be and is adopted as the business license code and schedule of licenses for the city for the year beginning January 1, 2008, and for each subsequent year thereafter. There is hereby levied and assessed a business license fee for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession or other activity in the city, by whatever name called. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-1, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-303. - License term; minimums. 
The license term and the minimum amount for a business license are as follows: 
(1)  Full year. Every person who commences business before July 1 shall be subject to and shall pay the annual license for such business in full. Unless otherwise specified in the enclosed schedules, the minimum annual license shall be $75.00. 
(2)  Half year. Every person who commences business on or after July 1, shall be subject to and shall pay one-half the annual license for such business for that calendar year. This provision shall not apply to licensee reporting gross receipts for such period. 
(3)  Issue fee. For each license issued, there shall be an issue fee collected equal to the fee permitted by the state pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90, as amended, and said issue fee shall be collected in the same manner as the license tax. 
(4)  Annual renewal. Except as provided in subsections (4)4a or 4b of this section, the business license shall be renewed annually on or before January 31 each year. 
a.  If the due date for payment of any business license falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized by the city from time to time, the due date shall automatically be extended until the next business day. 
b.  Insurance company annual license renewals shall be renewed in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-122 which states that each year, each insurance company shall furnish the city a statement in writing duly certified showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding year and shall accompany such statement with the amount of license tax due according to the licensing schedule. Failure to furnish such statement or to pay such sum shall subject the company and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license as provided for in this Code. 
c.  On or before December 31 of each year, a renewal reminder shall be mailed to each licensee that purchased a business license during the current year. Said renewal notice shall be mailed via regular U.S. mail to the licensee's last known address of record with the city. Licensees are required to furnish the city any address changes for their business prior to December 1 in order for them to receive their notice. 
d.  Business license renewal payments received by the city shall be applied to the current renewal only when any other debts the licensee owes to the city are first paid in full. No business license shall be issued if the current renewal payment does not meet said prior obligations and the current renewal. Failure to pay such sums shall subject the licensee and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license provided for in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-3, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 2012-033, 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 38-304. - License shall be location specific. 
(a)  For each place at which any business is carried on, a separate license shall be paid, and any person desiring to engage in any business for which a license is required shall designate the place at which business is carried on, and the license to be issued shall designate such place, and such license shall authorize the carrying on of such business only at the place designated. 
(b)  Every person dealing in two or more of the articles, or engaging in two or more of the businesses, vocations, occupations or professions scheduled herein, shall take out and pay for a license for each line of business. 
(c)  A taxpayer subject to the license authorized by this article that is engaged in business in other municipalities may account for its gross receipts so that the part of its gross receipts attributable to its branch offices will not be subject to the business license imposed by this article. To establish a bona fide branch office, the taxpayer must demonstrate proof of all following criteria: 
(1)  The taxpayer must demonstrate the continuing existence of an actual facility located outside the police jurisdiction in which its principal business office is located, such as a retail store, outlet, business office, showroom, or warehouse, to which employees and/or independent contractors are assigned or located during regular normal working hours. 
(2)  The taxpayer must maintain books and records, which reasonably indicate a segregation or allocation of the taxpayer's gross receipts to the particular facility. 
(3)  The taxpayer must provide proof that separate telephone listings, signs, and other indications of its separate activity are in existence. 
(4)  Billing and/or collection activities relating to the business conducted at the branch office or offices are performed by an employee or other representative, of the taxpayer who has such responsibility for the branch office. 
(5)  All business claimed by a branch office or offices must be conducted by and through said office or offices. 
(6)  The taxpayer must supply proof that all applicable business licenses with respect to the branch office or offices have been issued. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting businesses from payment of a license on the basis of a lack of physical location. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-4, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-305. - Restriction on transfer of license. 
No license shall be transferred except with the consent of the city council or of the finance director or his or her designee, and no license shall be transferred to reflect a physical change of address of the taxpayer within the city more than once during a license year and never from one taxpayer to another. Provided that a mere change in the name or ownership of a taxpayer that is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other form of legal entity now or hereafter recognized by the laws of the state shall not constitute a transfer for purposes of this article, unless: 
(1)  The change requires the taxpayer to obtain a new federal employer identification number or department of revenue taxpayer identification number; or 
(2)  In the discretion of the city, the subject license is one for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from requiring a new business license application and approval for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-5, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-306. - Unlawful to do business without a license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, taxpayer, or agent of a person or taxpayer to engage in businesses or vocations in the city for which a license is required without first having procured a license. A violation of this article relative to obtaining a license shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and if the violation is a willful violation, by such fine and imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court trying the same. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-6, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-307. - License must be posted. 
Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place, where said business, trade or occupation is carried on, and the holder of the license shall immediately show same to the designee of the city upon being requested so to do. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-7, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-308. - Duty to file report. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person subject to such license tax to render to the city on such forms as may be required, a sworn statement showing the total business done, amount of sales, gross receipts and gross sales, stock, value of furniture and other equipment, capital invested, number of helpers or employees, amount of space occupied, or other factor described in the schedule, one or several, as the case may require, for the ascertainment of the classification of such person for license taxation purposes and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject. 
(b)  If the city determines that the amount of business license tax reported on or remitted with any business license remittance form is incorrect, if no business license remittance form is filed within the time prescribed, or if the information provided on the form is insufficient to allow the taxing jurisdiction to determine the proper amount of business license tax due, the city shall calculate the correct amount of the tax based on the most accurate and complete information reasonably obtainable and enter a preliminary assessment for the correct amount of business license tax, including any applicable penalty and interest. 
(c)  The city shall promptly mail a copy of any preliminary assessment to the taxpayer's last known address by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested, or, in the sole discretion of the city, deliver the preliminary assessment to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(d)  If the amount of business license tax remitted by the taxpayer is undisputed by the city, or if the taxpayer consents to the amount of any deficiency or preliminary assessment in writing, the city shall enter a final assessment for the amount of the business license tax due, plus any applicable penalty and interest. 
(e)  (1)  If a taxpayer disagrees with a preliminary assessment as entered by the city, the taxpayer shall file a petition for review with the revenue officer within 30 days from the date of entry of the preliminary assessment setting out the specific objections to the preliminary assessment. If a petition for review is timely filed, the revenue officer shall schedule a conference with the taxpayer for the purpose of allowing the taxpayer or its representatives and the representatives of the city to present their respective positions, discuss any omissions or errors, and to attempt to agree upon any changes or modifications to their respective positions. 
(2)  If a petition for review is not timely filed, or is timely filed, and upon further review the revenue officer determines that the preliminary assessment is due to be upheld in whole or in part, the city may make the assessment final in the amount of business license tax due as computed by the revenue officer, with applicable interest and penalty computed to the date of entry of the final assessment. The revenue officer shall, whenever practicable, complete his or her review of the taxpayer's petition for review and applicable law within 90 days following the later of the date of filing of the petition or the conference, if any. 
(3)  A copy of the final assessment shall promptly be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address by certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested. At the option of the taxing jurisdiction a copy of the final assessment may be delivered to the taxpayer by personal delivery. The final assessment shall include a statement informing the taxpayer of his or her right to appeal the final assessment to circuit court within 30 days from the date of the entry of the final assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-8, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-309. - Duty to permit inspection and produce records. 
Upon demand by the designee of the city, it shall be the duty of all licensees to: 
(1)  Permit the designee of the city to enter the business and to inspect all portions of his place or places of business for the purposes of enabling said designee to gain such information as may be necessary or convenient for determining the proper license classification, and determining the correct amount of license tax; 
(2)  To furnish information during reasonable business hours, at the licensee's place of business, in the city, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information from which the correct license tax classification of such person may be ascertained and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax returns to the state, copies of state income tax returns and federal income tax returns. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-9, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-310. - Unlawful to obstruct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any agent, servant or employee of such person, to fail or refuse to perform any duty imposed by this article; nor shall any person, agent, servant or employee of such person obstruct or interfere with the designee of the city in carrying out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-10, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-311. - Privacy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the administration of this article to divulge any information obtained by him in the course of inspection and examination of the books, papers, reports and memoranda of the taxpayer made pursuant to the provisions of this article, except to the mayor, the city attorney or others authorized by law to receive such information described herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to print, publish, or divulge, without the written permission or approval of the taxpayer, the license form of any taxpayer or any part of the license form, or any information secured in arriving at the amount of tax or value reported, for any purpose other than the proper administration of any matter administered by the taxing jurisdiction, or upon order of any court, or as otherwise allowed in this article. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the disclosure of the fact that a taxpayer has or has not purchased a business license. Statistical information pertaining to taxes may be disclosed to the city council upon their written request through the mayor's office. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-11, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-312. - Failure to file assessment. 
(a)  In any case where a person subject to paying a license tax as provided herein fails to do so, the city designee shall be authorized to assess and determine the amount of license taxes due using the best information available either by return filed or by other means. 
(b)  The taxpayer shall be notified by registered or certified mail, or by personal service, of the amount of any such assessment, and of his right to appear before the finance director on a day named not less than 20 days from the date of notice and to show cause why such assessment shall not be made final. Such appearance may be made by agent or attorney. 
(c)  If no showing is made on or before the date fixed in such notice, or if such showing is not sufficient in the judgment of the city, such assessment shall be made final in the amount originally fixed, or in such other amount as is determined by the city to be correct. If upon such hearing the city designee finds a different amount due than that originally assessed, he shall make the assessment final in the correct amount, and in all cases shall notify the taxpayer of the assessment as finally fixed. 
(d)  A notice by the United States mail, addressed to the taxpayer's last known place of business, shall be sufficient. Any assessment made by the designee of the city shall be prima facie correct upon any appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-12, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-313. - Lien for nonpayment of license tax. 
On all property, both real and personal, used in the business, the city shall have a lien for such license, which lien shall attach as of the date when the license is due, as allowed by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-44. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-13, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-314. - Criminal penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in an amount not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00, and may also be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six months, in the discretion of the court trying the case, and violations on separate days shall each constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-14, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-315. - Civil penalties. 
In addition to the remedies provided by Code of Ala. 1975 , § 11-51-150 et seq., the continued or recurrent performance of any acts for which a license may be revoked or suspended under this article is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the public and is a nuisance. The city, as an additional or alternative remedy, may institute injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-15, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-316. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  All licenses not paid in full within 30 days from the date they fall due shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 30 days they shall be delinquent and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 60 or more days, but this provision shall not be deemed to authorize the delay of 30 days in the payment of the license due, which may be enforced at once. 
(b)  In the case of persons who began business on or after the first day of the calendar year, the license for such new business shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 15 days they shall be delinquent, and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 45 days or more. 
(c)  All delinquent accounts (both license taxes and penalties) shall also be charged simple interest at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-16, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-317. - Procedure for denial of new applications. 
(a)  The revenue officer or finance director shall have the authority to investigate all applications and may, at his sole discretion, refer any application to the city council for a determination of whether such license should or should not be issued. 
(b)  If the city council denies the issuance of any license referred to it, the city clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of the city council's decision. 
(c)  If said applicant desires to appear before the city council to show cause why said license should be issued, he shall file a written notice with the city clerk, said notice to be filed within two weeks from the date of mailing by the city clerk of the notice of the denial of such license by the city council. 
(d)  Upon receipt of said notice the city clerk shall promptly schedule a hearing, to be held within 15 days from the date of receipt of such notice, before the city council and shall give the notice of the date, time and place of said hearing to the applicant. 
(e)  The applicant shall be given the opportunity to appear personally, or through his counsel, or both, and the city council shall proceed to hear any evidence which may be presented both for and against the issuance of said license. 
(f)  If the city council determines from the evidence presented that in order to either provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the prosperity, or improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the city said license should not be granted, it shall enter an order to that effect; otherwise, said license shall be ordered issued upon payment of any required license fees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-18, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-318. - Procedure for revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Any lawful license issued to any person to conduct any business shall be subject to revocation by the city council for the violation by the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee of any provision of this article or of any ordinance of the city, or any statute of the state relating to the business for which such license is issued; and shall also be subject to revocation by the city council if the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee under color of such license violates or aids or abets in violating or knowingly permits or suffers to be violated any penal ordinance of the city or any criminal law of the state; and shall also be subject to revocation by the city council if, in connection with the issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee or his agent filed or caused to be filed any application, affidavit, statement, certificate, book, or any other data containing any false, deceptive or other misleading information or omission of material fact. 
(b)  The conditions set forth in subsection (a) of this section as grounds for the revocation of a license shall also constitute grounds for refusing to renew a license. 
(c)  The city council shall set a time for hearing on the matter of revoking or refusing to renew a license; and a notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee, or the applicant for renewal, as the case may be, at least ten days before the day set for said hearing. At the hearing the city council shall hear all evidence offered by any party and all evidence that may be presented bearing upon the question of revocation or the refusal of renewal, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-19, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-319. - Refunds on overpayments. 
(a)  Any taxpayer may file a petition for refund with the city for any overpayment of business license tax erroneously paid to the city. If a final assessment for the tax has been entered by the city, a petition for refund of all or a portion of the tax may be filed only if the final assessment has been paid in full prior to or simultaneously with the filing of the petition for refund. 
(b)  A petition for refund shall be filed with the city within two years from the date of payment of the business license tax, which is the subject of the petition. 
(c)  The city shall either grant or deny a petition for refund within six months from the date the petition is filed, unless the period is extended by written agreement of the taxpayer and the city. The taxpayer shall be notified of the city's decision concerning the petition for refund by first class U.S. mail or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, sent to the taxpayer's last known address. If the city fails to grant a full refund within the time provided herein, the refund petition shall be deemed to be denied. 
(d)  If the petition is granted or the city or a court otherwise determines that a refund is due, the overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer by the city, together with interest to the extent provided for in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-92. If the city determines that a refund is due, the amount of overpayment plus any interest due thereon may first be credited by the city against any outstanding tax liabilities due and owing by the taxpayer to the city, and the balance of any overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer. If any refund or part thereof is credited to any other tax by the city, the taxpayer shall be provided with a written detailed statement showing the amount of overpayment, the amount credited for payment to other taxes, and the resulting amount of the refund. 
(e)  A taxpayer may appeal from the denial in whole or in part of a petition for refund by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the circuit court of the county in which the city is located. Said notice of appeal must be filed within two years from the date the petition was denied. The circuit court shall hear the appeal according to its own rules and procedures and shall determine the correct amount of refund due, if any. If an appeal is not filed with the appropriate circuit court within two years of the date the petition was denied, then the appeal shall be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-20, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-320. - Delivery license. 
(a)  In lieu of any other type of license, a taxpayer may at its option purchase for $100.00 plus the issuance fee, a delivery license for the privilege of delivering its merchandise in the city if the taxpayer meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Other than deliveries, the taxpayer has no other physical presence within the city; 
(2)  The taxpayer conducts no other business in the city other than delivering merchandise and performing the requisite setup and installation of said merchandise; 
(3)  Such delivery and setup and installation is performed by the taxpayer's employees or agents, concerns the taxpayer's own merchandise in the city, and is done by means of delivery vehicles owned, leased, or contracted by the taxpayer; 
(4)  The gross receipts derived from the sale and any requisite setup or installation of all merchandise so delivered shall not exceed $75,000.00 during the license year; 
(5)  Any setup or installation shall relate only to (i) that required by the contract between the taxpayer and the customer or as may be required by state or local law, and (ii) the merchandise so delivered; 
(6)  If at any time during the current license year the taxpayer fails to meet any of the above-stated criteria, then within ten days after any of said criteria have been violated or exceeded, the taxpayer shall purchase all appropriate business licenses from the city for the entire license year and without regard to this section. 
(b)  Mere delivery of the taxpayer's merchandise by common carrier shall not allow the city to assess a business license tax against the taxpayer, but the gross receipts derived from any sale and delivery accomplished by means of a common carrier shall be counted against the $75,000.00 limitation described in the preceding section if the taxpayer also during the same license year sells and delivers into the taxing jurisdiction using a delivery vehicle other than a common carrier. 
(c)  A common carrier, contract carrier, or similar delivery service making deliveries on behalf of others shall not be entitled to purchase a delivery license. 
(d)  The delivery license shall be calculated in arrears, based on the related gross receipts during the preceding license year. 
(e)  The purchase of a delivery license shall not, in and of itself, establish nexus between the taxpayer and the city for purposes of the taxes levied by or under the authority of Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, or other provisions of law, nor does the purchase of a delivery license conclusively determine that nexus does not exist between the taxpayer and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-21, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-321. - License classification codes. 
License Code 	Code Description 	Fee Sch 
1110000 	Farming and crop production 	A 
1113523 	Agricultural imp sales 	A 
1120000 	Animal production 	A 
1130000 	Forestry 	G 
1130851 	Forester 	G 
1140000 	Fishing & hunting 	A 
1150000 	Agricultural support 	H 
1152261 	Cotton finishers 	H 
1153524 	Cotton gin mfg 	H 
2110000 	Oil gas extraction 	C 
2120000 	Mining 	C 
2130000 	Mining support services 	B 
2210000 	Utilities 	F 
2214911 	Electric utility 	F 
2214924 	Gas company, natural gas 	F 
2214941 	Water utility 	F 
2215984 	Gas liquid 	F 
2361522 	Contractors-residential 	A 
2361541 	Contractors-comm bldg 	A 
2370000 	Contractors-heavy construction 	A 
2371611 	Asphalt contractor 	A 
2380000 	Contractors-specialty trade 	A 
2381531 	Swimming pool construction 	A 
2381532 	Plumbing contractor 	A 
2381533 	HVAC contractor 	A 
2381561 	Roofing contractor 	A 
2381562 	Siding contractor 	A 
2381711 	Plumbers 	A 
2381712 	Air conditioning contract 	A 
2381715 	Sprinkler systems 	A 
2381716 	Tile contractor 	A 
2381717 	Building framer 	A 
2381718 	Brick, block contractor 	A 
2381719 	Gasfitter contractor 	A 
2381721 	Painter, paper hanger 	A 
2381722 	Fence dealer/instal 	A 
2381723 	Heating & air conditioning 	A 
2381724 	Cabinet contractor, build 	A 
2381726 	Curb painter, Ord. 17-6 	A 
2381731 	Electric contractor 	A 
2381742 	Drywall, sheetrock contrac 	A 
2381744 	Cable wire contractor 	A 
2381745 	Insulation contractor 	A 
2381752 	Carpet layers 	A 
2381761 	Sheetmetal contractor 	A 
2381771 	Concrete finisher 	A 
2381791 	Steel erectors 	A 
2381794 	Excavating, foundation wrk 	A 
2385855 	Satellite sales/install 	A 
2387398 	Signs, sales, install, mobile 	A 
2387423 	Elevator maintenance 	A 
3110000 	Food mfg 	E 
3120000 	Beverage mfg 	E 
3120160 	Special retail more than 30 days 	IL 
3121201 	Restaurant retail liquor license 	IE 
3121301 	Club liquor license class I nonprofit 	IC 
3121302 	Club liquor license class I0I 	ID 
3121303 	Lounge retail liquor class I 	IA 
3121304 	Special events retail 	IK 
3121305 	Retail beer license-on-premises only 	IG 
3125183 	Beer & wine wholesaler 	IN 
3125921 	Lounge, class ii, package store 	IB 
3125922 	Retail wine license-on-premises only 	IJ 
3125923 	Retail wine license-off premises only 	IH 
3125924 	Retail beer license-off-premises only 	IF 
3130000 	Textile mfg 	E 
3140000 	Other mfg 	E 
3142394 	Awning tent maker 	E 
3143499 	Locking devises 	E 
3150000 	Apparel mfg 	E 
3160000 	Leather & allied products mfg 	E 
3210000 	Wood mfg 	E 
3220000 	Paper mfg 	E 
3230000 	Printing 	C 
3240000 	Petroleum and coal mfg 	E 
3250000 	Chemical mfg 	E 
3252813 	Oxygen, industrial 	E 
3260000 	Plastic & rubber mfg 	E 
3270000 	Nonmetallic mfg 	E 
3310000 	Primary metal mfg 	E 
3320000 	Metal fabrication 	C 
3330000 	Machinery mfg 	E 
3340000 	Computer & electronic mfg 	E 
3350000 	Appliance mfg 	E 
3360000 	Transportation mfg 	E 
3370000 	Furniture mfg 	E 
3375063 	Cabinet shop 	E 
3390000 	Miscellaneous mfg 	E 
4210000 	Wholesale trade-durable 	D 
4220000 	Wh sale trade-nondurable prod 	D 
4225172 	Wh sale trade-nondurable gas 	D 
4410000 	Off-road vehicle/equipment sales 	A 
4415013 	Motor vehicle parts 	A 
4415511 	Motor vehicle dealer 	D 
4420000 	Furniture 	A 
4430000 	Electronic & appliance store 	A 
4440000 	Building materials 	A 
4450000 	Food & beverage stores 	A 
4460000 	Health and personal care stores 	A 
4475541 	Gasoline retail 	G 
4480000 	Clothing & accessories 	A 
4510000 	Sporting goods & hobbies 	A 
4520000 	General merchandise stores 	A 
4530000 	Miscellaneous retailers 	A 
4536512 	Used merchandise stores 	A 
4540000 	Non-store retailers 	C 
4545097 	Non-store retailer home 	C 
4545962 	Non-store retailers vending 	C 
4547355 	Non-store retailers-mail orders 	C 
4810000 	Air transportation 	C 
4820000 	Rail transportation 	SR1 
4830000 	Water transportation 	C 
4840000 	Truck transportation 	C 
4840002 	Truck terminal 	SR2 
4841595 	House mover 	C 
4841797 	Mobile home movers 	C 
4850000 	Charter services 	C 
4850001 	Bus terminals 	C 
4859501 	Taxicabs 	C 
4870000 	Sightseeing transportation 	C 
4920000 	Delivery 	O 
4925315 	Couriers 	A 
4930000 	Warehousing & storage-dist. 	J 
5110000 	Publishing ind except internet 	D 
5127832 	Movie theaters 	A 
5150000 	Broadcasting 	A 
5170002 	Telecommunications-other 	A 
5170003 	Telecommunications-reseller 	A 
5171101 	Telecommunications-local 	KA 
5171102 	Telecommunications-long dist 	KB 
5190000 	Information services 	A 
5220004 	Mortgage company 	G 
5220006 	Credit services 	G 
5225932 	Pawn shop 	G 
5226000 	Bank main office 	G 
5226001 	Bank branch or ATM 	L 
5226122 	Savings and loans 	G 
5229200 	Gold/silver dealers 	G 
5229999 	S&L branch or ATM 	L 
5230000 	Securities, commodity 	A 
5240000 	Agent office-funds, annuity 	A 
5246331 	Fire, marine insurance 	M 
5246311 	Life insurance 	N 
5250000 	Funds, trust, other agencies 	A 
5313101 	Real estate-broker/appraiser 	C 
5313102 	Real estate-agent 	C 
5316513 	Real estate-rental 	C 
5317033 	Real estate-trailer parks 	C 
5317297 	Mini warehouse 	C 
5326515 	Rental & leasing-other 	C 
5327512 	Rental & leasing-auto/truck 	C 
5410000 	Professional svcs not class. 	B 
5410001 	Professional associations 	B 
5410742 	Veterinarian 	B 
5417221 	Photographer 	B 
5417287 	Computer programmer 	B 
5417311 	Advertising 	B 
5417411 	Interior decorator 	A 
5418000 	Professional (medical) 	B 
5418011 	Anesthesiologist 	B 
5418014 	Neurologist 	B 
5418015 	Optician 	B 
5418016 	Physician, MD 	B 
5418017 	Psychologist 	B 
5418018 	Cardiologist 	B 
5418019 	Pediatrician 	B 
5418020 	Pathology 	B 
5418021 	Dentist orthodontist 	B 
5418022 	Orthodontist 	B 
5418025 	Surgeon, medical MD 	B 
5418031 	Osteopath 	B 
5418041 	Chiropractor 	B 
5418042 	Optometrists 	B 
5418049 	Physical therapist 	B 
5418050 	Podiatrist 	B 
5418069 	Orthopedics 	B 
5418111 	Attorney/lawyers 	B 
5418911 	Architect 	B 
5418912 	Surveyor 	B 
5418913 	Engineer 	B 
5418931 	Accountant/CPAs 	B 
5510000 	Management companies 	B 
5610000 	Administrative services 	C 
5610001 	Services not classified 	C 
5610782 	Lawn service (no landscaping) 	C 
5611521 	Alarms systems, burg., home 	C 
5611713 	Tree contractor 	C 
5611722 	Landscape service 	A 
5611727 	Steam cleaning contractor 	C 
5611799 	Pool service (cleaning) 	C 
5614216 	Parcel, package delivery 	C 
5614722 	Travel agency/travel agent 	C 
5617217 	Carpet rug cleaning 	C 
5617249 	Typing 	C 
5617288 	Court reporter 	C 
5617321 	Collection agency/credit 	C 
5617342 	Exterminators 	C 
5617349 	Janitor, cleaning service 	C 
5617361 	Employment agencies 	C 
5617392 	Detective/private inv 	C 
5617393 	Det. agency, private inv. 	C 
5617399 	Armored car service 	C 
5617402 	Chimney sweep 	C 
5617415 	Bill collector 	C 
5617421 	Answering service 	C 
5617422 	Auto recover 	C 
5617549 	Wrecker 	C 
5617699 	Locksmith 	C 
5618995 	Management service 	C 
5619229 	Patrol, security guard ser 	C 
5620000 	Waste management 	G 
5621725 	Sewer/drain cleaning cont 	G 
5624214 	Commercial garbage collect 	G 
5624953 	Commercial waste/grease 	G 
5625039 	Septic tank service 	G 
5627410 	Waste materials 	G 
6110000 	Educational services 	C 
6210000 	HMO-medical ctr & srvs 	H 
6210001 	Nursing home 	B 
6210002 	Outpatient care centers 	B 
6214119 	Ambulance service/outside 	B 
6218055 	Medical ctr/amb surgical 	B 
6218072 	Dental lab 	B 
6218081 	Audiology clinic 	B 
6218091 	Dialysis center 	B 
6218095 	Emergency medical care 	B 
6228062 	Hospital clinic/medical 	H 
6238059 	Nursing home 	B 
6230001 	Assisted living facilities 	B 
6240000 	Social assistance 	L 
6248351 	Day care centers (7 or more) 	B 
7110000 	Arts & sports 	D 
7111304 	Special events 	G 
7117289 	Talent agent 	D 
7117441 	Talent service 	D 
7117459 	Artist 	D 
7117697 	Taxidermist 	D 
7117915 	Concerts 	G 
7117941 	Boxing or wrestling match 	G 
7117959 	Carnival, fair or circus 	G 
7120000 	Museums 	L 
7130000 	Amusement 	C 
7135010 	Gym/fitness/weights 	C 
7137394 	Skating rink 	C 
7137396 	Health clubs 	C 
7137912 	Dance hall 	C 
7137933 	Bowling alleys 	C 
7139325 	Amusement parks, centers 	C 
7139425 	Water park amusement ctr 	C 
7210000 	Accommodations 	C 
7217011 	Hotel, motel 	C 
7217021 	Rm, board, bed breakfast 	C 
7220000 	Drinking est/club/lounge/bar 	A 
7221202 	Snack bar 	A 
7222099 	Sandwiches distributor 	A 
7225398 	Ice cream peddler 	A 
7225812 	Restaurants 	A 
7225813 	Catering 	A 
7225850 	Mobile food service 	A 
8110000 	Repairs & maintenance 	C 
8111103 	Telephone repairs 	C 
8117219 	Alterations clothing 	C 
8117251 	Shoe repairs 	C 
8117419 	Auto detail 	C 
8117440 	Window repair 	C 
8117531 	Auto body shop, repair 	C 
8117538 	Auto, a/c, small motors repair 	C 
8117539 	Auto, tk, quick lube-oil cg 	C 
8117542 	Auto carwash stand 	C 
8117622 	Electronics, radio, TV repair 	C 
8117623 	Air condition serv. repair 	C 
8117629 	Appliance repair, elec. rpr 	C 
8117642 	Furniture repairs, refinishing 	C 
8117692 	Welding shop 	C 
8117698 	Repair service, misc. 	C 
8120000 	Personal services 	C 
8120752 	Pet grooming 	C 
8126553 	Cemetery company 	C 
8127212 	Dry clean/laundry pickup 	C 
8127213 	Dry cleaning 	C 
8127215 	Laundries, automatic 	C 
8127218 	Linen-towel-uniform rental 	C 
8127231 	Beauty shop 	C 
8127232 	Tanning beds 	C 
8127241 	Barbershop 	C 
8127261 	Funeral directors 	C 
8127291 	Therapeutic massage 	C 
8127292 	Weight loss 	C 
8127293 	Tattooing 	C 
8127295 	Pet setter 	C 
8127296 	Nail studio 	C 
8127299 	Beauty spa 	C 
8127395 	Film developers 	C 
8127999 	Fortune teller or clairvoyant 	J 
8128073 	Electrolysis 	C 
8129950 	Bail enforcement agency 	C 
8129960 	Bondsmen, firm, person 	C 
9990000 	Unclassified misc. personal svc 	A 
9990001 	Unclassified misc. business 	A 
 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-22, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 2013-033, 8-6-2013 )  
Sec. 38-322. - License fee schedule. 
Schedule Code 		Rate 
A 	Gross receipts up to $30,000.00 	$75.00 plus ¼ of 1% (.0025) in excess of $30,000.00 
B 	Gross receipts up to $37,500.00 	$75.00 plus 1/5 of 1% (.002) in excess of $37,500.00 
C 	Gross receipts up to $75,000.00 	$75.00 plus 1/10 of 1% (.001) in excess of $75,000.00 
D 	Gross receipts up to $150,000.00 	$75.00 plus 1/20 of 1% (.005) in excess of $150,000.00 
		
E 	Gross receipts up to $75,000.00 	$75.00 plus 1/25 of 1% (.004) in excess of $75,000.00 
F 		3% of gross receipts 
G 		Flat fee $250.00 
H 		Flat fee $1,500.00 
IA 	Lounge retail liquor license class I 	$600.00 
IB 	Lounge, class II, package store 	$600.00 
IC 	Club liquor license class I non-profit 	$600.00 
ID 	Club liquor license class II 	$750.00 
IE 	Restaurant retail liquor license 	$500.00 
IF 	Retail beer license - off premises only 	$50.00 
IG 	Retail beer license-on premises only 	$75.00 
IH 	Retail wine license-off premises only 	$75.00 
IJ 	Retail wine license-on premises only 	$75.00 
IK 	Special events retail 	$150.00 plus 4.5% of gross sales 
IL 	Special retail more than 30 days 	$600.00 
IN 	Beer & wine wholesale 	$375.00 
J 		Flat fee $500.00 
KA 		Flat fee $1,110.00 
KB 		Flat fee $278.00 
L 		Flat fee $50.00 
M 		Company pays a license tax of $4.00 on each $100.00 of gross new premiums collected. 
$ ____________ × 4%(.04)=$ ____________ 
N 		Must pay a $20.00 minimum fee plus $1.00 on each $100.00 (.01) of gross new premiums collected 
$ ____________ × 1% of premiums (.01) = $ ____________ + $20.00 
0 	Gross receipts up to $75,000.00 	$100.00 
SR 	State regulated 	
SR1 		Flat fee $655.00 
SR2 		Flat fee $200.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-23, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 2013-033, 8-6-2013 )  
Sec. 38-323. - Exchange of information. 
(a)  The revenue officer may exchange tax returns, information, records, and other documents secured by the city, with other municipalities adopting similar ordinances for the exchange of taxpayer information, or with county or state authorities. The revenue officer may charge a reasonable fee for providing such information or documents. Any tax returns, information, records, or other documents so exchanged shall remain subject to the confidentiality provisions, restrictions, and criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure as provided under state or municipal law. 
(b)  Any such exchange shall be for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Collecting taxes due. 
(2)  Ascertaining the amount of taxes due from any person. 
(3)  Determining whether a person is liable for, or whether there is probable cause for believing a person might be liable for, the payment of any tax to a state, county, or municipal agency. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of tax returns or tax information by the city in the proper administration of any matter administered by the revenue officer. The license officer may also divulge to a purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor of a business or stock of goods the outstanding sales, use, or rental tax liability of the seller for which the purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor may be liable pursuant to the Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-25, 40-23-82, or 40-12-224. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-24, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-324. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Liquor. In addition to the license fee, each lounge retail and club liquor licensee will pay monthly to the revenue department, on forms provided by the clerk, a tax of ten percent on all liquor purchases from ABC outlets, retail and wholesale. Such payments are due on or before the 20th of the month following the month in which purchases are made. If payment of tax is not made as prescribed, a ten percent penalty is assessed on the total amount due on the day following the due date, and 20 percent on the 31st day following the due date. 
(b)  Restaurant. Retail restaurant liquor licensees will pay, in addition to the license fee, a ten percent tax. 
(c)  Wholesalers, beer and wine. 
(1)  Wholesale wine dealers will not sell to any retail outlet that is not properly licensed by the city to sell liquor and/or wine. No liquor and wine licenses will be issued without accompanying license for restaurant, lounge, or club, as appropriate. 
(2)  In addition, each wholesaler of beer who sells, stores, or receives for the purpose of distribution, to any person within the city, will pay to the city on forms provided, a tax of $0.52 per case—seven-ounce containers; $0.78 per case—12-ounce containers; $1.04 per case—14- to 16-ounce containers; on all beer. Such payments are due on or before the 20th day of the month following the month during which the beer is sold. If the taxes are paid on time, the tax due will be discounted by 2½ percent, which discount shall be retained by the wholesaler. 
(3)  Wholesale beer dealers and distributors will not sell to any retail outlet that does not have a current city license. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesale beer licensee to fail to keep, for a period of at least three years, complete and truthful records covering the operation of such licensee's license. The licensee must keep records showing all purchases and sales of beer with the names and addresses of the vendor and vendee. The licensee must not refuse the city inspector or representative access to such records or the opportunity to make inspections, examinations, audits or copies of the same when the request is made during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-28, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-325. - Contractors. 
(a)  No permit will be issued by the city building department until: 
(1)  The basic license fee has been paid to the finance department. 
(2)  The contractor has furnished either the city building department or the license inspector a list of names and addresses of all subcontractors to be used on the project or job. Subcontractors are those persons who are paid by the contract, by the job, or by the hour, and who are not on the contractor's regular payroll. To be on a regular employee payroll, taxes and social security must be withheld by the contractor. 
(b)  If all subcontracts have not been closed or awarded at the time application is made for a permit by the general contractor or by the owner, the general contractor or the owner shall not allow any work to proceed by any subcontractor until such subcontractor has exhibited to the general contractor or owner the appropriate city license for work to be done on such job, unless such subcontractor is certified by the city license department as having paid the appropriate city license due by any subcontractor. No electrical or any other final inspection will be given on a job until a subcontractor list has been given to the city license department and each subcontractor has purchased a business license. The building inspector will make an electrical or any other final inspection on each construction project or job only after the city license department has verified that each subcontractor has the appropriate and current business license. At least three working days prior to any final inspection being conducted, the general contractor will submit to the city license department a complete list of subcontractors. In the event that no general contract has been let by the owner, then the owner shall be subject to the provisions of this section which govern general contractors. 
(c)  All contractors and subcontractors and their employees shall have identification on their vehicles in at least two-inch size. Name on vehicle must be same as current license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-29, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-326. - Public utilities. 
Electric light companies, power companies, gas companies, pipeline companies for transporting gas, oil, gasoline or other commodities, gas distributing companies whether by means of pipelines, drums, cylinders, or otherwise, heating companies or other public utilities, incorporated under the laws of this state or any other state, or whether incorporated at all, and all water distributing systems, including but not limited to any municipal boards or systems shall pay three percent of the gross receipts of the business of such company or system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-30, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-327. - Gasoline and oil companies. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Distributor and seller each mean and include any person who shall engage in the business of selling, distributing, delivering, storing, or withdrawing from storage, gasoline or kerosene oil, within the corporate limits of the city. 
Gasoline means and includes gasoline, naphtha, and any other liquid motor fuel or any device or substitute therefor, commonly used in combustion engines, but shall not be held to apply to lubricating oil or greases or to those products known commercially as "kerosene oil" or "crude oil" when used for lighting or heating in homes and public buildings, but shall apply to such fuels when used for any other purposes whatsoever. 
Retail dealer means and includes any distributor or seller who is engaged in the business of selling, distributing, delivering, storing or withdrawing from storage, gasoline or kerosene oil, within the corporate limits of the city in broken quantities. 
Storer means and includes any person who ships or causes to be shipped gasoline or kerosene oil, into the city in lot quantities of as much as 50 gallons, and there stores the same and withdraws or uses the same for any purpose. 
(b)  Levied in city. On each gallon of gasoline sold or delivered within the corporate limits of the city, every distributor or seller of gasoline shall pay a license tax to the city, which sum shall be an amount equal to $0.04 per gallon. 
(c)  Written statement required of distributors and sellers. Each seller or distributor of gasoline shall on or before the 20th day of each month file with the finance director a sworn written statement showing the amount and quantity of all gasoline sold and delivered by such distributor or seller within the city limits during the calendar month next preceding. Any seller or distributor of gasoline who shall fail to make statements herein required or who shall make any false statement therein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  When payment due; penalties for delinquencies. The license tax levied by this section shall be paid on or before the 20th day of each calendar month for the amount of tax levied for the previous month's sales and deliveries of gasoline. Any person failing or omitting to pay such license tax within such time shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that such license tax is not paid after the date it is due shall constitute a separate offense and the license tax shall be increased by the addition thereto of a penalty of 20 percent of the license tax per day. 
(e)  Permit, compliance with article for sellers and distributors outside city. It shall be unlawful for any seller or distributor of gasoline having no place of business within the city, to make any sales or deliveries of gasoline within the city limits without first obtaining a permit from the finance director to do so. Such seller or distributor shall be liable for and pay the same license tax as that fixed in subsections (b) and (c) of this section and comply in full with the other provisions of this section. None of the provisions of this section shall apply to sales or deliveries of gasoline which constitute interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-31, 11-6-2007) 
State Law reference— State gasoline excise tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-17-30 et seq.  
Sec. 38-328. - Insurance companies. 
(a)  Fire insurance companies. On each fire insurance company there is levied a license tax of four percent on each $100.00 or major fraction thereof of the gross premiums, less premiums returned by cancellation received by such company on policies issued during the preceding year on property located in the city. New companies which did not do business in the city during the preceding year, and desiring to engage in business in the city shall deposit the sum of $35.00 which sum shall be adjusted at the end of the year on the above percentage basis. 
(b)  Life insurance, and all other insurance. Life insurance and all other insurance companies shall pay a license tax of $20.00 and also $1.00 on each $100.00 and major fraction thereof of gross premiums, less premiums returned by cancellation, during the preceding year on policies issued in the year to citizens living in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-32, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-329. - Selling of food products, goods, etc., from parked vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck, motor vehicle, wagon or other vehicle on any of the public streets within the city limits, for the purpose of selling or offering for sale fruits, vegetables, produce, any other food products, goods, wares or merchandise. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to prevent any person from selling any fruits or vegetables actually grown by such person by offering the same for sale by proceeding along a chosen route in such vehicle; provided that such person shall not stop or park a vehicle on any street within the city limits longer than is necessary to complete each sale, and when each such sale is completed, such person shall immediately proceed along the route chosen by such person and shall not at any time remain parked for the purpose of displaying merchandise or for soliciting sales for the same. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to repeal, alter, change or amend any provision in the license fee schedules adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-33, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-330. - Compliance with city ordinances. 
No business shall be carried on at a location or place of business, and no privilege license shall be issued therefor, until such time as the zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code), building codes and other codes and ordinances of the city are fully complied with where applicable; proof thereof to be evidenced through certification by the appropriate departments or other responsible offices of the city on the license application. If a certificate of occupancy is issued by the planning and development department, such can be used in lieu of such certification. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-34, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-331. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Farmers. No license shall be required of any farmer engaged in the sale of farm products produced exclusively by such farmer. However, it shall be unlawful for any farmer engaged in the sale of homegrown farm products to sell within the corporate limits of the city any of those products without the required county and city growers' permit (available without charge through the probate judge's office and the finance department) and written permission of the property owners granting permission to operate from any shopping center, public street, parking lot, or in or around any parking lot of a business. 
(1)  When permission is granted by property owners to farmers to sell from shopping centers, parking lots, streets, and any other area, the seller shall take special precautions to park in such a manner as not to obstruct the normal flow of traffic and to ensure that the safety and welfare of the customers is protected at all times. 
(2)  Farmer vendors engaged in the sale of farm-produced products must bear the burden of proof that products and items sold by such person were grown and/or produced by such person. 
(b)  Schools. Schools operated by the city, county, or state, churches; and other nonprofit organizations are exempt from any city license requirements. 
(c)  Associations. Associations of county government and associations of municipal governments are exempt from any city license requirements. 
(d)  No business exemption. No business required by this article to secure a license shall be exempt from the payment of such license fee an the grounds that such business is operated for charitable purpose, unless the entire proceeds from such business are devoted to such purpose. 
(e)  Business exemptions. Businesses that have been engaged by the City of Prattville to provide goods or services to the city shall hereby be exempt from the business licensing requirements of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Prattville, Article V. Business Licenses and Taxes, under the following circumstances: 
a.  During each specific calendar year, the individual or firm so engaged by the city has not conducted any business within the city limits of the City of Prattville, other than with the city; does not anticipate conducting any business within the city limits of the City of Prattville, other than with the city; and does not have a business located inside the city limits of the City of Prattville that conducts business elsewhere; 
b.  The projected amount of the fees to be paid to such individual or firm during the specified calendar year by the city for good or services to be provided to the city during the specified calendar year is less than the then current State of Alabama bid law amount; and 
c.  The individual or firm so engaged has executed a written statement to claim exemption, certifying to the Finance Director of the City of Prattville that during the specific calendar year, the individual or firm has not conducted any business within the city limits of the City of Prattville, other than with the city; does not anticipate conducting any business within the city limits of the City of Prattville, other than with the city; and does not have a business located inside the city limits of the City of Prattville that conducts business elsewhere; and further certifying that: 
1.  If such individual or firm, during the specified calendar year, receives either fees from the city for goods or services exceeding the then current State of Alabama competitive bid minimum or fees from other entities for doing business within the city limits of the City of Prattville, then such individual or firm acknowledges that the individual or firm will no longer be exempt from the business licensing provisions of this subsection; 
2.  If such individual or firm was exempt from the business licensing provisions of this subsection and later, during the same calendar year, shall fail to qualify for the exemption provided under this section, such individual or firm shall be subject to all provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Prattville, Article V. Business Licenses and Taxes, which includes the requirements to keep records, to make records available to the city, to pay business license fees and any late penalties and interest which may be due upon, and all other provisions; and 
3.  If such individual or firm has made a false statement on the statement to claim exemption, such individual or firm shall be subject to all penalties under Code of Ordinance of the City of Prattville, Article V. Business Licenses and Taxes, for failure to apply for a business license or failure to apply for a renewal business license; provided, however, that any such individual or firm that has obtained an exemption from the business licensing provisions of the city shall have 30 calendar days from the date on which the individual or firm has knowledge that the certification such individual or firm had made in the statement to claim exemption is no longer true, to apply for a City of Prattville business license without being assessed late penalties or interest; further provided that in such circumstances, the calculation of the business license fee due from such individual or firm shall include the gross receipts from the City of Prattville that gave rise to the claim for exemption. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-34.1, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 2016-001, § 1, 1-5-2016 )  
Sec. 38-332. - Construction of article. 
(a)  The adoption of this article shall not abridge the right of the city council to change alter, increase, or decrease any of the license fees at any time, nor shall it abridge the right of the city council to require a license for any business, occupation, trade, calling or profession not included in this article. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to repeal special regulations or taxes such as those relating to gasoline license taxes, amusement taxes, cigarette stamp taxes, etc. 
(c)  The license and revenue officer and the finance director are empowered to make arrests for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-34.2, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-333. - Prerequisite. 
(a)  No license shall be issued for any business controlled or covered by the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-20-5, dealing with public health requirements except upon presentation, by the license applicant, of a health permit issued by the county health officer for the business; and no license shall be issued for any business controlled or regulated by the alcoholic beverage control board of the state, except upon presentation, by the license applicant, of a license issued by such board for the business. 
(b)  Any license applicant applying for a license to engage in any profession requiring certification, accreditation or licensing from the state, or any board or subdivision of the state, shall provide evidence of such certification or accreditation, certification or license has been issued and remains in effect. No license shall be issued until the requirements of this section are met. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-34.3, 11-6-2007)  
Sec. 38-334. - Transient dealers, merchants, peddlers, and solicitors. 
(a)  In this section, the terms "transient dealers," "merchants," "peddlers," and "solicitors" mean all persons, both principals and agents, who engage or conduct in this city, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place, a temporary or transient business of selling goods, wares, services or merchandise with the intention of continuing business in the city on a continuous basis for a period of not more than 180 days and/or who rent, lease, or occupy, either in whole or part, for the purpose of carrying on such business, a room, building, or other structure or lot, or plot of ground for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, services, or merchandise. 
(b)  The practice of going door to door in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited to do so by an owner or occupant of such private residences or business, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, and/or dispensing of and/or peddling or hawking. The same is hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-027, § 6-34.4, 11-6-2007)  
Secs. 38-335—38-514. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CHARITABLE OR RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-515. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable or religious purpose means the use of the money or property for the benefit of: 
(1)  Charity or philanthropy, or underprivileged, needy, refugee, diseased, disabled, or handicapped persons, or persons in need of rehabilitation; 
(2)  A church, religious society or other religious sect, group, or order; 
(3)  Patriotism; that is, for the teaching of patriotism or the relief or assistance of veterans or veterans' organizations; or 
(4)  Existing educational institutions or for the establishment or endowment of educational institutions or in aid of the education of any person or group of persons. 
Conduct a solicitation means to manage, organize, direct, administer or be responsible for a solicitation on behalf of any person. 
Cost of the solicitation means the amount of funds collected in excess of the amount spent for the direct benefit of the stated purpose of the solicitation including, but not limited to, information materials and activities, recruitment, training and compensation of solicitors, and management and administration of the solicitation and disbursement of the funds. 
Funds spent for the direct benefit of the stated purpose of the solicitation means money expended directly for the specific purpose stated in the registration. 
Solicit or solicitation means to request property, financial aid, money or anything of value; or to sell or offer to sell a product, article, tag, service, publication, document, advertising space, membership, subscription or ticket; or to hold, promote or participate in an entertainment, sport event, benefit dance, fair, bazaar or other type of organized social entertainment. 
(Code 1992, § 6-110; Ord. of 9-5-1979, § II)  
Sec. 38-516. - Purpose. 
The regulations and prohibitions set forth in this article are necessary for the legitimate governmental interest in protecting citizens from fraud through the registration and identification procedure and from undue interference from strangers importuning citizens in their homes after dark and during the early morning hours. The city council recognizes that these regulations operate to restrain first amendment rights but determines that such restraints are reasonable and necessary for the protection set forth herein. 
(Code 1992, § 6-111; Ord. of 9-5-1978, § I)  
Sec. 38-517. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall solicit or conduct a solicitation within the boundaries of the city on the plea or representation, express or implied, that the proceeds from the solicitation are for a charitable or religious purpose unless the person is properly registered with the city and is prominently displaying identification provided by section 38-538. 
(b)  No person shall solicit by door-to-door or telephone canvass at the place of residence of anyone from whom a solicitation is sought or within a residential neighborhood later than two hours after sundown or earlier than 8:00 a.m., unless the solicitor has prior approval therefor from such resident. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  A person who solicits solely from such person's own membership or from foundations; 
(2)  A person who does not collect more than $100,000.00 within a 12-month period; and 
(3)  A person who solicits solely through the use of the public broadcasting media. 
(d)  No person shall at any time solicit on streets, alleys or rights-of-way of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 6-112; Ord. of 9-5-1978, § III)  
Sec. 38-518. - Receipts to contributors. 
(a)  Any solicitor receiving money or anything having a value of $10.00 or more from any contributor shall give the contributor a written receipt containing the name and authorization number of the soliciting organization and the name of the solicitor signing on the receipt, the date, the amount received and the portion of the contribution which is tax deductible. 
(b)  No person shall use or disburse funds collected pursuant to a charitable or religious solicitation for a purpose other than that stated in the statement filed with the city clerk and the actual and necessary expenses incident to the solicitation, collection and disbursement of funds; provided expenses shall not exceed 25 percent of the amount received after deduction of the actual cost of any tangible property given or otherwise transferred to contributors. 
(Code 1992, § 6-115; Ord. of 9-5-1978, § IV(3), (4))  
Sec. 38-519. - Financial reports. 
(a)  Every person authorized to conduct a solicitation under this article shall file a financial report under oath with the city clerk within 30 days after the solicitation has been completed. The financial report shall state the following: 
(1)  The amount of funds collected, in detail, the cost of any tangible property given to contributors, the expenses incurred in management and administration of the solicitation, and the distribution of the balance of the funds collected. 
(2)  The name, address and social security number of each person receiving any wages, fees, commissions or expenses, either independently or based on the funds collected. 
(b)  All books, records and papers relating to the solicitation shall be available to the city clerk at city hall upon written request to the person authorized to conduct the solicitation. 
(Code 1992, § 6-116; Ord. of 9-5-1978, § V)  
Secs. 38-520—38-536. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 38-537. - Required; information to be supplied. 
Registration shall be complete when the person seeking to solicit or conduct a solicitation pays the registration fee and files with the city clerk the following information under oath on forms furnished or approved by the city: 
(1)  The name, local and permanent addresses and telephone number and headquarters of the person registering; 
(2)  If registrant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the registrant's principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of registrant's records; 
(3)  The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom; 
(4)  The names and addresses and official positions of the persons by whom the receipts of such solicitations shall be disbursed for the stated purpose; 
(5)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names and addresses of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation; 
(6)  An outline of the methods to be used conducting the solicitations; 
(7)  The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations, and if such period shall exceed 30 days, the specific reasons for the need of such excess time; 
(8)  The estimated cost of the solicitation; 
(9)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses and emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names, addresses and social security numbers of all individual solicitors to be used in the solicitation; 
(10)  A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the registrant within the city, such statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final distribution thereof; 
(11)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the registrant within the city; 
(12)  A statement that the actual cost of the solicitation will exceed 25 percent of the total amount to be raised. 
(Code 1992, § 6-113; Ord. of 9-5-1978, § IV(1))  
Sec. 38-538. - Identification badge. 
Upon receipt of the information required by section 38-537, the city clerk shall designate and/or approve an identification badge containing the name of the organization conducting the solicitation, the picture or photograph of the authorized solicitor, the purpose of the solicitation and an authorization number. The identification badge shall be nontransferable, valid only during the period of the solicitation and shall in no way constitute an approval by the city of the purpose of the notification. Each solicitor shall display this identification badge in a prominent position on the outer clothing, clearly visible to the person from whom solicitations are sought. The identification badge shall be provided at the expense of the solicitor. 
(Code 1992, § 6-114; Ord. of 9-5-1978, § IV(2))  
Sec. 38-539. - Investigation and revocation. 
(a)  Following registration to solicit under this article, the city clerk shall forthwith submit the registration information to the chief of police or the chief's agent, for investigation into the truth and accuracy of the registrant and a preliminary determination of whether the registrant qualifies as an approved solicitor. 
(b)  If the police chief determines that the registrant is in accordance with the standards set forth herein, no further action shall be taken. If the police chief makes a preliminary determination that the registrant does not so qualify or has materially violated a provision of this article or has made a material misstatement of fact in the registration information, then the chief shall so notify the registrant in writing, giving the reasons therefor, and advising the registrant of the next regular city council meeting, not sooner than four days after mailing of the notice, at which time the question of revocation of the registration shall be on the council agenda, and all interested parties heard, for the city council to determine whether the registrant qualifies as a solicitor hereunder or whether such registration should be revoked, suspended, or modified. Misstatements of material fact that could mislead the public are grounds for revocation. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Code 1992, § 6-117; Ord. of 9-5-1978, § VI)  
Secs. 38-540—38-566. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - YARD SALES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-567. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nonprofit organization means an organization such as a church group, civic club, veterans' organization or school. 
Personal property means property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of an individual's residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. The term "personal property" does not include merchandise that was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
Yard sales means all sales commonly known as garage sales, lawn sales, attic sales, rummage sales, flea market sales and yard sales, or any similar casual sale of personal property which is advertised or displayed whereby the public at large is invited to view and/or purchase personal property; the term "yard sale" does not include those persons and transactions excepted in section 38-568. 
(Code 1992, § 6-120; Ord. of 9-20-1983(2), § 1)  
Sec. 38-568. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; 
(3)  Any person selling or advertising for sale items of personal property which are specifically named or described in the advertisement, which are not displayed in a yard and which separate items do not exceed five in number; 
(4)  Any arts and crafts shows and displays sponsored by a nonprofit organization; and 
(5)  Any merchant qualified and acting under a valid merchant's license, including any licensed flea market. 
(Code 1992, § 6-127; Ord. of 9-20-1983(2), § 5)  
Sec. 38-569. - Place of sale. 
All yard sales shall be conducted on the premises where the applicant resides, excepting churches and nonprofit organizations that shall be exempt from this section. 
(Code 1992, § 6-125; Ord. of 4-19-1985, § 4(d))  
Sec. 38-570. - Property permitted to be sold. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, under authority granted by this article, property other than personal property. 
(Code 1992, § 6-126; Ord. of 9-20-1983(2), § 3)  
Secs. 38-571—38-600. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 38-601. - Required; application. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale in the city without a permit, to be known as a yard sale permit. 
(b)  Applicants shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of applicant; 
(2)  Location at which the yard sale is to be held; 
(3)  Dates upon which the yard sale will be held; 
(4)  Dates and locations of any past yard sales within the current calendar year. 
(Code 1992, § 6-121; Ord. of 4-19-1985, § 2)  
Sec. 38-602. - Fee. 
For each permit issued, a permit fee of $5.00 shall be paid. 
(Code 1992, § 6-122; Ord. of 4-19-1985, § 4(a))  
Sec. 38-603. - Display on premises. 
Permits issued under this article shall be prominently displayed on the premises of the yard upon which the sale is conducted during the entire time the sale is in progress. 
(Code 1992, § 6-123; Ord. of 4-19-1985, § 4(c))  
Sec. 38-604. - Frequency. 
A permit shall be issued to any person within a household only three times within a calendar year and no such permit shall be issued for more than three consecutive calendar days. Members of more than one residence may join in requesting a permit and such permit shall be considered as having been issued for each of such residences, but only one permit fee shall be paid. Each household so joined shall be treated as having conducted a yard sale. 
(Code 1992, § 6-124; Ord. of 4-19-1985, § 4(b))  
Secs. 38-605—38-634. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS AND DETECTIVES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-635. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agency means any person employing a private investigator or detective, or a person to act in that capacity for a client or patron of the agency. The term "agency" shall in no way include a governmental agency. 
Private investigator or detective. 
(1)  The term "private investigator" or "detective" means: 
a.  Any person engaged by individuals for private protection; 
b.  A person unofficially engaged in obtaining secret information for the use and benefit of those who choose to employ such person and to pay such person compensation; 
c.  One making an investigation for another when such investigation involves the conduct, life or affairs of the person investigated; 
d.  One who locates or repossesses automobiles or chattels subject to lien; 
e.  One who guards property or keeps it under surveillance; 
f.  One who collects or attempts to collect debts; 
g.  One who investigates claims; or 
h.  One who shadows, keeps under surveillance, investigates or follows one to obtain evidence for or against such person. 
(2)  Such terms shall not include: 
a.  Public detectives; 
b.  Peace officers or deputy sheriffs; 
c.  Lawyers in the course of the practice of their profession; 
d.  Accountants engaged in the practice of their profession; 
e.  Insurance investigators acting solely in the employ of an insurance company, the insured thereof or the agency of such insurance company; 
f.  One conducting strictly the business of a collection agency, the owner of an account or employee of the owner of the account who collects for the owner thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-130; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-636. - Agencies to file statements relative to employees. 
Each agency engaged in the business of furnishing private investigators or detectives shall file with the chief of police, on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year, a statement of the name and address of each employee of the agency during the preceding three months. Failure to furnish such statement or a correct statement shall be sufficient cause for revocation of the agency license. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-140; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-637. - Police supervision; carrying weapons. 
Each private investigator or detective licensed under this article shall be subject to police supervision. Qualifying and being licensed under the terms of this article shall not of itself entitle the applicant to carry weapons concealed or otherwise in violation of the law. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-141; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-638. - Procedure upon cancellation of bond or insolvency of surety company. 
Should the bond of any applicant for a license under this article or investigator, detective or agency licensed under this article be cancelled or the surety company guaranteeing the same be declared to be insolvent or in the hands of receiver, the license of any such investigator, detective or agency bonded by such company shall be revoked, upon notification by the city clerk, until a new bond approved by the city clerk shall have been substituted in lieu thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-142; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Secs. 38-639—38-656. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 38-657. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or be engaged in or to advertise as engaging in the vocation, profession or business as a private investigator or detective until a license has been issued or after the license to so engage has been revoked. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-131; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-658. - Application; bond; minimum age of applicant. 
(a)  An applicant for a license as a private investigator or detective or agency shall file with the chief of police a written application, under oath, outlining in such application the personal data as to the date and place of birth, education, law enforcement experience and a complete and detailed record and report of all civil suits and criminal cases in which the applicant has been either a party or a witness within the preceding 12 months, specifying the name and location of the court, the nature of the proceeding and the result thereof. The application shall further give the name and address of at least three residents of the city as references as to the applicant's moral and professional reputation and the name and address of each employee of the applicant during the past year. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit with the application a surety bond in the sum of $5,000.00, with a guaranty bonding company authorized to do business in the state as surety, to indemnify anyone who may be wrongfully injured by the words or acts of the applicant in following in the vocation, profession, business or calling as a private investigator or detective; provided, that such bond shall be further conditioned so that the cumulative liability of such guaranty company will not exceed the sum of $5,000.00 in any one policy year. 
(c)  No person shall engage in the business of a private investigator, detective or agency operator unless and until such person shall have attained the age of 21 years. 
(d)  No application for license as a private investigator or detective shall be received unless and until the same is accompanied by a photograph of the applicant. Any agency making application as such shall be accompanied by a photograph of each member of the firm and each employee thereof. 
(e)  No person shall be licensed as a private investigator or detective who is not of good moral and professional reputation. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-132; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-659. - Investigation of applicant by chief of police. 
The chief of police shall make a thorough investigation as to each applicant for a license as a private investigator, detective or agency and, after a full and complete investigation thereof, including the fingerprinting of the applicant, report to the mayor and to the city council whether a license should or should not be granted to such person. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-133; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-660. - Approval of certain persons prior to issuance. 
A license to a private investigator, detective or agency shall be issued only on the approval of the mayor and concurrence of the city council after recommendation by the police chief. Upon the issuance of a license, the surety bond filed by the applicant shall be filed in the police headquarters of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-134; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-661. - Fee—Private investigator or detective. 
The license fee for a private investigator or detective shall be as set forth in article V of this chapter, pertaining to business licenses and taxes. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-135; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-662. - Same—Private investigating agency or detective agency. 
The license fee for a private investigating agency, detective agency or private detective agency shall be as set forth in article V of this chapter, pertaining to business licenses and taxes. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-136; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-663. - Issuance. 
A privilege license under this division may be issued only on the certification of the chief of police that all the requirements of this division have been complied with. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-137; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-664. - Revocation. 
The license provided for in this division as a private investigator, detective or agency is granted at the pleasure of the city council, and may be revoked at any time on a majority vote of the city council for cause. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-138; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 38-665. - Employment of persons without licenses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the vocation, profession, business or agency as a private investigator or detective to employ or engage the services of a private investigator or detective who does not have the license required by this division, and the violation of this section shall be sufficient cause for revocation of the license of the person or agency violating the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 6-139; Ord. of 9-5-1989)  
Chapter 42 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Number of judges. 
The municipal court shall consist of two judges, a presiding judge and a trial judge. 
(Code 1992, § 8-4; Ord. of 11-1-1977, § 4) 
State Law reference— Council to fix number of municipal judges, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-3.  
Sec. 42-2. - Monthly reports. 
The municipal judge shall be required to make a report to the council on the operation of the municipal court every month. 
(Code 1992, § 8-8; Ord. of 11-1-1977, §§ 12, 13) 
State Law reference— Reports, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 12-14-15, 12-14-16.  
Sec. 42-3. - Schedule of fines—Traffic infractions and offenses. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes a schedule of fines for traffic infractions. In the event the defendant elects to plead guilty before a magistrate to any one of the traffic offenses listed in the schedule, the fine established shall apply in the municipal court of the city. 
(1)  State traffic offenses and fines: 
Section 	Offense 	Fine 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-76 	Improper load (shift/spill) 	$25.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-217 	Safety belts 	$10.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-217 	Windshields must be unobstructed, windshield wipers, tinting 	$25.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-222 	Child passenger restraints (maximum fine) 	$10.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-80 	Driving on wrong side of road 	$25.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-86 	No passing zone 	$25.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-88 	Passing on right 	$25.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-90 	Improper use of divided highway 	$25.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-130 	Improper U-turn 	$25.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-133 	Improper lane change 	$25.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-154 	Failure to stop for school bus 	$50.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-221 	Highway intoxication (pedestrians) 	$65.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-6-12 	Violation of driver license restriction code 	$60.00 
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-6-51 	No state tag/expired tag 	$25.00 
 
(2)  City traffic offenses and fines: 
a.  Section 62-59; digging out ..... $25.00 
b.  Section 62-117; vehicle off truck route ..... 25.00 
(3)  Parking violations and fines: 
a.  Parking overtime ..... $2.00 
b.  If not paid within 72 hours ..... 4.00 
c.  Illegal extension of time ..... 5.00 
d.  Parking double ..... 2.00 
e.  Parking improperly ..... 5.00 
f.  Parking in prohibited zone ..... 5.00 
g.  Parking at fire hydrant ..... 25.00 
h.  Parking in handicapped zone ..... 80.00 
(b)  Magistrates may not accept pleas on traffic offenses if the defendant has been convicted of two or more traffic violations during the preceding 12 months. 
(c)  Additional court costs. Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-7.1, additional court costs in the amount equal to the court costs and fees levied in the district court for a similar case shall apply to traffic cases. This cost is in addition to all other court costs currently assessed as prescribed under state law or this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 8-12; Ord. of 2-21-1989; Ord. of 7-3-1990; Ord. No. 2011-017, 5-3-2011; Ord. No. 2017-015, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-017, adopted May 3, 2011, was not specifically amendatory. Inclusion as subsection (c) of this section was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 42-4. - Same—Nontraffic offenses. 
The city hereby establishes a schedule of fines for nontraffic offenses. In the event the defendant elects to plead guilty before a magistrate to any one of the offenses listed in the schedule, the fine established shall apply in the municipal court of the city. 
(1)  State nontraffic offenses and fines: 
a.  Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-29; criminal littering ..... $125.00 
b.  Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-9-13; worthless negotiable instrument ..... 125.00 
c.  Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-11; falsely reporting incident ..... 125.00 
(2)  City nontraffic offenses and fines: 
a.  Section 10-41; allowing dog to run at large ..... $50.00 
b.  Section 50-50; affray ..... 125.00 
c.  Section 46-59; littering generally ..... 125.00 
d.  Section 66-421; dumping garbage other than at a landfill ..... 125.00 
e.  Former section 6-1; transient dealers, merchants, peddlers and solicitors ..... 125.00 
f.  Former section 6-3; entering city to do business without a license (businesses only) ..... 125.00 
g.  Former section 6-5; engaging in business without a license ..... 125.00 
h.  Section 46-100; failure to remove abandoned vehicle ..... 125.00 
i.  Section 50-75; noise, types described ..... 125.00 
(3)  Additional court costs. Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-7.1, additional court costs in the amount equal to the court costs and fees levied in the district court for a similar case shall apply to non-traffic cases. This cost is in addition to all other court costs currently assessed as prescribed under state law or this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 8-13; Ord. of 2-21-1989; Ord. of 7-3-1990; Ord. No. 2011-017, 5-3-2011; Ord. No. 2017-015, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-017, adopted May 3, 2011, was not specifically amendatory. Inclusion as subsection (3) of this section was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 42-5. - Same—Incorporation of rule 20. 
In addition thereto, the schedule of fines established by rule 20 of the rules of judicial administration is hereby incorporated herein by reference as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1992, § 8-14; Ord. of 2-21-1989; Ord. of 7-3-1990)  
Chapter 46 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-117, 11-47-118, 11-47-140. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Exposed wells, pits, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or allow to be maintained upon any premises within the city, owned or controlled by such person, any exposed well, pit, hole or other excavation of like kind and character not covered or protected so as to prevent persons from falling into such well, pit, hole, or excavation. Such person shall be required to fill such well, pit, hole or excavation fully and in such a manner as to render it safe, or to fully and completely cover such hole, well, pit, or excavation with a concrete covering of a nature to render it safe. 
(Code 1971, § 12-24; Code 1992, § 11-8)  
Sec. 46-2. - Abandoned refrigerators, airtight containers, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, place or permit any discarded, abandoned or unused icebox or refrigerator or similar container of an airtight character, in any place where same is accessible to children, without first removing and rendering completely inoperable all automatic catches or locks on the exterior of all doors thereof, or remove the doors thereof, so as to prevent any child or other person from becoming imprisoned therein. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the delivery, transfer or removal of any such icebox, refrigerator or container from one location to another while in transit, provided such icebox, refrigerator or container shall not be left unattended for longer than 15 minutes at any one time, and shall be checked for the presence of children or other persons therein. 
(Code 1971, § 12-23; Code 1992, § 11-9)  
Sec. 46-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-018 , adopted Apr. 7, 2015, repealed § 46-3, which pertained to removal of growth or accumulation of weeds, rubbish, etc. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 46-4. - Keeping garbage and rubbish; inspection by county health officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge or control of any premises to keep, cause to be kept or allow the keeping on any premises of garbage, rubbish or other refuse in such a manner that it will become offensive or deleterious to health or likely to cause disease, and the same is hereby declared a public nuisance. The health officer of the county, such officer's authorized representatives, or such other duly authorized inspectors as may be designated by the city, are hereby authorized to inspect any premises for the purpose of enforcement of the requirements of this section, and it shall be unlawful for any person to resist or interfere with such representative by word, deed or act in the performance of such inspection. 
(Code 1971, § 9-5; Code 1992, § 11-40; Ord. of 9-1-1987)  
Sec. 46-5. - Accumulation of carrion, filth, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge or control of any premises to allow or permit any carrion, filth or any other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind to accumulate or remain thereon. 
(Code 1971, § 12-39; Code 1992, § 11-41)  
Sec. 46-6. - Stagnant water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge or control of any premises to allow or permit holes or places where water may accumulate and become stagnant to be or remain on such premises or to allow or permit the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit the same to remain thereon. 
(Code 1971, § 12-41; Code 1992, § 11-42)  
Secs. 46-7—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-117, 11-47-118, 11-47-140. 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Notice to owner to remedy. 
(a)  Whenever any condition, on or adjacent to any premises, prohibited by this chapter, is found to exist, the owner of such premises shall be notified by the city, in writing, to correct, remedy or remove the condition within ten days after mailing or delivering such notice and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with such notice. 
(b)  The notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be served personally on the owner to whom it is directed or shall be given by letter addressed to such owner at such owner's last known post office address. In the event personal service cannot be made and the owner's address is unknown, such notice shall be given by publication at least two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city. 
(Code 1971, §§ 12-42, 12-43; Code 1992, § 11-1)  
Sec. 46-32. - Remedying of conditions by city. 
In the event the owner of any lot or premises upon which a prohibited condition exists fails to correct, remedy or remove such condition within ten days after notice to do so is given as provided in section 46-31, the city may do such work or make such improvements as are necessary to correct, remedy or remove such condition, or cause the same to be done, and pay therefor and charge the expenses incurred thereby to the owner of such lot. Such expenses shall be assessed against the lot or real estate upon or adjacent to which the work was done or the improvements made. The doing of such work by the city shall not relieve such person from prosecution for failure to comply with such notice in violation of section 46-31. 
(Code 1971, § 12-44; Code 1992, § 11-2)  
Sec. 46-33. - Clearing of litter from open private property. 
The planning and development department is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the city, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by certified mail, with return receipt, and addressed to the owner at such owner's last known address as the same appears on the records in the office of the tax assessor of the county (i.e., legal title according to records in the office of the judge of probate of the county). The failure, neglect or refusal of any owner so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within 20 days after the mailing of the notice provided for in this section shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 11-3; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 21)  
Sec. 46-34. - Collection of expenses incurred. 
Whenever any work is done or improvements are made by the city under the provisions of section 46-32 or 46-33, the designated officer or employee on behalf of the city, shall file a statement of the expenses incurred thereby in the proper place to operate as notice of and be collected as a lien as provided by state law. Such statement shall give the amount of such expenses and the dates on which the work was done or the improvements were made. 
(Code 1971, § 12-45; Code 1992, § 11-4)  
Secs. 46-35—46-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal littering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-29. 
 
Sec. 46-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized private receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in the ordinances of the city. 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order, provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Handbill means a commercial or noncommercial handbill as defined in this section. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste material that, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States postal service in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Private premises means any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for any private use, as opposed to a public place, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
Public place means any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other pubic way or any public park, square, space, ground, or building. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1992, § 11-20; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 2)  
Sec. 46-58. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished on a first offense a minimum fine of $200.00 and shall serve community service, as ordered by the judge of the municipal court, to pick up litter on public rights-of-way. The maximum fine to be imposed for any subsequent conviction shall be $500.00 and community service as determined by the court. 
(Ord. No. 99-008, 3-16-1999)  
Sec. 46-59. - In public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city landfills. 
(Code 1971, §§ 9-12, 9-20; Code 1992, § 11-21; Ord. No. 273, 9-4-1979; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 3)  
Sec. 46-60. - On vacant lots. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Code 1992, § 11-22; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 20)  
Sec. 46-61. - On occupied private property. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Code 1992, § 11-23; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 18)  
Sec. 46-62. - Placement in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
Persons shall place litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1971, § 9-12; Code 1992, § 11-24; Ord. No. 273, 9-4-1979; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 4)  
Sec. 46-63. - Sweeping into gutters. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Code 1992, § 11-25; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 5)  
Sec. 46-64. - Places of business to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Code 1971, § 9-19; Code 1992, § 11-26; Ord. No. 273, 9-4-1979; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 6)  
Sec. 46-65. - Owners, employees, etc., of drive-in establishments to prevent accumulation of rubbish on premises or in the street. 
The owners, operators, lessees and employees of all businesses engaged in on-premises or off-premises services and anyone who makes deliveries of goods to customers in parking areas adjacent to the streets of the city, shall prevent wrappings, containers and other papers which enclose or accompany such foods from being thrown or deposited or allowed to blow upon the premises of such businesses, the streets of the city or any other premises, and if any wrapping, container, napkin, straw or other accompanying paper or trash shall accidentally fall or blow upon the streets of the city, the premises of the business or any other premises, the owners, operators, lessees, and employees of such establishment engaged in such services shall be jointly and severally responsible with the customers thereof for the immediate removal of such wrapping, container, napkin, straw or accompanying paper or trash. 
(Code 1971, § 9-3; Code 1992, § 11-27; Ord. of 9-1-1987)  
Sec. 46-66. - Prohibited; depositing garbage in streams, sewers, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, or deposit or cause to be swept, thrown or deposited into or on any canal, stream, public water drain, sewer or receiving basin any garbage, rubbish or other refuse or to permit the same to accumulate in such manner that it may be carried and deposited into or on any of the above by action of rain, wind and snow. 
(Code 1971, § 9-13; Code 1992, § 11-28; Ord. No. 273, 9-4-1979)  
Sec. 46-67. - Littering prohibited—In parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Code 1992, § 11-29; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 9)  
Sec. 46-68. - Same—In lakes and fountains. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Code 1992, § 11-30; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 10)  
Sec. 46-69. - Same—Thrown from vehicles. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private property. 
(Code 1992, § 11-31; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 7)  
Sec. 46-70. - Prohibited—Truck loads causing litter. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Code 1992, § 11-32; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 8)  
Sec. 46-71. - Same—Dropping litter from aircraft, helicopter or balloon. 
No person in any aircraft, helicopter or balloon shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Code 1992, § 11-33; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 16)  
Sec. 46-72. - Prohibited; handbills—Throwing or distributing in public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city; nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute any handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Code 1992, § 11-34; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 11)  
Sec. 46-73. - Same—Placing on vehicles. 
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle, except in a manner that will prevent it from being blown about or scattered by the elements. 
(Code 1992, § 11-35; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 12)  
Sec. 46-74. - Same—Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises that are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1992, § 11-36; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 13)  
Sec. 46-75. - Same—Distribution where properly posted. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Solicitors," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Code 1992, § 11-37; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 14)  
Sec. 46-76. - Same—Distributing at inhabited private premises. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this article, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. 
(b)  Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1992, § 11-38; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 15)  
Sec. 46-77. - Posting notices. 
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Code 1992, § 11-39; Ord. of 4-19-1983(2), § 17)  
Secs. 46-78—46-97. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 46-98. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Property means any real property which is not a street or highway. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides, and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. The term "vehicle" includes any boat or vehicle designed to be used on waterways, lakes, rivers, or any other large body of water. The term "vehicle" refers to a vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated, which includes one that does not have an attached current tag. 
(Code 1992, § 11-50; Ord. of 6-1-1993; Ord. No. 95-14, 6-6-1995)  
Sec. 46-99. - Maximum time on streets. 
No person shall abandon any vehicle. It shall be presumed that any vehicle that has been left at any place on a street or highway within the city for a period of 72 hours consecutively is an abandoned vehicle. 
(Code 1992, § 11-51)  
Sec. 46-100. - Leaving wrecked, nonoperating vehicle on street. 
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. 
(Code 1992, § 11-52)  
Sec. 46-101. - Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles on property; exceptions. 
No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than seven days; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for a time longer than seven days; except that this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city, or to vehicles in a duly licensed junkyard. 
(Code 1992, § 11-53)  
Sec. 46-102. - Impounding. 
The chief of police or any member of the police department designated by the chief is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this article or lost, stolen, or unclaimed. Any vehicle so taken up and removed shall be stored in a suitable place provided by the city to protect it from deterioration. A permanent record giving the date of the taking of each vehicle shall be kept by the chief of police. 
(Code 1992, § 11-54)  
Sec. 46-103. - Reclamation by owner. 
The owner of any abandoned vehicle removed by the police department as provided in section 46-102 may regain possession thereof from the city by making application therefor within two months after its receipt by the city upon paying to the city all reasonable costs of removal, which shall be repaid to the person who paid or incurred such charges, plus an additional charge of $25.00 for storage charges of the vehicle while in possession of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 12-59; Code 1992, § 11-55)  
Sec. 46-104. - Sale of unclaimed vehicles; disposition of proceeds. 
If no claim for the abandoned vehicle is made within two months after it is received by the city, the city may sell the vehicle for the best price obtainable as junk or otherwise, as provided in Code of Ala. 1975, title 32, ch. 13 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-1 et seq.). The proceeds shall be available to pay the reasonable charges of delivering the same to the city if a claim therefor is made by the person who paid the charges and the expense of keeping and disposing of the vehicle; any balance shall be held and disposed of as provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-7. 
(Code 1971, § 12-60; Code 1992, § 11-56)  
Sec. 46-105. - Liability for damage following removal. 
Neither the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises from which any abandoned vehicle shall be removed under the provisions of this article, or any servant or agent thereof, or the city, shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle while being removed, or while in the possession of the city, or as a result of any subsequent sale or other disposition. 
(Code 1971, § 12-61; Code 1992, § 11-57)  
Secs. 46-106—46-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WEED CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-111. - Purpose of article. 
In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this article is to prohibit and order the abatement of certain public nuisances within the city which are defined by this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-018 , 4-7-2015)  
Sec. 46-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Excluded properties means those properties which are in a heavily wooded area, areas in their natural state (i.e., not previously developed in any manner), property under current construction and farm properties. A lot or premises of more than five acres, including subdivisions in which no lots have been sold or occupied, shall be considered farm property and exempt from cutting or mowing; except that each such designated farm property, when such property is not under cultivation for useful purposes, shall be required to maintain an area of 50 feet from the abutting property lines of abutting residential or business property, and 50 feet from the street front, which area shall be in compliance with this article. 
Owner or owners of property means the legal titleholder, lessee, occupant of property, agent of the legal titleholder or lessee, person in charge, possession or control of such property. 
Private property means real property owned by any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company, firm, trust, corporation, business or any entity recognized by law. 
Public nuisance means any growth of weeds, wild bushes, grass or other vegetative growth which exceeds 12 inches in height and which is injurious to the general public health, safety and welfare by providing breeding grounds and shelter for rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes and other vermin, insects and pests; which obtains such heights and dryness so as to constitute serious fire threats or hazards; which bear wingy or downy seeds, when mature, that cause the spread of weeds and, when breathed, irritation to the throat, lungs and eyes of the public; which hides debris, such as broken glass or metal, which could inflict injury on any person going upon the property; or which is unsightly. 
Vacant lots means any area of land that either has no structure upon it or has an unoccupied structure, whether that unoccupied structure is business or residential, upon the premises. A vacant lot will encompass adjoining and/or included easements, ditches and alleyways. 
( Ord. No. 2015-018 , 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 2018-003, 3-6-2018 )  
Sec. 46-113. - Removal of growth or accumulation of weeds, rubbish, etc. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, proprietor or person in charge or control of any premises to keep the same, together with the adjacent sidewalk, clean and free from rubbish, waste and offensive materials or substances; when such premises is not under cultivation for useful and productive purposes, to keep the same free from weeds, brush or other vegetation growth. 
(b)  It shall further be the duty of the owner, proprietor or person in charge or control of any premises to cut or mow the weeds, brush and other vegetation growth and grass thereon to a height of not more than 12 inches. 
(c)  A lot or premises of more than five acres, including subdivisions in which no lots have been sold or occupied, shall be considered farm property and exempt from cutting or mowing; except that each such designated farm property, when such property is not under cultivation for useful purposes, shall be required to maintain an area of 50 feet from the abutting property lines of abutting residential or business property, and 50 feet from the street front, which area shall be in compliance with this article. 
(d)  Whenever any such premises in the city is not being maintained in the condition required by this article, such lot, place or premises may be declared to be a public nuisance and abated with the provisions of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. Private property in violation of this article is a public nuisance and will be dealt with by the city pursuant to the provision of this article and Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-67-60 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 2015-018 , 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 2018-003, 3-6-2018 )  
Sec. 46-114. - Notification and enforcement. 
(a)  Nuisance declaration. All weeds, wild bushes, grass or other vegetable growth located upon the streets, sidewalks or upon private property in the city which bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature or which attain such growth of 12 inches or taller which becomes a fire menace when dry or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous may be declared a public nuisance by the council and, thereafter, abated as provided in this section. 
(b)  Nuisance resolution. Whenever any such weeds are growing upon any street, sidewalk or private property, the city council may, by resolution, declare the weeds to be a public nuisance and order its abatement. Such resolution shall refer to the street by the name under which it is commonly known, describe the property upon which or in front of which the nuisance exists by giving a legal description thereto, and no other description of the property shall be required. Any number of streets, sidewalks or parcels of private property may be included in one and the same resolution. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. After passage of such resolution, notice of a public hearing on the matter shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested, mailed 21 days prior to the date of the hearing and shall inform the owner of the time, date and place of the hearing and the reason therefor. The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property as the property appears on record in the tax assessor's office for the county. All notices shall carry a list of names of persons and/or private contractors who perform such work and are registered with the city clerk. Such names shall not constitute a recommendation, and the failure to include such a list shall in no way affect the operation of this article. Notice shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the municipality once a week for two consecutive weeks. In addition thereto, two signs shall be conspicuously posted on the property. The wording of such signs shall not be less than one inch in height and shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS 
Notice is hereby given that on the _____ day of _______________, 20___, at _________ a.m./p.m. in the council chambers, the council of the City of Prattville will consider a resolution regarding the weeds growing upon or in front of the property on ____________ Street in the City of Prattville and more particularly described in said resolution, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk; and at that time and place will determine whether the weeds constitute a public nuisance which shall be abated by the removal of the noxious or dangerous weeds; and, if so, will order the abatement and removal of the nuisance. If abatement and removal are ordered, the cost of abatement and removal shall be assessed upon the lots and lands from which or in front of which such weeds are removed, and the cost shall be added to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and lands for municipal purposes. The costs shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected. The costs shall be subject to the same councils and fees and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
If no objections are filed with the city clerk at least five days before the meeting of the council, and unless such person appears before the council in person or through his/her representative to show cause, if any, why his/her objection should be sustained, it shall be presumed that the person accepts the notice as fact and waives any rights he/she may have to contest the removal of the weeds and the action of the council shall be final unless good and sufficient cause can be otherwise shown. 
Reference is hereby made to the resolution, on file in the office of the city clerk, for further particulars. 
Dated this ____day of _______________, 20___. 
City of Prattville, Alabama 
City Clerk 
The notice shall be posted at least seven days prior to the time for hearing objections by the city council. 
(d)  Objections. If objections are filed at the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider all evidence, objections and protests regarding the proposed removal of weeds. The council may continue the hearing from time to time. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the council, by resolution, shall decide whether a public nuisance exists and, if so, shall order it to be removed or abated with respect to any property or part of such property described. The council by passage of such resolution shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and either to perform or have performed the work of removal or abatement with respect to such property or part of such property. The decision of the council on the matter shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
(e)  Abatement. After the council passes the resolution finding the conditions of the property to be a nuisance and ordering its abatement, all employees and duly authorized agents of the city are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property to abate the nuisance. The city council may authorize private contractors, companies, corporations, enterprises or individuals to abate and remove the nuisance. The council, by resolution, shall designate the contractors, companies, corporations, enterprises or individuals who may perform the work. Those persons so designated are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for purposes of abating or removing the nuisance. For purposes of this article, compliance with the competitive bid law is not required. Any property owner shall have the right to have such weeds removed at his own expense providing that the removal is done prior to the commencing of the work by the employees or agents of the city to remove such weeds. 
( Ord. No. 2015-018 , 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 2018-003, 3-6-2018 )  
Sec. 46-115. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Report of costs. The city shall keep an account of the costs of abating or removing the nuisance in front of or on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done by it or its employees, or by a duly authorized private contractor, company, corporation, enterprise or individual, and shall render an itemized report in writing to the council showing the cost of removing the nuisance on each separate lot, or in front of the lot. Before the report is submitted to the council, a copy of the report shall be posted for at least five days prior thereto on or near the chamber door of the council, together with a notice of the time when the report shall be submitted to the council for confirmation. 
(b)  At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the council shall hear the report, together with any objections which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating the nuisance and, thereupon, make such modifications in the report as deemed necessary after which by resolution the report shall be confirmed. The amounts of the cost for abating such nuisance in front of or upon the various parcels of land mentioned in the report shall hereinafter be referred to as "weed liens" and shall constitute a weed lien on the property for the amount of the weed liens, respectively. After confirmation of the reports, a copy shall be given to the county revenue commissioner who, under the "Optional Method of Taxation," is charged with the collection of the city's municipal taxes pursuant to Article 1, Division 2, Chapter 51, of Title 11, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. It shall be the duty of the county revenue commissioner to add the amounts of the respective weed liens to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land. Thereafter, such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency. 
( Ord. No. 2015-018 , 4-7-2015)  
Secs. 46-116—46-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WEED CONTROL REPEAT OFFENDERS 
 
Sec. 46-121. - Notification and enforcement. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-67-68, as amended, when a public nuisance exists that was previously abated or on which abatement has been attempted through the process of posting notice on the property in accordance with the provisions of Article I of this chapter, the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located shall remove all weeds, wild bushes, grass or other vegetative growth located upon the streets, sidewalks or upon private property in the city which bears seeds of a wingy or downy nature, or which attain a growth height of 12 inches or taller, or which becomes a fire menace when dry, or which provide habitat to rats, snakes or other disease vectors, or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous. The code enforcement officer may declare the condition to be a reoccurring public nuisance, for the purposes of abatement, and the code enforcement officer's declaration shall be final. 
(b)  When the code enforcement officer does so declare the reoccurring condition to be a nuisance, the city may take such actions as are necessary to abate the nuisance without first adhering to the procedures set out in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-67-60 et seq., as amended, including without a resolution by the council declaring the condition to be a public nuisance, without posting notice, without the council hearing objections, and without an order from the council for abatement. All necessary employees of the city and its contractors and designees are expressly authorized to enter upon such properties as are necessary to abate the nuisance. 
(c)  Before the city may abate the nuisance, however, the code enforcement officer shall send the owners of the property written notice by regular United States mail no less than ten calendar days before the city acts to abate the nuisance. The notice shall (1) inform the owners that the code enforcement officer has declared the property present a nuisance; (2) inform the owners that the city has previously abated such a nuisance, or it has attempted to abate such a nuisance, on the property; (3) inform the owners that the reasonable costs of the abatement shall be assessed and collected as a special assessment and lien against the property; (4) inform the owners that they may have any nuisance removed at their own expense prior to the arrival of the employees, contractors, or designees assigned by the city to abate the nuisance; and (5) inform the owners that no further notices will be sent by the city for the remainder of the growing season. 
( Ord. No. 2015-018 , 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 2018-003, 3-6-2018 )  
Sec. 46-122. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  When properties that have required repeated maintenance of noxious and overgrown grass and weeds are abated by the city, as set forth in this article, city shall keep an account of the costs of abating or removing the nuisance in front of or on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done by it or its employees, or by a duly authorized private contractor, company, corporation, enterprise or individual, and shall render an itemized report in writing to the council showing the cost of removing the nuisance on each separate lot, or in front of the lot. Before the report is submitted to the council, a copy of the report shall be posted for at least five days prior thereto on or near the chamber door of the council, together with a notice of the time when the report shall be submitted to the council for confirmation. 
(b)  At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the council shall hear the report, together with any objections which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating the nuisance and, thereupon, make such modifications in the report as deemed necessary after which by resolution the report shall be confirmed. The amounts of the cost for abating such nuisance in front of or upon the various parcels of land mentioned in the report shall hereinafter be referred to as "weed liens" and shall constitute a weed lien on the property for the amount of the weed liens, respectively. After confirmation of the reports, a copy shall be given to the county revenue commissioner who, under the "Optional Method of Taxation," is charged with the collection of the city's municipal taxes pursuant to Article 1, Division 2, Chapter 51, of Title 11, Code of Ala. 1975, as amended. It shall be the duty of the county revenue commissioner to add the amounts of the respective weed liens to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land. Thereafter, such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency. 
( Ord. No. 2015-018 , 4-7-2015)  
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Adoption of state offenses. 
(a)  Any person committing an offense which is declared by a law of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a misdemeanor, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  Any person committing an offense which is declared by a law of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(c)  Any person committing an offense as defined by Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2, which offense is not declared by a law of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a felony, misdemeanor or violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(d)  Any person found to be in violation of subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(e)  Any person found to be in violation of this section for the commission of an offense as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191 shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191. 
(Code 1971, § 12-1; Code 1992, § 14-1; Ord. of 9-6-1983(1), §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 2002-027, §§ 1—5, 11-5-2002)  
Sec. 50-2. - Posting advertisements, notices, etc. 
No person, whether a licensed bill poster or not, shall paste, post, paint, print or in any way fasten any handbill, sign, notice or advertisement of any kind or character, on any curb, sidewalk or street, or any part thereof, or upon any tree, post, pole, hydrant, bridge or any structure within the limits of any street in the city, and no person shall paste, post, paint, print or in any way fasten any handbill, sign, notice or advertisement of any kind or character upon any private wall, window, door, gate, fence, advertising board or upon any other private structure or building, unless such person is the owner or otherwise legally in possession thereof, without the consent of the owner or the owner's authorized agent, in writing. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to the posting of legal notices by public officers and attorneys in the manner and places prescribed by law, nor to the circulation and distribution by any merchant of advertisement of such person's own private business or of articles for sale exclusively by such merchant. 
(Code 1971, § 12-7; Code 1992, § 14-2)  
Sec. 50-3. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor 17 years of age or younger to be in any public place between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency. In this subsection the term "emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life; 
(6)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(7)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(8)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
(c)  It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child to allow such child to violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 12-10; Code 1992, § 14-3)  
Sec. 50-4. - Utility lines not to interfere with trees. 
Telegraph, electric, telephone or other utility lines shall be erected and maintained so that the same will not come in contact with any trees of the city, either by elevating the wires above the trees, encasing the wires inside a cable, or by placing the wires underground. No trees shall be cut, trimmed, or otherwise defaced in order to erect or maintain any such lines except as otherwise provided in section 58-29. 
(Code 1971, § 12-26; Code 1992, § 14-7)  
Secs. 50-5—50-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 
 
Sec. 50-27. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  Except for law enforcement officers in the discharge of their duties and persons exercising the legal right of self-defense or defense of others, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, any firearm within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any defendant charged with violation of this section may present as an absolute defense thereto proof of ownership or permission from the owner of the land upon which said firearm was discharged and provided that said land was a parcel of more than one contiguous parcel of 50 acres or more of undeveloped property. 
(Code 1971, § 12-18; Code 1992, § 14-4; Ord. of 9-7-1993(3); Ord. No. 98-026, 10-6-1998)  
Sec. 50-28. - Discharging pellet or other guns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any pellet gun. This subsection shall not apply to those types of pellet guns commonly called BB guns, which before firing can only be cocked or pumped one time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any paintball gun or rifle or weapons that use carbon dioxide as a propellant. 
(Code 1971, § 12-29; Code 1992, § 14-5)  
Sec. 50-29. - Use of bows, arrows, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge in or upon any street, alley, public grounds, or parks within the city any bow, crossbow, spear gun, or similar device which is calculated or intended to propel or project an arrow or other projectile, or to shoot or discharge such weapon in or upon any private grounds or building where the projectile propelled or discharged by the use of such bow or similar device endangers the life, limb, or property of another, or will traverse any part of any street, alley, public grounds or parks. Nothing provided herein or elsewhere by ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the shooting with or discharging of bows or implements used in the practice of archery or implements for propelling arrows in or upon city parks and recreation areas as may be set aside and designated for that purpose by proper authority of the city having jurisdiction and control over such public areas, or in or upon private archery ranges constructed and maintained in such a manner as not to endanger life, limb, or property. No bow shall be drawn with an arrow or projectile notched therein and pointed in any direction other than at a target or at the ground not more than 15 feet from the archer. No target shall be of a thickness whereby an arrow, when released or discharged from the archers bow, shall pass through the target. No archer shall discharge an arrow or projectile from his bow when another human being is within 45 degrees from the archer's position left or right of a line drawn from the center of the target to the archer. 
(Ord. No. 95-029, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-1995)  
Sec. 50-30. - Electrical fences. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain on any premises in any area zoned for residential purposes an electrical or charged fence wherein the exterior of such fence is not protected from contact with people, children and animals. 
(Code 1992, § 11-10; Ord. of 12-15-1987)  
Secs. 50-31—50-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-49. - Drinking, open possession of or attempt to drink, sell, etc., liquors, wines or malt brewed beverages in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, to have in open or unconcealed possession or custody, for drinking, selling, serving, dispensing, or to give away, or to attempt to drink, sell, serve, dispense or give away any liquor, wine or malt or brewed beverages, while upon any street, avenue or alley, or in any public building or upon any public property, or while in any other public place. As used in this section, the term "public place" means and includes any place or gathering which the public generally attends or is admitted to either by invitation, common consent or right, or by payment of an admission or other charge, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, shall include any theater or other place of amusement and any athletic contest; provided that such term "public place" shall not mean or include premises which have been duly licensed by the city for sale thereon of such beverages, the Doster Memorial Community Center, or the Prattville Senior Citizens Center, provided that proper application has been made ten days prior to the event to the mayor and the mayor has issued a permit. 
(b)  This section does not apply to possession of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles. 
(Code 1971, § 3-1; Code 1992, § 3-1; Ord. of 4-15-1986; Ord. No. 95-009, 4-18-1995) 
State Law reference— Possession of open containers of alcohol in motor vehicles, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-220.  
Sec. 50-50. - Affray. 
All persons who shall willingly engage or participate in fighting, quarreling in a loud and angry manner, or who shall attempt to engage in or participate in fighting and quarreling in a loud and angry manner shall be considered participants in an affray and shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 12-11; Code 1992, § 14-13) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-7.  
Secs. 50-51—50-73. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NOISE 
 
Sec. 50-74. - Loud and unnecessary noises—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable people, within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 13-1; Code 1992, § 11-5)  
Sec. 50-75. - Same—Acts enumerated; exemptions. 
(a)  Acts enumerated. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Code, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or any other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creating by means of any signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; or the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio or television receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the purpose of producing or reproducing sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with more volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird that by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(6)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat or any other motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(8)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading of a vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(9)  Construction or repairing of building. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety and then only with a permit from the planning and development director, which permit may be granted for a period of not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the director should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if such director shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would not result to any party in interest, such director may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(10)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, court or church, while any of the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(11)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of wares, ringing bells or use of other noise-making devices by peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Drums, loudspeakers, etc. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise is hereby declared to be unlawful unless such performance, show, sale or display has on display, and available for inspection, a permit issued by the chief of police, which permit may be issued by the chief of police upon application, exhibition and demonstration of the device to be used for the creation of the noise, and the payment of an application or permit fee of $10.00 which permit may be issued if the demonstration or exhibition does not create a disturbance in its use for its intended purpose. 
(13)  Metal rails, pillars and columns, transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along the streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, or trucks, which in any way disturbs the peace and quiet of persons in such streets or public places. 
(14)  Railroads, operation thereof. The causing, permitting or continuing of any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a railroad locomotive or cars. 
(15)  Piledrivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of the operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(17)  Pickup, delivery of waste containers. The pickup or delivery of solid waste and construction waste containers or the pickup of waste collected in said containers other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except on those properties classified as B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, O-1, M-1 or M-2 in appendix A, Zoning. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations: 
(1)  Safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief valves. Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles. Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in the time of an emergency. 
(3)  Permitted disturbances. Any other noise resulting from activities of temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the city in accordance with its ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1971, §§ 13-2—13-13; Code 1992, § 11-6; Ord. of 6-1-1993; Ord. No. 2005-023, 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 50-76. - Same—Tests and standards. 
(a)  Factors to consider. The standards that shall be considered in determining whether a violation of sections 50-74 and 50-75 exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Volume. Volume of the noise. 
(2)  Intensity. Intensity of the noise. 
(3)  Usual or unusual. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual. 
(4)  Natural or unnatural. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural. 
(5)  Background noise. Volume and intensity of the background noise, if any. 
(6)  Proximity. Proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities. 
(7)  Nature of area. Nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(8)  Density of area. Density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(9)  Time. Time of the day or night the noise occurs. 
(10)  Duration. Duration of the noise. 
(11)  Frequency. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant. 
(12)  Commercial or noncommercial. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(b)  Tables. 
(1)  Table I. 
LIMITING NOISE LEVELS FOR USE DISTRICTS 
Octave band center frequency cycles per second 	Maximum permissible sound pressure (levels in decibels re: 0.0002 microbars) 
	Use District 
	Residential 	Commercial 	Manufacturing 
Below 75 	65 	79 	80 
75 to 150 	60 	74 	75 
150 to 300 	55 	66 	70 
300 to 600 	55 	59 	64 
600 to 1200 	45 	53 	58 
1200 to 2400 	45 	47 	53 
2400 to 4800 	40 	41 	49 
Above 4800 	40 	39 	46 
 
If the noise is not smooth and continuous, one or more of the corrections in table II in subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in table I of this subsection. 
(2)  Table II. 
TYPE OF OPERATION IN CHARACTER OF NOISE 
(Correction in decibels) 
Noise source operated less than 20 percent of any one-hour period 	plus five* 
Noise source operated less than five percent of any one-hour period 	plus ten* 
Noise source operated less than one percent of any one-hour period 	plus 15* 
Noise of impulsive character (e.g., hammering) 	minus five 
Noise of periodic character (e.g., hum, screech) 	minus five 
 
*Apply one of these corrections only 
If the noise occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or holidays, seven shall be subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in table I of subsection (b)(1) of this section. It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle within the city limits which creates a noise or sound which exceeds the noise level limits set out in table III of subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(3)  Table III. 
LIMITING NOISE LEVELS FROM VEHICLES 
	Maximum distance 	dB(A) 
Trucks and buses 		
—Over 10,000 pounds 	50 feet 	97 
	25 feet 	93 
—Under 10,000 pounds 	50 feet 	80 
	25 feet 	86 
Passenger cars 	50 feet 	78 
	25 feet 	84 
Motorcycles, including other vehicles 	50 feet 	87 
	25 feet 	93 
 
(Code 1971, § 12-5; Code 1992, § 11-7)  
Secs. 50-77—50-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 
 
Sec. 50-96. - Prostitution. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to: 
(1)  Engage in prostitution. 
(2)  Aid or abet prostitution, or frequent the company of prostitutes. 
(3)  Procure or solicit for purposes of prostitution. 
(4)  Keep or set up house of ill fame, brothel or bawdy house. 
(5)  Receive any person for purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution into any vehicle, conveyance, place, structure or building. 
(6)  Permit any person to remain for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution in any vehicle, conveyance, place, structure or building. 
(7)  Lease or rent, or contract to lease or rent, any vehicle, conveyance, place, structure or building or part thereof, knowing or with good reason to know that it is intended to be used for any purpose herein prohibited. 
(8)  Attempt to do any of the acts prohibited by this section. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager or any hotel, boardinghouse, lodginghouse, motel or any other place wherein rooms are for hire to employ any person who has been convicted under this section. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to lease, let or rent any house, room, apartment or other quarters to any person for any immoral purposes. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall be punished as a class A misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 99-002, 1-19-1999) 
State Law reference— Prostitution, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-12-110 et seq.  
Sec. 50-97. - Service by persons of opposite sex prohibited in massage salons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon, bath parlor, etc., where any physical contact with the recipient of such service is provided by a person of the opposite sex, unless said massage therapist shall be certified or licensed by an accredited school or have 500 hours of instruction and/or course work under a licensed massage therapist. In the event the state or any of its subdivisions shall issue a license for engaging in the business of massage therapy or practicing massage therapy, as stated above, said license shall be required. Any certified or licensed massage therapist, as stated above, shall not be permitted sexual contact with any patron or customer. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be possessed or consumed on the premises. Each massage therapist shall be fully clothed at all times while on duty in said business. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8, and in addition to such penalty, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to revoke the license of the owner or manager of the establishment, wherein the provisions of this section shall have been violated. 
(Code 1971, § 12-31; Code 1992, § 14-8; Ord. No. 95-041, 12-5-1995)  
Sec. 50-98. - Inhalation of model glue, solvents, etc. 
(a)  Inhalation of fumes. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any type of model glue, paint, paint thinner, petroleum distillates or byproduct, or to induce any other person to do so, for the purpose of causing a condition of or inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system, or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(b)  Possession, buying, selling. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally possess, buy, sell or otherwise transfer any type of model glue, paint, paint thinner, petroleum distillates or byproducts for the purpose of violating this section or inducing or aiding any other person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Definition. The term "inhalant", as used in this section, shall mean any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of model airplanes, boats and automobiles, or any similar substance which contains one or more of the following volatile solvents: 
(1)  Acetone; 
(2)  Amylacetate; 
(3)  Benzol or benzene; 
(4)  Butyl acetate; 
(5)  Butyl alcohol; 
(6)  Carbon tetrachloride; 
(7)  Chloroform; 
(8)  Cyclohexanone; 
(9)  Ethanol or ethyl alcohol; 
(10)  Ethyl acetate; 
(11)  Hexane; 
(12)  Isopropanol or isopropyl alcohol; 
(13)  Isopropyl acetate; 
(14)  Methyl "cellosolve" acetate; 
(15)  Methyl ethyl ketone; 
(16)  Methyl isobutyl ketone; 
(17)  Toluol or toluene; 
(18)  Trichloroethylene. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1993(3))  
Secs. 50-99—50-124. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 50-125. - Impersonating state or city officer. 
Any person who falsely assumes or represents such person's self to be an officer of the state or city, or attempts, without legal authority, to exercise any of the authority of such officer, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 12-20; Code 1992, § 14-6) 
State Law reference— Impersonating public servant, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-10; impersonating peace officer, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-11.  
Sec. 50-126. - False alarms and reports. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of fire or catastrophe. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of explosion or impending danger of explosion. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of the need for police protection, assistance or investigation, or any false report to the police department. 
(d)  No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of the need for an ambulance or medical assistance. 
(Code 1992, § 14-12) 
State Law reference— False alarms and reports, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-8 et seq.  
Chapter 51 - PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-052, adopted Nov. 19, 2013 , set out provisions intended for use as §§ 51-1—51-26. To preserve the style of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 51-21—51-45. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 51-1—51-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 51-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Breach of peace means any act causing fear or intimidation to include, but not limited to, displaying a pistol in any manner not in accordance with state law, shouting inappropriately, fighting, taking photographs of minor children without the consent of parents and with deviant motivations, or any other act that may enrage the senses of a reasonable person. 
Boisterous conduct means any noisy or rowdy behavior. 
Director means the director of the parks and recreation department of the city, who is the person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities, and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste material that, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other area in the city owned, leased, dedicated, or devoted to the city for active or passive recreation. This shall include the area known as the Autauga Creek Walk. 
Refuse means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or electric personal assistive mobility devices; provided, that for the purposes of this title, a bicycle or a ridden animal shall be deemed a vehicle, except those provisions of this article, which by their very nature can have no application. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-22. - Authority to eject violators of article provisions. 
(a)  The parks and recreation director, police officers or park attendants shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this article. 
(b)  For the first offense, the violator shall be ejected from the park for a minimum of 72 hours. For the second offense, the violator shall be ejected from the park for a minimum of 30 days. For the third offense, the violator shall be permanently trespassed from the park. 
(c)  If the violator commits any criminal act, including, but not limited to vandalism, the violator shall be permanently trespassed from the park on the first offense. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 ; Ord. No. 2017-018, 11-7-2017 )  
Sec. 51-23. - Permits. 
(a)  When required. A permit shall be obtained from the director prior to the use of designated pavilions, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, Stanley Jensen Stadium, and other buildings or areas designated by the director. 
(b)  Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit under this section shall file an application with the director. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if any; 
(3)  The day and hours for which the permit is desired; 
(4)  The park or portion thereof for which such a permit is desired; 
(5)  An estimate of the anticipated attendance; and 
(6)  Any other information which the director shall find reasonably necessary to make a determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(c)  Standards for issuance. The director shall issue a permit when it is found that: 
(1)  The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park; 
(2)  The proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
(3)  The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city; and 
(5)  The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the date and hour required in the application. 
(d)  Denial and appeal. If the director disapproves the application for a permit, the director shall mail by certified mail a notice of such action to the applicant within five business days after the date upon which the permit application was filed. Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit shall have the right to appeal the denial to the city council. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within two business days after receipt of notice that the application has been denied. The city council shall act upon the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(e)  Effect. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in such permits. 
(f)  Liability of permittee. The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(g)  Revocation. The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown. 
(h)  Exhibition. No person who claims to have a permit shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the director upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the permit for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. The permit shall be posted in a manner designated by the director. If no place is designated to post a permit, the person in charge of the event shall be in possession of the permit and shall be present at all times during the event. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-24. - Hours. 
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public information. The director may establish the hours that a park is opened and closed. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-25. - Damaging, disfiguring, defacing, or tampering with buildings and facilities. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities, parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex. This section shall not apply to any licensed caregiver in the performance of care of a disabled person. 
(3)  Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands. This section shall not apply if a permit has been granted pursuant to section 51-23. 
(4)  Climb, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-26. - Injury or removal of natural resources. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, downed timber or other wood or materials or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
(2)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, nor shall any person attach any rope, wire, cable or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(3)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-27. - Refuse and trash generally. 
No person in a park shall have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-28. - Fires. 
No person in a park shall build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the director. Such regulations should be designed to preserve public safety and prevent the start of fires. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper or other flammable material within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-29. - Disturbance of the peace generally. 
No person in a park shall disturb the peace of others by violent, profane, indecent, offensive or boisterous conduct or language or by conduct that is a breach of the peace. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-30. - Disturbing permitted activities. 
No person in a park shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-31. - Merchandising. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the director. 
(2)  Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
(3)  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever, on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-32. - Soliciting contributions. 
No person in a park shall solicit money or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-33. - Closed areas. 
(a)  Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, daily or otherwise, and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find reasonably necessary. 
(b)  No person shall enter an area posted as "closed to the public," nor shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-34. - Bathing and swimming. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in this section or may be hereafter adopted, nor shall any person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing or congregate thereat when such activity is prohibited by the director upon a finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable. 
(2)  Frequent any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing or congregating, except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the director for such purposes for each individual area. 
(3)  Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind, unless there shall be an unobstructed view into such tent, shelter or structure from at least two sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension or exterior brace or support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any other structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-35. - Boating. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated for boating by the director. Such activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are adopted. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-36. - Fishing. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Engage in commercial fishing or the buying or selling of fish caught in any waters. 
(2)  Fish in any waters, whether by the use of hook-and-line, net, trap or other device, except in waters designated by the director for that use and under such regulations and restrictions as have been or may be prescribed by the director. 
(3)  Fish from any pier, boat dock or boat ramp. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-37. - Camping. 
No person in a park shall use camp trailers, camp wagons, tents or other type of camping equipment in areas other than those designated by the director as camping areas. All groups must be under adequate supervision. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-38. - Generally. 
No person in a park shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this division and other ordinances. 
The director shall have the authority to establish rules and hours of operation for the parks and shall post a sign of such rules and hours of operations at the entrance of every park. 
No person shall possess, on or about his/her person, any firearm, whether or not it is concealed, at any sports complex or sporting event. This section shall not apply to law enforcement personnel whether or not they are actively on duty. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-39. - Enforcement. 
The chief of police or his/her designee or the director or his/her designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-40. - Confinement of operation to roads. 
No person in a park shall drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas or such other areas as may on occasion be specially designated as temporary parking areas or drives by the director. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-41. - Signs. 
No person in a park shall fail to observe all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for proper control to safeguard life and property. 
The director may authorize signs to be placed in any park and shall not be subject to the requirements of Article 12 of Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-42. - Speed. 
No person in a park shall ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles an hour, except upon such roads as the director may designate, by posted sign, for speedier travel. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-43. - Parking. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Park a vehicle other than in an established or designated parking area. Such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions and with the instructions of any police or park attendant who may be present. 
(2)  Park on the road or driveway at any time. Vehicles may be parked with the two left wheels near the right edge of the paving for not more than ten minutes. No stopping or parking is permitted even briefly to view activities or athletic events. 
(3)  Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway, unless directed by a park official. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-44. - Bicycles. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Ride a bicycle outside a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. 
(2)  Ride a bicycle other than on the right hand side of the road pavement as close as conditions permit. Bicycles shall be kept in single file when two or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking and pass to the right of any vehicles they may be meeting. 
(3)  Use a bicycle at night unless the bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the state which shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 51-45. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and sentenced as follows: 
(1)  Upon the first conviction, a fine of not less than $150.00. 
(2)  Upon the second conviction, a fine of not less than $300.00 and incarcerated for not less than 48 hours. 
(3)  Upon the third conviction, a fine of not less than $500.00, incarcerated for not less than 14 days, and shall be trespassed from all parks. 
(4)  The municipal court judge shall have the authority to include being trespassed from any or all parks as part of the sentence of a conviction of (1) and (2). 
( Ord. No. 2013-052, 11-19-2013 )  
Chapter 54 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Streets in municipalities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-49-1 et seq.; public improvements and assessments therefor, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-48-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Public works manual adopted. 
(a)  The Prattville Public Works Manual, consisting of articles I through X and appendix, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the city public works manual. 
(b)  Violations of the public works manual shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(c)  Any and all additions and amendments to such manual, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such manual so that reference to the city public works manual shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(d)  In case of the amendment of any section of such manual for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in subsection (b) of this section shall apply to the section as amended; or in the case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section amended unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(e)  A copy of such manual shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk, or someone authorized by the clerk, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of such manual when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such manual all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the city council. This copy of such manual shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-80, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 54-2. - Maintenance of sidewalks, driveways, etc., by property owners or occupants. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and the obligation of all owners, occupants and users of real property within the corporate limits of the city, upon which property a public sidewalk, driveway or other way abuts, to keep and maintain such sidewalk, driveway or way in a safe condition for use. Such sidewalks, driveways or ways shall be maintained so as to be free of depressions, excavations, inequities, obstacles, obstructions or encroachments by the owner or occupant of such real property. 
(b)  It shall be the duty and obligation of the owner and occupant of any property abutting upon any defective, unsafe or hazardous sidewalk, parkway, way or driveway to repair the same at such owner's or occupant's expense. 
(c)  If any injury or damage is occasioned or suffered, or inflicted upon any person, by reason of the violation of the provisions of this section, primary liability for any loss or damage shall be upon the owner, occupant or user of such property. 
(Code 1971, § 16-8; Code 1992, § 17-1)  
Sec. 54-3. - Obstructions—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, boxes, barrels, containers, dispensers, signs or any other obstruction of any kind in or upon any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk within the city. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person in charge of or occupying any property to permit goods, wares, merchandise, boxes, barrels, containers, dispensers, signs or other obstructions to remain on the street, alley, avenue or sidewalk adjoining the property or building in such person's charge or control, whether the same was placed thereon by such person or not. 
(Code 1971, § 16-2; Code 1992, § 17-4)  
Sec. 54-4. - Same—Authority of city to remove. 
The city shall have full power and authority, in its discretion, to remove or cause to be removed, all obstructions which may be dangerous to passersby or which may impede or obstruct the free use and passage of pedestrians or vehicles upon streets and sidewalks. 
(Code 1971, § 16-3; Code 1992, § 17-5)  
Sec. 54-5. - Painting, marking, etc., streets, sidewalks, or curbs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, stain, or mark any sign, figure, character, or letter upon, or damage or injure in any way, any sidewalk or paved street, except that street address numbers in residential areas may be painted on the curb and shall be four-inch white numerals on a dull black eight-inch by ten-inch rectangular background. 
(Code 1971, § 16-5; Code 1992, § 17-6; Ord. of 6-5-1984(1))  
Sec. 54-6. - Removing street markers or defacing street signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any post, stake or other marker indicating the lines of any street or alley, or to pull down, remove or deface any board, sign or plate, indicating the name of any street. 
(Code 1971, § 16-6; Code 1992, § 17-7)  
Secs. 54-7—54-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION IN STREETS 
 
Sec. 54-33. - Article supplemental to building code. 
The provisions of this article are to be construed as supplemental to any provision of the building code of the city insofar as such building code may have provisions relating to this general subject matter. 
(Code 1971, § 16-10(f); Code 1992, § 17-20)  
Sec. 54-34. - Permit required; plat. 
(a)  Any person who shall work upon, in, under, above or about any street, alley, curb, gutter, sidewalk, public easement or right-of-way within the city shall first obtain a written permit from the planning and development department. 
(b)  The applicant shall furnish a scale plat showing the work area, the space within the right-of-way required for the work and a proposed plan for the use of barricades, signals, signs, flags, flares and other traffic-control and safety devices about the work area, which plan, hereafter referred to as the traffic safety plan, shall conform to the requirements of this section and any regulations or standards established by the city and shall be deemed a part of such permit. This section shall not apply to the city when engaged in work performed by the city; however, adequate warning devices shall be used in the performance of this work. 
(Code 1971, § 16-10(a); Code 1992, § 17-21)  
Sec. 54-35. - Safety regulations. 
The city shall make reasonable regulations to provide for the barricading of construction areas within public rights-of-way. The city may require, as part of any plan, that the applicant maintain such barricades, signals, signs, or other traffic-control and safety devices according to such regulations. The regulations may further prescribe the hours during which work may be performed, the materials or equipment to be used, and require the dirt and materials removed from the excavation be moved to a placed other than adjacent to the work area, and that any excavation be covered with materials of sufficient strength and construction to permit vehicular traffic to pass over such excavation. 
(Code 1971, § 16-10(b); Code 1992, § 17-22)  
Sec. 54-36. - Identification of supervisor; preventing hazards. 
The applicant shall furnish the police department with the name of a supervisor in charge of construction who can be reached at any time in the event of an emergency should the project become dangerous to the public. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prevent any hazardous conditions to result from such construction work. 
(Code 1971, § 16-10(c); Code 1992, § 17-23)  
Sec. 54-37. - Restoration of surface after stop work order. 
Upon issuance of a stop work order, the person to whom the permit was issued shall restore the work area to its proper condition as provided in the traffic safety plan and permit. Upon failure to comply with the restoration notice within 24 hours, the city shall be authorized to restore the area to the condition provided in the traffic safety plan and permit, and shall be entitled to receive from the applicant twice the actual expenses incurred by the city in so acting including, but not limited to, cost of labor, materials, overhead, and reasonable rental of equipment used by the city in restoring the site; and for such purposes the city shall have a right of action against the holder of the permit and any bond in effect running from the holder of the permit to the city, conditioned upon compliance with the ordinances of the city in the performance of such work. 
(Code 1971, § 16-10(e); Code 1992, § 17-24)  
Sec. 54-38. - Indemnification against claims. 
At all times during which any work under this article is being performed and until such work is completed and accepted and approved by the city, the applicant shall and will indemnify and save harmless the city from and against all action and claims and against all costs, damages and expenses to which the city may be put by reason of any injury or alleged injury to any person or damage to property resulting or alleged to result from or to be occasioned by any act, negligence, carelessness or want of skill in connection with or in the conduct of any such work, or in guarding same, or from any improper methods, tools, implements, or materials used in its prosecution, or by or on account of any alleged act or omission whatever of the applicant, applicant's contractor, or applicant's agents, employees or servants; and the applicant, or any person doing work under the permit as herein provided for, shall well and truly make payment of all sums so recovered against the city in any suits on account of such alleged injuries or damage to which the city may be a party, together with all such costs, damages and expenses as may be suffered by the city, all in such manner as to save the city whole and harmless from all such actions or claims. 
(Code 1971, § 16-10(g); Code 1992, § 17-25)  
Sec. 54-39. - Violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this article, or any part thereof, and any violation is subject to punishment prescribed in section 1-8, and in addition, upon any violation, the city may issue a stop work order, which shall remain in effect until there is full compliance with this article. 
(Code 1971, § 16-10(d); Code 1992, § 17-26)  
Secs. 54-40—54-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-044, adopted Oct. 15, 2013 , amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 54-67—54-105, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-67. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Special event shall mean any parade, run, race, block party, fund-raising road block, festival road block, march, or procession upon any street. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-68. - Public conduct during special event. 
(a)  Interference . It shall be unlawful for any person to unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any person, vehicle or animal participating in a special event. 
(b)  Driving through special event. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle between the vehicles or persons comprising a special event when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a special event. 
(c)  Parking on special event route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a special event. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Secs. 54-69—54-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 54-95. - Required; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any special event, unless a special event permit has been obtained from the chief of police, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-96. - Permit applications; fees. 
(a)  A person desiring a special event permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such department. Such application shall be filed not less than 45 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the special event. 
(b)  There shall be a $25.00 fee paid at the time of filing the application for a special event permit. 
(c)  The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, may consider any application hereunder which is filed less than 45 days before the date such special event is proposed to be conducted. Any application submitted within 45 days prior to the event is subject to an additional fee of $10.00. 
(d)  Special events requiring the assistance of the police department will require an additional charge of $25.00 per officer, per hour, and is due no later than five days before the event. Payment is to be made in the finance department. The City of Prattville, other governmental entities, and any parade that has been established for 25 years or longer shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(e)  The application for a special event permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The date when the special event is to be conducted. 
(2)  The hours when such special event will start and terminate. 
(3)  The time at which units of the special events will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
(4)  If the special event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and the name of the responsible party of such organization. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, including starting and stopping point, as well as a list of all streets along the route. 
(6)  The approximate number of people, animals, and vehicles which will constitute such special event. 
(7)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such special event. 
(8)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a special event permit should be issued. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 ; Ord. No. 2015-017, 4-7-2015 )  
Sec. 54-97. - Standards for permit issuance. 
The chief of police shall issue a special event permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of this city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to this city; 
(3)  The conduct of such special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of this city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points of the special event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such special event will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the special event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The special event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(8)  Permit holder shall be responsible for removing all debris and litter caused by any activity pursuant to the issue of this permit; 
(9)  The special event is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, cause, goods, or events and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-98. - Notice of special event to city officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a special event permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the mayor and city attorney. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-99. - Notice of permit denial. 
If the chief of police disapproves the application for a special event permit, the chief of police shall mail by certified mail a notice of such action to the applicant within five business days after the date upon which the application was filed. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-100. - Appeal to city council. 
Any person aggrieved by the denial of a special event permit shall have the right to appeal the denial to the city council. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within two business days after receipt of notice that the application has been denied. The city council shall act upon the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-101. - Alternate date, time or route. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a special event permit, may authorize the conduct of the special event on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five business days after notice of such action, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate special event permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a special event permit under this article. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-102. - Contents of permit. 
Each special event permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Event route. 
(3)  Streets to be blocked. 
(4)  Number of participants expected. 
(5)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-103. - Carrying permit; compliance with laws. 
(a)  The responsible party shall carry the special event permit upon his/her person during the conduct of the special event. 
(b)  The holder of a special event permit hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws, provisions of this Code, and other city ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-104. - Revocation of permit. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a special event permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Sec. 54-105. - Exemption. 
The City of Prattville shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2013-044, 10-15-2013 )  
Chapter 58 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agency means the city. 
Auxiliary services means any communications service in addition to regular subscriber services including, but not limited to, pay TV, burglar alarm service, data transmission, facsimile service, home shopping service, and similar communication services. 
Cable television system or CATV system means any facility that, in whole or in part, receives directly or indirectly over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies, the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such service. 
Channel means a band of frequencies six megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum capable of carrying either one audiovisual television signal and a few nonvideo signals or a large number of nonvideo signals. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the present federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any successor agency created by the United States Congress. 
Franchise means an authorization granted by the city council that permits the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable television system within the franchise area under the terms of this article. 
Franchise area means that portion of the city, including any area hereafter added thereto during the term of any franchise granted hereunder, for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this article. The franchise area may or may not include all of the city. 
Grantee means a holder of a cable television franchise issued by the city. 
Gross revenues means revenues derived directly or indirectly by a grantee from both regular subscriber service and auxiliary services. 
Gross subscriber revenues means those revenues derived directly or indirectly by a grantee from the supplying of regular subscriber service; that is, the installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees, and fees for regular cable benefits including the transmission of broadcast signals and access and origination channels if utilized. It does not include revenues derived from auxiliary services or from any taxes whether or not passed on to users, per program or per channel charges, leased channel revenues, advertising revenues, or any other income derived from the system. 
Major stockholder means a beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of ten percent or more of the issued and outstanding voting stock of any corporation. 
Public street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, alley, right-of-way, public utility easement, and any other public ground or water within or belonging to the city. 
Regular subscriber service means that service regularly provided to all subscribers. It includes all broadcast signal carriage and FCC-required access channel carriage including origination programming. It does not include specialized programming for which a per-program or per-channel charge is made. 
(Code 1992, § 6-152; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 2)  
Sec. 58-20. - Amendment of article and franchises. 
The city council shall amend this article, and any franchise issued hereunder, upon its own motion or the application of a grantee whenever amendment is necessary to conform to amendments to section 76.31 of the FCC rules and regulations which shall be incorporated into this article within one year of their adoption or at the time of franchise renewal, whichever comes first. No amendment shall be adopted except after full, open public hearing affording due process, and no amendment substantially amending the existing rights and obligations of the grantee shall be adopted without the grantee's consent. 
(Code 1992, § 6-167; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 17)  
Sec. 58-21. - Rights and remedies are cumulative. 
The rights and remedies reserved to the parties by this article are cumulative and shall not add or subtract from any rights or remedies that they may have with respect to the subject matter of this article, and a waiver thereof at any time shall not affect any other time. 
(Code 1992, § 6-175; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 25)  
Sec. 58-22. - Delegation of powers. 
Any delegable right, power or duty of the city council, the city, the agency or any official of the city may be transferred or delegated by resolution to an appropriate officer, employee, or department of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 6-173; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 23)  
Sec. 58-23. - Notices. 
Every direction, notice, or order to be served upon a grantee shall be sent to the local office described in section 58-27(2). Every notice to be served upon the city shall be delivered, or sent by certified mail to the agency, at: 
City of Prattville 
101 West Main Street 
Post Office Drawer 20 
Prattville, Alabama, 36067-0020. 
The delivery of such notice shall be deemed to have been at the time of receipt. 
(Code 1992, § 6-174; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 24)  
Sec. 58-24. - Alternative services. 
It is not the city council's intention to prohibit the erection or continued use of individual television antennas, and no one will be required to receive cable television service or connect with a television system. It is further the policy of the city to promote the availability of alternative services wherever possible. 
(Code 1992, § 6-171; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 21)  
Sec. 58-25. - Technical requirements; channel capacity. 
The CATV system to be constructed by the grantee shall be installed, maintained and operated at all times in full compliance with the technical and channel capacity standards of the Federal Communications Commission. The results of annual performance tests conducted in accordance with section 76.601(c) of the FCC rules, or such other section of the rules as shall incorporate its substance, shall be retained for at least five years and available for inspection by the city. The system shall provide a minimum of 20 channels of six MHz each available for immediate or potential use. 
(Code 1992, § 6-157; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 7)  
Sec. 58-26. - Safety requirements. 
A grantee shall, at all times: 
(1)  Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the city building code and electrical safety ordinances and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the city. 
(2)  Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all structures, lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the city, wherever situated or located. 
(Code 1992, § 6-158; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 1)  
Sec. 58-27. - Service standards; business office; resolution of complaints. 
Throughout the life of its franchise, a grantee shall: 
(1)  Maintain all parts of its system in good condition and in accordance with standards generally observed by the cable television industry. Sufficient employees shall be retained to provide safe, adequate and prompt service for all of its facilities. 
(2)  Maintain a conveniently located business office and service center to which subscribers may telephone without incurring added message units or toll charges. This office shall be open during all usual business hours and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received by telephone at any time when any television signals are being broadcast. 
(3)  Dispatch personnel to investigate all service complaints and equipment malfunctions within 24 hours and strive to resolve such complaints as promptly as possible. Planned interruption of service shall be only for cause. Insofar as possible, planned service interruption shall be preceded by notice, be of brief duration, and occur during minimum viewing hours. 
(4)  Maintain a complete list of all complaints received and the measures taken to resolve them in form to be approved by agency. This list shall be available to the agency upon request. 
(5)  Permit the agency to inspect and test the systems' technical equipment and facilities upon reasonable notice during normal business hours. 
(6)  Responsibility for the administration of any franchise granted hereunder and for the resolution of all complaints against a grantee regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matter, is hereby delegated to the city under such reasonable rules as the city may from time to time prescribe. The grantee shall notify subscribers at the time of initial subscription to the system of the procedure for reporting and resolving complaints by delivering to each subscriber a notice in form approved by agency. 
(Code 1992, § 6-159; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 1)  
Sec. 58-28. - Rates charged to subscribers. 
(a)  Any franchise issued shall set forth the initial rates which the grantee may charge its subscribers upon commencing service. 
(b)  Any rate established shall be reasonable, just, and fair to the public and shall provide the grantee a return upon its investment reasonably sufficient to: 
(1)  Ensure confidence in grantee's soundness; 
(2)  Support its credit and attract necessary capital under efficient and economical management; and 
(3)  Provide a return to equity owners commensurate with current returns on investments and other enterprises having corresponding rights. 
(c)  No rate established shall afford any undue preference or advantage among subscribers, but separate rates may be established for separate classes of subscribers and rates may reflect the increased cost of providing service to isolated or sparsely populated areas. In no event shall rates be established so low for any class of subscriber or for any geographical location as to prevent, discourage, restrict, or diminish competition in the furnishing of cable services. 
(d)  The city council shall have only the power, authority, and right to regulate the rates and charges made by the grantee pursuant to the franchise agreement in accordance with the terms and provisions of Public Law 98-549, cited in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 approved and enacted by the United States Congress on October 30, 1984. Public Law 98-549 is incorporated into this agreement by reference as though set out fully herein. 
(Code 1992, § 6-164; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 14)  
Sec. 58-29. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)  Any pavement, sidewalk, curbing or other paved area taken up or any excavation made by a grantee shall be done under the supervision and direction of the agency under permits issued for work by the proper officials of the city, and shall be done in such manner as to give the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the city. A grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the agency, replace and restore any such pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved area in as good condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done, and shall also make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the public streets, ways and easements of the city. These maps shall be available for inspection at any time during business hours by the agency. 
(b)  A grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any of its property when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, road construction, change of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracts, or any type of municipal improvements; provided, however, that the grantee shall, in all such cases, have the privilege of abandoning any property in place. 
(c)  A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of a building. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 72 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(d)  A grantee shall have authority to trim the trees upon and overhanging the public streets so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee, except at the option of the city such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee. 
(e)  In all sections of the franchise area where the cable wires, or other similar facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the grantee to do so. 
(Code 1992, § 6-160; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 10)  
Sec. 58-30. - Construction. 
(a)  A grantee shall extend the installation of cables, amplifiers, and related equipment throughout the area covered by its franchise as rapidly as practicable, but in any event shall: 
(1)  Begin engineering studies within 30 days after accepting its franchise. 
(2)  Begin awarding construction contracts within 60 days after receiving certification from the FCC. 
(3)  Begin construction of its proposed system within 90 days after receiving certification from the FCC, and execution of necessary pole attachment agreements. 
(4)  Begin rendering service to subscribers within one year after receiving certification from the FCC. 
(5)  Complete construction of 40 percent of its proposed system, measured in terms of total linear strand miles, within two years after receiving certification from the FCC, and complete an additional 20 percent each year thereafter so that after five years the entire system shall be substantially constructed, and the grantee capable of providing service, no more than 60 days after receiving an application for service, to every dwelling unit within the franchise area except to the extent that density of homes, adverse terrain, or other factors render making service available impracticable. For the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this subsection, and to provide for a reasonable policy requiring extension of energized trunk lines of the cable system within the franchise area so as to achieve compliance with the obligations imposed by this section, the grantee shall extend such lines to all areas of the franchise areas having a minimum of 50 homes per street mile. 
(6)  File a map and progress report with the agency at the close of each calendar year showing the exact areas of the city being served by the cable television system and the location and identification of major component parts of the system. 
(b)  Failure on the part of a grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be grounds for termination of its franchise pursuant to the terms of section 58-63(b) hereof; provided, however, that the city council may, at its discretion, extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reasons of circumstances beyond its control. 
(c)  Upon the failure of a grantee to satisfactorily complete any work upon the public streets as may be required by law or the terms of its franchise within the time prescribed, the city, at its option, may cause such work to be done, and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized report. 
(Code 1992, § 6-161; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 11)  
Sec. 58-31. - Public service requirements. 
A grantee shall: 
(1)  If requested by the city, provide at least one service outlet to city hall, the police department, and each fire station within its franchise area at no cost to the city; and, if requested by the city, provide at least one outlet to each elementary and secondary public school within its franchise area, at no cost to the school involved, provided such municipal buildings and schools are not more than 150 feet from the grantee's trunk line. Any additional service outlets to such facilities shall be charged on the basis of labor and material cost plus a reasonable overhead thereon. 
(2)  Make its facilities immediately available to the city, upon request, during the course of any emergency or disaster; and allow for installation of an emergency or disaster warning system to be installed in conjunction with normal cable operation. 
(3)  Provide, in accordance with FCC requirements, channels for local government, education, and public access use. No charge except as may be permitted by FCC rules shall be made for such use, but such use shall be subject to reasonable terms and conditions established by the grantee in accordance with the rules of the FCC. 
(4)  Construct and maintain local production facilities to serve the needs of the entities utilizing public service channels, the use of which shall also be subject to reasonable terms and conditions established by the grantee in accordance with the rules of the FCC. 
(5)  Provide tower space for installation of the city's VHF/UHF radio frequencies, as applicable, for the city's operation in compliance with FCC rules and where interference on frequencies would not interfere with the grantee's normal cable operation. 
(Code 1992, § 6-166; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 16)  
Sec. 58-32. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his request, or failing to promptly do so, the same shall be deemed abandoned. 
(Code 1992, § 6-165; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 15)  
Sec. 58-33. - Tampering, unauthorized connections, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner thereof, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or use any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable television system within the city for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of the system. 
(Code 1992, § 6-170; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 20)  
Sec. 58-34. - Grantee may promulgate rules. 
A grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of his business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its services under this article and the rules of the FCC, and to ensure uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers. 
(Code 1992, § 6-172; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 22)  
Secs. 58-35—58-56. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 58-57. - Operating franchise necessary. 
It shall be unlawful to commence or engage in the construction, operation or maintenance of a cable television system without a franchise issued under this division. The city council may, by ordinance, award a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within all or any portion of the city to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who makes application for authority to furnish a cable television system which complies with the terms and conditions of this article. Provided, that this section shall not be deemed to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or to prohibit the city council from restricting the number of grantees should it determine such a restriction would be in the public interest. 
(Code 1992, § 6-153; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 3) 
State Law reference— Consent of municipality as to use of streets, etc., for construction or operation of public utility or private enterprise required, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-49-1.  
Sec. 58-58. - Application procedures. 
This division itself grants no authority to operate a cable television system to any person. Such grants are only made by the adoption of a separate ordinance awarding a specific franchise to an applicant who has complied with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Any person interested in obtaining a franchise to operate a cable television system in the franchise area shall submit a written application to the city council, together with a nonrefundable application fee of $100.00, which shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name, address and form of business of the applicant. 
1.  If the applicant is a corporation, it shall also state the names, addresses and occupations of its officers, directors and major stockholders, and the names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary companies; 
2.  If the applicant is a corporation controlled by another corporation, the names, addresses and occupations of the officers, directors and major stockholders of the controlling corporation shall also be stated; 
3.  If the applicant is a partnership or other unincorporated association, the name and address of each member, whether active or inactive, shall be set forth; and 
4.  If one or more partners are corporations, the names, addresses and occupations of such corporation's officers, directors and major stockholders shall also be stated. 
b.  A list of all other cable television systems, if any, in which the applicant, or any partner or major stockholder, has a substantial interest, stating the location, approximate number of homes served, and the name and address of the local franchising body. 
c.  A thorough description of the proposed cable television system to be installed and operated; the manner in which the applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of public utility companies will be used in the proposed system, together with a map delineating proposed service areas if the applicant proposes to serve less than the entire city. 
d.  A schedule of proposed rates and charges to all classes of subscribers for both installation and monthly service, and a copy of the proposed service agreement between the applicant and its proposed subscribers. 
e.  A copy of any contract which may exist between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of such utility's property, such as poles, lines or conduits. 
f.  A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral, or implied, between the applicant and any other person with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed cable television operation. If a franchise should be granted to a person posing as a front or representative of another undisclosed person, such franchise shall be voidable by the city. 
g.  An estimate of the cost of constructing the applicant's proposed system, and a financial statement prepared in form satisfactory to the city council showing applicant's financial status and its financial ability to meet these proposed costs. 
h.  A sworn statement acknowledging the applicant's familiarity with and eligibility under the provisions of this division and the rules of the FCC and its intention to abide by the same. 
i.  Any such supplementary information as the city council shall at any time demand in order to reasonably determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
(2)  An application that has satisfied the criteria in subsection (1) of this section shall be accepted by the city for consideration and notice published of its acceptance. Such notice shall specify the place where a copy of the application can be viewed, and that the city will accept written comments relative to the application until the third meeting of the city council following the date of the notice. The notice shall specify that a copy of all written comments is also to be served on the applicant. 
(3)  The city council shall then: 
a.  Specify a date, not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days following the expiration of the filing period, upon which all bona fide applicants (i.e., those paying the prescribed fee, filing complete applications and responding to all proper inquiries) shall participate in a public hearing before the city council; and 
b.  Specify a public place where interested parties may inspect all bona fide applications. 
(4)  After hearing the evidence, opinions and representations of all interested parties including members of the public, the city council shall then render a decision awarding a franchise to one or more applicants, or rejecting all applicants if none is found qualified, based upon its findings as to the relative qualifications of the applicants, under satisfactory CATV service. The council's decision on all applications shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1992, § 6-168; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 18)  
Sec. 58-59. - Limitations of franchise. 
(a)  Any franchise granted under this division shall be nonexclusive, and nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the city council from granting identical or similar franchises to more than one person, within all or any portion of the city. 
(b)  A grantee shall, at all times during the life of its franchise, be subject to the lawful exercise of the city's police power, strictly adhere to the city laws and ordinances, and such reasonable regulations as the city council may subsequently promulgate thereunder. No franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deemed, expressly or impliedly, to authorize the grantee to utilize its cable television system to provide any service in such a manner as to unlawfully damage any business competitor or other third party or violate any statutes or regulations of the United States or the state. Nor shall any grantee, by act or omission, engage in any anti-competitive practice in violation of any statutes or regulations of the United States or the state. The provisions of this section shall be enforceable in courts of competent jurisdiction against a grantee by any party who alleges injury as a result of an alleged violation thereof. 
(c)  All privileges prescribed by such a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the public streets, and the city council reserves the right to reasonably designate where a grantee's facilities are to be placed within the public ways. 
(d)  A franchise shall be a privilege that is personal to the original grantee. It shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned, or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without prior consent of the city council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. 
(1)  Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, which shall include an acceptance of all terms and conditions of the franchise by the transferee, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed with the agency within 30 days after such transfer or assignment. 
(2)  Consent of the city council shall not be granted until it has examined the proposed assignee's legal, financial, technical, character and other qualifications to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in the city and has afforded all interested parties notice of an opportunity to be heard on the question. 
(3)  Consent of the city council shall not be arbitrarily refused; provided, that the proposed assignee possesses the requisite qualifications and agrees, in writing, to comply with all provisions of the franchise and this article. 
(4)  Transfer of 20 percent or more of the voting securities of a corporate grantee to a person not presently a stockholder shall be deemed to be a transfer of control. 
(5)  No such consent shall be required for a transfer: 
a.  In trust, of system assets by mortgage by other hypothecation, to secure an indebtedness; 
b.  To a parent or subsidiary of a corporate grantee; 
c.  To a corporation where stock is held by the same stockholders as a grantee; 
d.  Of less than 20 percent of the voting securities of a corporate grantee unless such transfer also results in a transfer of voting control; 
e.  Of stock from one present stockholder to another stockholder or unless such transfer also results in a transfer of voting control. 
(Code 1992, § 6-155; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 1)  
Sec. 58-60. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  A grantee shall pay, and by its acceptance of a franchise specifically agrees to pay, any and all damages or penalties which the city may be legally required to pay as a result of grantee's installation, operation or maintenance of a franchise cable television system under this article whether or not the acts or omissions complained of are authorized, allowed or prohibited by the city. 
(b)  Grantee shall at all times indemnify the city and save the city harmless from any all claims, demands, and/or suits, whether for damages to person or property or for any reason whatsoever which the city shall be required to pay arising proximately, consequentially or otherwise by reason of the installation, operation or existence of such cable television station, or from the maintenance, continuation or use thereof or the abandonment thereof. 
(c)  A grantee shall also pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to any and all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (a) of this section. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and the reasonable value of services rendered by any employee of the city. 
(d)  The grantee shall maintain, throughout the term of the franchise, liability insurance insuring the city and the grantee with regard to all damages mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, caused by grantee or its agents, in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  Workers' compensation insurance as provided by the laws of the state. 
(2)  $500,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person within the limit, however, of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident. 
(3)  $100,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. The insurance policies obtained by a grantee in compliance with this section shall be issued by a company acceptable to the city, and a current certificate of insurance, along with written evidence of payment of all required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the agency during the term of the franchise. Such policies shall name the city as an additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of such policy shall be delivered to the city ten days in advance of the effective date thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 6-156; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 6)  
Sec. 58-61. - Indemnity bond. 
(a)  Concurrently with the acceptance of its franchise, a grantee shall deposit with the agency, cash or acceptable negotiable securities fully guaranteed by the United States, in the amount of $50,000.00 to guarantee to the city the grantee's performance. In the event the grantee fails to comply with one or more of the provisions of its franchise, then the city shall retain such sum as damages for grantee's breach of its obligations. At such time as the grantee shall certify to the city council that construction of the system is substantially complete, and service available to substantially all residents of the city, such cash or securities may be replaced by a bond, written by an acceptable surety, in such amount to indemnify the city against any loss it may suffer in the event the grantee fails to comply with one or more provisions of its franchise. The grantee and its surety shall be jointly and severally liable under the terms of the bond for any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result of the grantee's nonperformance, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal of any property of the grantee in the event of default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. The bond shall provide 30 days' prior written notice to the city council of any intention on the part of the grantee to cancel, fail to renew, or otherwise materially alter its terms. 
(b)  Neither the deposit or cash, nor the filing of an indemnity bond with the agency, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under the terms of its franchise for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Code 1992, § 6-162; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 12)  
Sec. 58-62. - Franchise payments. 
(a)  Any person awarded a franchise under this division shall pay to the city, each year during the life of the franchise, a franchise fee in the amount of five percent and/or the maximum allowed by the FCC of its gross subscriber revenues and five percent and/or the maximum allowed by the FCC of its auxiliary services revenues derived from its operation of the franchised cable television system within the franchised area limits. The amount of any application fee should be credited against the franchise fees thereafter becoming due. The franchise fee of five percent and/or the maximum allowed by the FCC shall become the effective rate upon passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  A grantee shall file with the city, within 90 days after expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which its franchise is in force, a financial statement certified by a responsible officer of the grantee, showing in detail the gross subscriber revenues, as defined herein, of the grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay the city within 15 days after the time for filing such statement, the sum prescribed above or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year covered by such statements. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records showing the gross subscriber revenues from which its franchise payments are computed and shall also have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this article. No acceptance of payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this article or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder; however, an accounting rendered to the city and to which no exception is made within three years after the receipt by the city shall be deemed to be accurate and shall not thereafter be subject to question or made the basis of any claim by the city against the grantee. 
(Code 1992, § 6-163; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 13)  
Sec. 58-63. - Term of franchise. 
(a)  Any franchise granted by the city council shall be for a term of 15 years following the date such franchise is accepted by the grantee and, upon application of the grantee and review of the performance of grantee in a pubic hearing, the city council may renew the franchise for successive 15-year periods, with such modification of terms as the city council may determine. 
(b)  The city council may terminate any franchise in the event the grantee shall refuse, or neglect to comply with, any material requirement or limitation contained in this article. 
(c)  Should the city council determine that the grantee is not, in its opinion, in compliance with this article and any franchise issued thereunder, it shall so notify the grantee, and the grantee shall within 30 days bring the franchise system into compliance, reporting corrective action taken to the city council. 
(d)  If the city council is not satisfied that compliance has been achieved, or that good faith progress is being made toward compliance, it may schedule a pubic hearing to determine whether the franchise should be revoked. The grantee and the public shall be given at least 30 days' notice of such a hearing, and all interested parties shall be heard in an open hearing. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall determine whether the franchise should be terminated and shall set forth, in writing, the facts and reasons upon which its decision is based. 
(Code 1992, § 6-154; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 4)  
Sec. 58-64. - Renewal procedures. 
(a)  A franchise may be renewed by the city council for a period of up to 15 years upon the written request of the grantee without soliciting additional applications. Such a renewal request shall be filed at least six, but not more than 18, months prior to the expiration of the franchise and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $1,000.00. A renewal request may propose modifications in the terms of a grantee's franchise that shall be considered by the city council, but in any case the city council may, upon its own motion, modify the terms of a grantee's franchise subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a request for a renewal of a franchise, the city council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter, giving at least 30 days' notice of such hearing and any franchise modifications proposed by either the grantee or the city council. After hearing all of the evidence, opinions and representations, the city council shall then render a decision to renew or not to renew the grantee's franchise, and if the former course is taken, whether or not its franchise should be modified in any way. A grantee shall file its acceptance of a renewal franchise within 30 days after it is offered by the city council and, upon failure to do so, shall be conclusively presumed to have consented to the expiration of its franchise. 
(Code 1992, § 6-169; Ord. of 7-3-1990, § 19)  
Chapter 62 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic and vehicles, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-1.1 et seq.; general powers of local authorities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Adoption of state law. 
In addition to all other provisions of law regulating the speed and operation of vehicles in the city, there is hereby adopted by the city all laws of the state and all rules and regulations of the state department of public safety pertaining to the control of traffic and vehicles on highways. Violations of such laws, rules and regulations shall be violations of this Code. 
(Code 1971, §§ 17-2, 17-46; Code 1992, § 18-1)  
Sec. 62-2. - Testing procedure for determination of alcoholic content of blood. 
The city, in compliance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-192, does hereby authorize chemical tests of blood, breath or urine for the purposes of determining the alcoholic content of the defendant's blood, if lawfully arrested as provided by such section, and the police chief or assistant chief shall designate which tests shall be administered by the city. The type of test shall be designated by memorandum or order and filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1971, § 17-27; Code 1992, § 18-2; Ord. of 9-3-1985, § 17-27)  
Sec. 62-3. - Playing games on sidewalks; using skateboards, skates, etc., thereon. 
No person shall engage in or play any game upon any sidewalk, nor shall any person coast on sidewalks with skateboards, skates or foot-operated devices in front of a business. This section only applies in a business district. 
(Code 1992, § 18-3)  
Sec. 62-4. - Placing tacks, glass, etc., in streets or driveways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, willfully or maliciously to cause any glass, tack, nail, brick, rock or any substance or thing which might damage or puncture the tire of an automobile or other vehicle to be placed or to be in, on or upon the roadway of any street, highway, alley, park or other public place or upon the driveway on the private premises of another. 
(b)  Any person who is, in any way, the cause of or responsible for any of the things mentioned in subsection (a) of this section being in or upon any such roadway of any street, highway, alley, park, or other public place or upon the driveway on the private premises of another, either accidentally or otherwise, who knowingly fails or refuses to remove the same immediately, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 16-7; Code 1992, § 17-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-60.  
Secs. 62-5—62-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Secs. 62-27—62-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE OPERATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-56. - U-turns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle to make a U-turn on any street within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 17-21; Code 1992, § 18-20)  
Sec. 62-57. - Use of driveway only. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a vehicle, whether driven by motor, hand or animal, to be driven or carried across a curb except at such places as a driveway has been established. 
(Code 1971, § 17-22; Code 1992, § 18-21)  
Sec. 62-58. - Riding bicycles, motorcycles, etc., in certain designated places prohibited. 
(a)  No bicycle shall be operated upon any sidewalk, pedestrian path, public school ground or public playground. This subsection shall not apply to a bicycle when operated on such school ground or playground when officially sanctioned functions are in progress, nor to sidewalks or sidewalk areas where the city has posted appropriate signs indicating that the riding of bicycles is permitted on the sidewalk or sidewalk area on that portion of the highway or area. 
(b)  Any person riding a motorcycle, motorbike, or moped upon any public sidewalk, pedestrian path, public school ground or in any public cemetery, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless such area is specifically exempted from this section by the regulatory authorities in control of the property, which shall be evidenced by signs conspicuously posted. 
(Code 1971, § 17-7; Code 1992, § 18-23; Ord. of 4-17-1979)  
Sec. 62-59. - Improper acceleration. 
Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall willfully cause such vehicle to "dig out" or shall cause any such vehicle to make unnecessary noise by reason of operating such vehicle in such a manner as to cause the wheels thereof to spin or slide on the roadway of any street, when starting such vehicle or while making any turning movement, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-26; Code 1992, § 18-38)  
Sec. 62-60. - Prohibiting electronic messaging while driving. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Electronic message means a self-contained piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be transmitted between physical devices. An electronic message includes, but is not limited to, a text-based communication, a command or request to access an internet site, or other data that uses a commonly recognized electronic communications protocol. 
Wireless communication device means a cellular, analog, wireless or digital device, computer or telephone, capable of accessing, sending or receiving wireless electronic messages, conversation or other interchange of information, including, but not limited to, a wireless telephone service, a wireless internet service or a wireless text messaging service, but does not include voice radios, mobile radios, land mobile radios, commercial mobile radios or two-way radios with the capability to transmit and receive voice transmissions utilizing a "push to talk" or "press to transmit" function, or other voice radios used by a law enforcement officer, an emergency services provider, an employee or agent of public safety organizations, first responders, school bus operators, taxicab drivers or mobile commercial enterprises. 
(b)  Violation. A driver of a motor vehicle may not use a wireless communication device to view, send, or compose an electronic message while operating a motor vehicle. 
(1)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under this section if a wireless communications device is used: 
a.  While the motor vehicle is parked on the shoulder of a roadway or the vehicle is stopped due to normal traffic being obstructed and the vehicle transmission is in neutral or park; 
b.  For making a telephone call; 
c.  As a global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to the vehicle; 
d.  For obtaining emergency assistance to report a traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious traffic hazard, or to prevent a crime about to be committed; 
e.  In the reasonable belief that a person's life or safety is in immediate danger; or 
f.  If the device is permanently installed inside the vehicle. 
(2)  This section does not apply to an operator of an authorized emergency vehicle using a wireless communication device while acting in an official capacity. 
(c)  Violation as misdemeanor; penalties. 
(1)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation this section shall for a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00; for conviction of a second offense committed within one year after the date of the first offense, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment; for conviction of a third or subsequent offense committed within one year after the date of the first offense, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than three months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-011, § I, 6-1-2010)  
Sec. 62-61. - Compression brakes—Definitions. 
Engine compression brake shall mean any device that utilizes compression and/or rapid release of compressed air in the cylinders of diesel engines to slow or retard vehicle speed. 
Noise baffling device shall mean a properly functioning muffler or engine exhaust silencer that eliminates the offensive and disturbing noise caused by use of engine compression brakes. The muffler or engine exhaust silencer must reduce the noise to levels meeting vehicle noise emission standards set or authorized by the Noise Control Act (42 U.S.C. § 4901 et seq.) and the United States Environmental Agency, and must also comply with all other federal, state, or local laws and regulations relating to vehicle noise levels. 
Public safety vehicle shall mean any vehicle operated by the Prattville Fire Department or the Prattville Police Department, or any other vehicle included in the definition of "authorized emergency vehicles" as provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-1.1. 
( Ord. No. 2013-034, § 1, 8-6-2013 )  
Sec. 62-62. - Same—Prohibited—Exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to engage or allow to be engaged, operate, or use an engine compression brake while the vehicle is operated on any public roadway within the corporate limits. 
This section shall not apply to operators of any of the following: 
(1)  A public safety vehicle. 
(2)  A vehicle involved in an emergency not caused by the operator of the vehicle utilizing the engine compression brake, wherein the operator reasonably believes that use of the engine compression brake is necessary to avoid or mitigate an accident or collision. 
(3)  A vehicle equipped with a noise baffling device. A law enforcement officer or other competent witness may give opinion evidence based on personal observation as to whether a vehicle had a properly functioning noise baffling device. 
The city is authorized, but is not required, to place traffic control devices in appropriate locations to supplement enforcement of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2013-034, § 1, 8-6-2013 )  
Secs. 62-63—62-76. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPEED RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 62-77. - Fifty-five miles-per-hour zones. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 55 miles-per-hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  On U.S. 82 bypass from U.S. 31 (Memorial Drive) to west city limits. 
(2)  On Alabama Highway 6 from U.S. 31 (Memorial Drive) to Cobbs Ford Road. 
(Code 1971, § 17-38; Code 1992, § 18-30; Ord. No. 2001A-016, § 18-30, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 2008-022, 11-4-2008)  
Sec. 62-78. - Fifty miles-per-hour zones. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 50 miles-per-hour in the following listed zones: on Autauga County Road No. 2 from the east city limits westerly toward the city to Pine Creek. 
(Code 1971, § 17-39; Code 1992, § 18-31; Ord. No. 2008-022, 11-4-2008)  
Sec. 62-79. - Forty-five miles-per-hour zones. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 45 miles-per-hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  On Cobbs Ford Road/Main Street from the east city limits to U.S. 31; 
(2)  On U.S. 31 (Memorial Drive) from the north city limits to the south city limits; 
(3)  On Alabama Highway No. 14 (Selma Highway) from 500 feet west of Maple Street to the west city limits; 
(4)  On Alabama Highway No. 14 (Main Street) from 200 feet east of Pratt Street to U.S. 31 (Memorial Drive); 
(5)  McQueen Smith Road; 
(6)  On Alabama Highway No. 206 (Fourth Street) from the west city limits to Autauga Creek; 
(7)  On Autauga County Road No. 57 (Lower Kingston Road) from the north city limits southerly toward the city for a distance of 0.30 mile; 
(8)  On Alabama Highway No. 14 (Fairview Avenue) from Montview Court to the east city limits; 
(9)  Doster Road from U.S. 31 (Memorial Drive) to Shady Hill Road; 
(10)  On Jensen Road from the intersection of U.S. 82 bypass south to the city limits; 
(11)  On Bridge Creek Road beginning at the intersection of Upper Kingston Road north to the city limits; 
(12)  On County Road No. 4 (east of Washington Ferry) from the east city limits to the west city limits. 
(Code 1971, § 17-40; Code 1992, § 18-32; Ord. No. 99-005, 2-2-1999; Ord. No. 2001A-016, § 18-32, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 2008-022, 11-4-2008)  
Sec. 62-80. - Forty miles-per-hour zones. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 40 miles-per-hour in the following listed zones: on Alabama Highway No. 14 (Fairview Avenue) from U.S. 31 to Montview Court. 
(Code 1971, § 17-41; Code 1992, § 18-33; Ord. of 8-15-1978; Ord. No. 2001A-016, § 18-33, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 2008-022, 11-4-2008)  
Sec. 62-81. - Thirty-five miles-per-hour zones. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 35 miles-per-hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  On Alabama Highway No. 206 (Fourth Street) from Autauga Creek to Main Street; 
(2)  On Alabama Highway No. 14 (Selma Highway/Washington Street) from 500 feet west of Maple Street to the junction of Alabama Highway No. 206 (Main Street); 
(3)  On Alabama Highway No. 14 (Washington and Main Streets) to 200 feet east of Pratt Street; 
(4)  On Autauga County Road No. 57 (Lower Kingston Road) beginning at a point 0.30 mile south of the north city limits to the junction with Alabama Highway No. 206 (Fourth Street); 
(5)  On Washington Ferry Road from Alabama Highway No. 14 (Selma Highway) south to the city limits; 
(6)  Wetumpka Street; 
(7)  Gin Shop Hill Road; 
(8)  Gardner Road; 
(9)  On Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive beginning at the northernmost intersection of Wilberforce Avenue north to the city limits; 
(10)  On Upper Kingston Road beginning at the intersection of Woodland Acres Drive north to the city limits; 
(11)  Durden Road; 
(12)  Doster Road from Shady Hill Road to Mobile Drive; 
(13)  On County Road No. 4 (west of Washington Ferry) from the city limits to the eastern city limits; 
(14)  Old Ridge Road from Alabama Highway No. 14 to the north city limits; 
(15)  South Industrial Parkway. 
(Code 1971, § 17-42; Code 1992, § 18-34; Ord. No. 2001A-016, § 18-34, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 2008-022, 11-4-2008)  
Sec. 62-82. - Thirty miles-per-hour zones. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 30 miles-per-hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  On Autauga County Road No. 57 beginning at a point 0.30 mile south of the north city limits southerly toward the city for a distance of 1.80 miles to the junction with Alabama Highway No. 206; 
(2)  On Sixth Street beginning at the intersection of Memorial Drive and Sixth Street west to North Northington, a distance of 1.10 miles; 
(3)  On North Chestnut Street beginning at the intersection of Wilburforce Street and North Chestnut, north to the city limits, a distance of 1.10 miles; 
(Code 1971, § 17-43; Code 1992, § 18-35; Ord. of 8-15-1978; Ord. No. 2008-022, 11-4-2008)  
Sec. 62-83. - Twenty-five miles-per-hour zones. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 25 miles-per-hour on any streets or alleys other than those specifically mentioned or set out in this division. 
(Code 1971, § 17-44; Code 1992, § 18-36)  
Sec. 62-84. - Fifteen miles-per-hour zones. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 15 miles-per-hour in the following listed zones: 
(1)  Court Street from Main Street to 3rd Street; 
(2)  Main Street from Chestnut Street to Court Street. 
(Ord. No. 2003-028, 9-16-2003)  
Sec. 62-85. - Racing. 
Any person who engages in or participates in a race upon the streets in any motor vehicle, whether exceeding the speed limit or not, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-45; Code 1992, § 18-37)  
Secs. 62-86—62-113. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 62-114. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deviating truck means a truck which leaves from, or enters, a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
Prohibited routes means streets or sections of streets within the city upon which trucks are prohibited from traveling or operating. 
Truck means any vehicle or combination of vehicles together, including trailers and truck tractors, with trailer attached and designed or operated for the transportation of property and the transporting capacity of which is 1½ tons or more. 
Truck route means a way over certain streets and highways, designated as a truck route by appropriate city, state or federal signs, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city shall operate. 
(Code 1971, § 17-60; Code 1992, § 18-40; Ord. of 1-4-1983)  
Sec. 62-115. - Established. 
The following routes are established as truck routes: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 82; 
(2)  Alabama Highway No. 14; and 
(3)  U.S. Highway 31. 
(Code 1971, § 17-61; Code 1992, § 18-41; Ord. of 1-4-1983; Ord. of 2-15-1983(1); Ord. No. 2015-046, 12-15-2015 )  
Sec. 62-116. - Prohibited. 
The following streets or sections of streets are hereby designated prohibited routes because of weight restrictions and other conditions deemed hazardous: 
(1)  Bridge Street between Maple Street and Main Street; and 
(2)  Maple Street between Bridge Street and Washington Street. 
( Ord. No. 2017-007, 5-2-2017 ) 
Editor's note— This section was formerly repealed by Ord. No. 2017-006 , adopted Apr. 4, 2017.  
Sec. 62-117. - Operation of trucks. 
(a)  All trucks in the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes established by this division, and on other streets over which truck travel is permitted by the terms of this division as follows: 
(1)  A deviating truck shall operate inside the city only for the purpose of loading and unloading, proceeding to or from a truck route upon originating or terminating a trip. Drivers of trucks shall request, in advance, assistance from the police department whenever this is needed due to length of truck, width of truck, or type of cargo being hauled; and 
(2)  All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed by the shortest feasible direction over streets to a truck route as established by this division. 
(b)  This article shall not prohibit: 
(1)  The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city; 
(2)  The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, or any contractor or materialman, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city; or 
(3)  The operation of trucks upon any detour established by the police department in any case. 
(Code 1971, § 17-63; Code 1992, § 18-43; Ord. of 1-4-1983)  
Sec. 62-118. - Signs to be posted. 
The chief of police shall cause all truck routes and those streets upon which truck traffic is not feasible to be clearly marked by signs posted to give notice thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 17-64; Code 1992, § 18-44; Ord. of 1-4-1983)  
Sec. 62-119. - Weigh-in. 
Any patrol officer of the police department shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining the applicability of this division to such vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 17-65; Code 1992, § 18-45; Ord. of 1-4-1983)  
Secs. 62-120—62-136. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate parking, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-1; parking in violation of city ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-152; liability of owners and lessors of vehicles for municipal parking violations, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-5-152, 32-5-152.1. 
 
Sec. 62-137. - Parking to conform to markings and signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in such person's name, or owned or operated by such person, or in such person's possession, or under such person's control, to be or remain in any space or area in which parking is prohibited, as designated by proper marking with yellow paint or by sign, or in a time-limit parking area for a longer period of time than that designated by proper marking or a sign, or in any space or area in which parking is provided exclusively for the handicapped as designated by proper marking or sign, unless such vehicle is authorized for parking in a handicapped zone, as evidenced by a decal on the vehicle, or to park in any manner other than that indicated by proper marking or sign. 
(Code 1971, § 17-53; Code 1992, § 18-50; Ord. of 6-5-1984(2)) 
State Law reference— Obedience to traffic-control devices, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-31.  
Sec. 62-138. - Parking of trucks, tractors, etc.—In certain areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, except while loading or unloading, any truck larger than 1½ tons, any tractor, trailer or any tractor-trailer combination, upon any street or in any area of the city which is zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4. 
(Code 1971, § 17-54; Code 1992, § 18-51; Ord. of 2-15-1983(2))  
Sec. 62-139. - Same—With certain capacities of flammable liquids. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or park for any purpose, except while loading and unloading, any cargo tank, tank truck or trailer, tractor and trailer combination, or any other tank vehicle having a capacity in excess of 100 gallons for kerosene, gasoline, diesel fuel, propane, butane or any other flammable liquid having a flashpoint of below 70 degrees Fahrenheit within the city, unless written permission has first been obtained from the fire department. 
(Code 1971, § 17-55; Code 1992, § 18-52)  
Chapter 66 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to construct, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-3, 11-48-4 et seq., 11-50-50 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Waterworks board. 
(a)  There is hereby created a waterworks board, which department is charged with the duty of operating the water system of the city. 
(b)  With regard to sanitary sewer service, the board shall: 
(1)  Furnish such water as may be necessary for the flushing of the sewer system after the discharge of sewage therein. 
(2)  Render bills for the applicable sanitary sewer service charges to the occupants of all properties connected to the sewer system and use every reasonable effort to collect such bills under procedures established in this chapter. 
(3)  Employ such personnel as may be necessary for these purposes. 
(4)  Not less often than once during each calendar month, render to the city a report showing in reasonable detail the total amount of sanitary sewer service charges collected by the board since the period covered by the preceding monthly report. 
(Code 1971, § 19-1; Code 1992, § 13-1) 
State Law reference— Waterworks board, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-234.  
Secs. 66-2—66-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 66-21. - Water service outside city limits restricted. 
No service for water shall be allowed beyond the city limits without a specific resolution and approval by the city council. Such resolution shall set and establish an amount, including but not limited to fees and costs, as will compensate the city for a portion of the costs for capital improvements and construction of the facilities necessary to render said service. 
(Code 1992, § 13-13; Ord. of 11-5-1991)  
Secs. 66-22—66-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to operate sewer system, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-50 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means any release of wastewater that, for any unforeseen reason, fails to comply with any prohibition or limitation in this article. 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (P.L. 92-500), as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-217), and as further amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
Approval authority means the director of the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM). 
Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius (68 degrees Fahrenheit) expressed in terms of weight and volume (milligrams per liter). 
Building sewer or house connection means the connecting pipe from a building to the sanitary sewer. 
Categorical standard means national categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. 
City means the City of Prattville, Alabama. Activities attributable to the city shall be the responsibility of the city council or any city employee delegated by the city council to act for the city. 
Color means what is considered to be the true color of the light transmitted by a waste solution after removing suspended material including pseudocolloidal particles. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater. Combined sewers are not permitted by ADEM policy. 
Constituents means the specific compounds and components that comprise the wastewater. 
Control authority means the approval authority defined in section 66-1. The term "control authority" shall also apply to the city in accordance with the memorandum of agreement between the state department of environmental management and the city. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Domestic wastewater means all liquid and waterborne pollutants, exclusive of unpolluted wastewater, or wastewater or wastes from processes or operations of industrial users. 
Environmental protection agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term "environmental protection agency" may also be used as a designation for the administrator or the duly authorized official of such agency. 
Flammable is as described in section 66-209(1). 
Grab sample means a sample that is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum pump tank trucks and septic tank haulers. 
Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act into the sewerage system, including holding tank waste discharged into the sewerage system. 
Industrial user means any user of the sewerage system who is a source of indirect discharge that does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act. The term "industrial user" means a user who discharges industrial waste into the sewerage system. 
Industrial waste means the liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business or from the development of natural resources. 
Infiltration means the water entering sewers and building sewer connections from the soil through defective joints, broken or cracked pipes, improper connections, manhole walls, etc. The term "infiltration" does not include and is distinguished from inflow. 
Inflow means the water discharged into sewer lines from such sources as roof leaders, cellar and yard area drains, foundation drains, commercial and industrial discharges of unpolluted wastewater, drains from springs and swampy areas, etc. The term "inflow" does not include and is distinguished from infiltration. 
Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the wastewater treatment processes or operations, or acts or discharges which may cause damage to any portion of the sewerage system and/or which contribute to a violation of any requirement of the city NPDES permits. The term "interference" includes interference with sewage sludge use or disposal in accordance with section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to SWDA (P.L. 89-272 as amended), the Clean Air Act (P.L. 91-604 as amended) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the sewerage system. 
Mayor means the administrative officer of the city who is charged with administrative control of all operations of the sewerage system and who is responsible directly to the city. As used herein, the term "mayor" may also include any city employee delegated to act for the city by the mayor or by the city. 
National categorical pretreatment standard, categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system or NPDES permit means a permit to discharge wastewater issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, or the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the federal register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, the term "new source" means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
Normal waste means a waste having average concentrations of 300 milligrams per liter of BOD, or less, and 300 milligrams per liter of suspended solids, or less, as determined by samples taken before entering the sewerage system. 
Person is as defined in section 1-2, excluding this city. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution. Stabilized pH is that determined after a sample of waste has been subjected to natural aeration. 
Pollutant means any solid waste, chemical waste, biological material, radioactive material, thermal waste or industrial, municipal and/or agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of water. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amounts of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewerage system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national categorical pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
Private wastewater disposal system means any facilities for wastewater treatment and disposal not maintained and operated by the city. 
Properly shredded garbage means the organic wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights and which is controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act which are owned, in this instance, by the city. The term "publicly owned treatment works or POTW" includes the wastewater treatment plants and any sewers that convey wastewater to the wastewater treatment plants (i.e., sewerage system). 
Receiving stream means the body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the discharge from a wastewater treatment plant or the body of water, stream or watercourse formed by the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewage means sewage excluding process wastes from industrial users. 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility that carries liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwaters and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences and industrial users (i.e., wastewater). 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater. 
Sewerage system means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater (POTW). 
Significant industrial user or SIU means any industrial user of the city sewerage system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday; 
(2)  Has a discharge that is greater than five percent of the hydraulic flow or organic design capacity of the city sewerage system serving the industrial user; 
(3)  Has a discharge that contains toxic pollutants or priority pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act or state statutes and rules and regulations; 
(4)  Is found by the city, the approval authority or the EPA to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the sewerage system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the sewerage system. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater for any duration during which the rate of flow or concentration of any constituent increases to such magnitude so as to adversely affect the operation of the sewerage system or the ability of the city's wastewater treatment plants to meet applicable water quality objectives. 
Standard industrial classification or SIC means a classification of an industry based on its product or service pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget of the federal government, as amended. 
Standard Methods means the analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the American Public Health Association or EPA Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes as per 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. 
Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Strength of waste means the concentration of pollutants or substances contained in a liquid waste. 
Suspended solids means the total solid matter that either floats on the surface of or is suspended in water or liquid waste and which is removable by laboratory filtration. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under provisions of section 307(a) of the Act or by the state. 
24-hour flow proportional composite sample or composite sample means a sample consisting of at least eight portions collected during a 24-hour period or the total period of waste flow if less than 24 hours and in which the sample portions are collected proportionate to the flow and proportionately combined into a single sample. Alternate sampling requirements may be established in a user's SID permit and/or by the control authority. 
Unpolluted wastewater. 
(1)  The term "unpolluted wastewater" means any wastewater that is substantially free of pollutants and is discharged from the following: 
a.  Rain downspouts and drains; 
b.  Footing drains; 
c.  Stormwater and surface water drains; 
d.  Cooling water systems. 
(2)  The term "unpolluted wastewater" shall contain, by definition, none of the following: 
a.  BOD in excess of ten milligrams per liter; 
b.  Suspended solids in excess of ten milligrams per liter; 
c.  Free or emulsified greases or oils; 
d.  Acids or alkalis; 
e.  Phenols or other substances imparting taste or odor to receiving waters; 
f.  Toxic or poisonous substances; 
g.  Noxious or odorous gases; 
h.  Any wastewater with a temperature which exceeds 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit) at its introduction into a storm sewer or which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) at its introduction into a receiving stream. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewerage system. 
Wastewater means sewage. 
Wastewater treatment plant means the facilities of the city for treating and disposing of wastewater. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state means all bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, within the boundaries of the state. 
(Code 1992, § 13-20; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 1.03)  
Sec. 66-47. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  ADEM: Alabama Department of Environmental Management. 
(2)  BOD: biochemical oxygen demand. 
(3)  CFR: Code of Federal Regulations. 
(4)  COD: chemical oxygen demand. 
(5)  EPA: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(6)  l: liter. 
(7)  mg: milligrams. 
(8)  mg/l: milligrams per liter. 
(9)  NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(10)  O and M: operation and maintenance. 
(11)  OSHA: Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(12)  P.L.: Public Law. 
(13)  POTW: publicly owned treatment works. 
(14)  SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act. 
(15)  SIU: significant industrial user. 
(16)  SID permit: state indirect discharge permit. 
(17)  SS: suspended solids. 
(18)  USC: United States Code. 
(Code 1992, § 13-21; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 1.02)  
Sec. 66-48. - Purposes; objectives. 
(a)  This article is adopted for the purposes of regulating and controlling the discharge of wastewaters into the sewerage system, to set forth uniform requirements for users of the sewerage system and to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including, but not limited to, the Clean Water Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-217), as amended; the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403); the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended; the Clean Air Act, as amended; the Toxic Substances Control Act, as amended; the Alabama Water Pollution Control Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-22-1 et seq.); and rules and regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency as amended from time to time. This article provides for the regulation of users of the sewerage system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, ensures that existing customers' capacities will not be preempted and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. This article shall apply to all persons who are users of the sewerage system. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewerage system which will interfere with the operation of the sewerage system or contaminate the resulting sludge. 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewerage system which will pass through the sewerage system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the operation of the sewerage system. 
(3)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the wastewater treatment plants. 
(4)  Provide for equitable distribution of the costs attributable to the construction, operation and maintenance of the sewerage system. 
(5)  Define areas of responsibility and procedures for joint management of the state industrial wastewater pretreatment program as it applies to the city sewerage system by the state department of environmental management and the city. 
(Code 1992, § 13-22; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 1.01)  
Sec. 66-49. - Assignment of program responsibilities. 
(a)  Implementation of this article may be either a joint effort by the city and ADEM, or an independent effort by the city under this article or ADEM under its state pretreatment regulations. 
(b)  ADEM shall assume primary responsibility for implementation of actions involving significant industrial users. 
(c)  The city shall assume primary responsibility for implementation of all actions other than those assigned to ADEM under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1992, § 13-23; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), §§ 15.01—15.03)  
Sec. 66-50. - Reviewing authority; amendment. 
(a)  The city council shall be the reviewing authority for all appeals of actions or administrative determinations made by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article. Notice of an intent to appeal and request for a hearing shall be addressed to the mayor in writing and shall detail the nature of the appeal. An early date for such hearing shall be set by the city council and the appellant promptly notified in writing. The decision of the city council after such hearing shall be final and conclusive and shall be conveyed to the persons involved in writing. 
(b)  The city council expressly reserves the absolute right to amend, modify, rescind or supplement this article with concurrence by ADEM. 
(c)  The city council will adopt and modify from time to time separate rate schedules to supplement this article. 
(Code 1992, § 13-24; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), §§ 13.01—13.03)  
Sec. 66-51. - Authority for inspection. 
(a)  The mayor and other duly authorized employees of the city and ADEM, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, flow measurement, sampling and testing of industrial wastes and other pollutants in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The mayor and other duly authorized employees of the city are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kinds and sources of discharges to the sewerage system. As required by federal regulations, industrial users must disclose information on processes; however, the city agrees that trade secret information will not be disclosed and will be held confidential. 
(c)  Owners or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the mayor and other duly authorized employees of the city and ADEM ready access at all reasonable times to all points on the premises where wastes are discharged into sewers for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. 
(d)  The city, its representatives and ADEM shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. 
(e)  Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with such user's security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, its representatives and ADEM will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Code 1992, § 13-25; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), §§ 11.01—11.05)  
Sec. 66-52. - Protection of equipment. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface, tamper with or remove any equipment or materials which are a part of the sewerage system, or any equipment or materials used by the city or ADEM for the purpose of making waste examinations and waste flow measurements and left upon the premises of a user discharging wastes into the sewerage system. Only persons authorized by the city or ADEM will be allowed to uncover, adjust, maintain and remove such equipment and materials. 
(Code 1992, § 13-26; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 12)  
Secs. 66-53—66-77. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REQUIRED USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
Sec. 66-78. - Restrictions on discharge to outlet other than sanitary sewer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any outlet other than a sanitary sewer any domestic or industrial wastes except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article and where an appropriate NPDES permit has been obtained pursuant to section 402 of the Act, or authorized private disposal system approved by the county health department, and provided that the property line for a parcel of land with a private disposal system is not within 150 feet of a public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1992, § 13-30; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 2.01; Ord. of 12-6-1994)  
Sec. 66-79. - Required discharge of cooling water to storm sewer. 
Where a storm sewer is adjacent to a property, cooling water which meets the requirements of unpolluted wastewater shall be discharged into the storm sewer in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article, provided that the city determines that sufficient capacity exists in the storm sewer to carry the cooling water without exceeding the design storm drainage capacity of the storm sewer, and where an appropriate NPDES permit has been obtained from ADEM pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
(Code 1992, § 13-31; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 2.02; Ord. of 12-6-1994)  
Sec. 66-80. - Required connection to public sanitary sewer. 
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way, or private easement, in which there is now located or may in the future be located abutting the property, a public sanitary sewer of the city that discharges to any of the city wastewater treatment plants, which has installed suitable toilet and other facilities therein necessary for the discharge of domestic and/or industrial wastes, is hereby required at the owners' expense to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sanitary sewer, in accordance with provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sanitary sewer is within 150 feet of the property line of the property. Such connections shall be required: 
(1)  When the city determines that a problem exists with an existing private wastewater disposal system which cannot be corrected by any means less than by replacement of a significant portion of the system. 
(2)  Where a public sanitary sewer is available within 150 feet of a property, no new private wastewater disposal systems will be permitted. 
(3)  All new connections to the city sewerage system shall be made in accordance with provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(4)  That all connections to the city sewerage system, after January 1, 1995, shall contain a four-inch or six-inch PVC flow backwater valve with cleanout on each end within two feet of the valve. 
(Code 1992, § 13-32; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 2.03; Ord. of 12-6-1994)  
Sec. 66-81. - Compliance with connection regulations. 
All new connections to the city sewerage system shall be made in accordance with provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 13-33; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 2.04)  
Sec. 66-82. - Sewer service outside city limits restricted. 
No service for sewage shall be allowed beyond the city limits without a specific resolution and approval by the city council. Such resolution shall set and establish an amount, including but not limited to fees and costs, as will compensate the city for a portion of the costs for capital improvements and construction of the facilities necessary to render said service. 
(Code 1992, § 13-34; Ord. of 11-5-1991)  
Secs. 66-83—66-107. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 66-108. - Use authorized. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 66-80, such toilet and other facilities necessary for the discharge of domestic and/or industrial wastes shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the requirements of the state, county health department and/or the city and provisions of the standard building code. 
(b)  All connections to the private wastewater disposal system, after January 1, 1995, shall contain a four-inch or six-inch PVC flow backwater valve with cleanout on each end within two feet of the valve. 
(Code 1992, § 13-40; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 3.01; Ord. of 12-6-1994)  
Sec. 66-109. - Construction permit required; application; furnishing information; payment of fees; percolation tests required. 
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owners shall first obtain a written permit from the city. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city that the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the city. At least two percolation tests shall be required within the area of septic tank drain field. Appropriate permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1992, § 13-41; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 3.02)  
Sec. 66-110. - Permit effective upon completion; required inspections. 
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two workdays of the receipt of notice by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 13-42; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 3.03)  
Sec. 66-111. - Type, capacity, location and layout; conditions under which permit prohibited; no discharge to natural outlet. 
The type, capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of ADEM and the county health department. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet, nor where the property is within 150 feet of an existing public sanitary sewer. No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 1992, § 13-43; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 3.04)  
Sec. 66-112. - Termination of use when public sewer becomes available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to property served by a private wastewater disposal system and problems as defined in section 66-80 are determined by the city to exist, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer, as provided in division 2 of this article, within 90 days and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1992, § 13-44; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 3.05)  
Sec. 66-113. - Maintenance of system. 
The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1992, § 13-45; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 3.06)  
Sec. 66-114. - Conditions for discharge of tank wastes. 
Holding tank wastes and septic tank wastes from private systems shall be discharged into the sewerage system only under the following conditions: 
(1)  No person owning vacuum pump or septic tank trucks or other liquid waste transport trucks shall discharge directly or indirectly such wastewater into the sewerage system unless such person shall first have applied for and received a wastewater haulers discharge permit from the city. All applicants for wastewater haulers discharge permits shall complete such forms as required by the city, pay appropriate fees and agree in writing to abide by the provisions of this section and any special conditions or regulations established by the city. The owners of such vehicles shall affix and display a permit number on the side of each vehicle used for such purposes. Such permits shall be valid for a maximum period of one year from the date of issuance, provided that such permit shall be subject to revocation by the city for violation of any provision of this division or reasonable regulation established by the city. Such permits shall be limited to the discharge of sanitary sewage containing no industrial waste. Pumpage from commercial grease traps is specifically prohibited from discharge into the sewerage system. The city shall designate the locations and times where such trucks may be discharged and may refuse to accept any truckload of waste at its absolute discretion where it appears that the waste could interfere with the effective operation of the sewerage system. 
(2)  No person shall discharge any other holding tank waste including industrial process wastes into the sewerage system unless such person shall have applied for and have been issued a permit by the city. Unless otherwise allowed under the terms and conditions of the permit, a separate permit shall be secured for each separate discharge. The permit shall state the specific location of discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur and the volume of the discharge, and shall limit the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the discharge. Such user shall pay any applicable charges or fees therefor, and shall comply with the conditions of the permit issued by the city. 
(3)  The owner of any vehicle for which a wastewater haulers discharge permit is requested, must be a resident of the city, and the business of such owner must be located in the city. The mayor shall have the authority to waive the residency and business location requirements upon written application and appropriate bond and surety as required and approved by the mayor. 
(4)  No person shall operate a dumping station for the discharge of sanitary sewage from recreational vehicles into the sewerage system unless the user of the dumping station has first applied for and received a recreational vehicle dumping station permit from the city. All applicants for recreational vehicle dumping station permits shall complete such forms as required by the city, pay appropriate fees and agree in writing to abide by the provisions of this division and any special conditions or regulations established by the city. These permits shall be issued only for approved facilities designed for and to receive sanitary sewage only. 
(Code 1992, § 13-46; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 3.07; Ord. of 6-7-1983(1))  
Sec. 66-115. - Additional requirements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by federal or state agencies. 
(Code 1992, § 13-47; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 3.08)  
Secs. 66-116—66-143. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTIONS AND PERMITS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 66-144. - Separate and independent building sewers. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer for the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(Code 1992, § 13-62; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.14)  
Sec. 66-145. - Use of existing building sewers. 
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the city to meet all the requirements of this division and other ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 13-63; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.15)  
Sec. 66-146. - Materials, specifications, etc., of building sewers. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the city building code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Code 1992, § 13-64; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.16)  
Sec. 66-147. - Building sewer elevation; lift. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1992, § 13-65; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.17)  
Sec. 66-148. - Connecting building sewer to public sewer; regulations. 
The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the city building code, other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. All connections from a private dwelling or commercial property to public sewer systems, including the installation of all exterior lines and fixtures, must be performed by a licensed plumber. This shall not include repair of existing fixtures but shall include total replacement of existing fixtures. 
(Code 1992, § 13-66; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.18; Ord. of 12-6-1994)  
Sec. 66-149. - Inspection and testing of building sewer. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 13-67; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.19)  
Sec. 66-150. - Responsibility of owner for cost of building sewer installation and connection. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owners. The owners shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation or maintenance of the building sewer. Maintenance after installation of the sewer from the building to the connection pipe, which connection pipe shall be defined as that pipe receiving sewer laterals from more than one building on a public right-of-way or easement, shall be borne by the owners. The owners shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation or maintenance of the building sewer. 
(Code 1992, § 13-68; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.13; Ord. No. 95-042, 12-19-1995)  
Sec. 66-151. - Guarding excavations; restoring street surfaces. 
(a)  All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. 
(b)  Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1992, § 13-69; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.20)  
Sec. 66-152. - Conformance to OSHA regulations. 
All construction activities shall conform to all applicable OSHA regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 13-69.1; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.21)  
Secs. 66-153—66-172. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permits 
 
Sec. 66-173. - Permit required to make connection with sewer. 
No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or openings into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1992, § 13-50; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.01)  
Sec. 66-174. - Classes of sewer permits. 
There shall be two classes of sewer permits: 
(1)  Building sewer permits for residential, commercial, industrial or public facilities. 
(2)  State indirect discharge (SID) permits for significant industrial users as defined in section 66-46. 
(Code 1992, § 13-51; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.02)  
Sec. 66-175. - Application for and issuance of permit to connect with city sewers. 
Any person desiring to tap, cut or connect onto the city sanitary sewer line or system shall make application in writing to the director of planning and development setting forth the street and location of the place where such sewer line is to be tapped, cut or connected, the name and address of the owner of the property which is to be connected with such sewer line, and such other information as the director of planning and development shall require. Such application shall be filed in the office of the director of planning and development and upon the payment of fees as required in the following sections, the director of planning and development shall issue a permit authorizing such connection. 
(Code 1992, § 13-52; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.03; Ord. of 10-3-1989)  
Sec. 66-176. - SID permit required. 
In addition to the requirements of section 66-175, any person who proposes to originate the discharge of any industrial waste for the first time into the sewerage system or who proposes to make a significant change in the character or volume of any industrial waste theretofore discharged into the sewerage system, shall make application to ADEM through the city for a SID permit and obtain a permit prior to connecting to the sewerage system or making a significant change in such person's contribution thereto. The applications shall be supplemented by any information that may have been furnished by the applicant to any other governmental agency and by such other plans or other data as the city may reasonably require for purposes of determining whether the qualifications are met as specified in section 66-181. 
(Code 1992, § 13-53; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.04)  
Sec. 66-177. - Definition of significant change. 
A significant change in the character or volume of an industrial waste, for purposes of section 66-176, shall be deemed to be proposed if substances, compounds and elements not previously constituting any part of a user's industrial waste are to be introduced into such waste, or if the average concentration of any substance, compound or element in the waste or average volume proposed to be discharged will cause a violation of any permit limitation. In case of doubt as to whether an intended change constitutes a significant change, it shall be the responsibility of the user intending to make such a change to make the necessary application, or obtain a written ruling from the city and ADEM that an application for a SID permit is not required. 
(Code 1992, § 13-54; Ord. of 2-15-1983(1), § 4.05)  
Sec. 66-178. - Continuation of existing users without SID permits. 
Any user who, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, was operating within the city and is a SIU from which industrial waste is discharged into the sewerage system, hereinafter called an existing significant industrial user, may continue such discharge until notified by the city in writing that a SID permit will be required and until an application has been submitted to and denied by the city and ADEM in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The city, after consultation with ADEM, shall issue written notices to existing significant industrial users (in such time sequence as it may determine in the light of the staff resources available for the processing of SID permit applications) specifying in each such notice the time within which an existing SIU shall file application for a SID permit. 
(2)  Within the specified time limit, the existing SIU shall file the required application together with any other information as described in section 66-176. 
(3)  An existing SIU may continue to discharge, after complying with the requirement to file an application for a SID permit, unless and until receipt by the applicant of a written notice specifying the reasons for denial of a SID permit and specifying what remedial action, if any, must be taken to qualify the applicant for a permit. 
(Code 1992, § 13-55; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.06)  
Sec. 66-179. - Application for SID permit by user subject to national categorical pretreatment standard. 
Any user subject to a new national categorical pretreatment standard shall apply for a new SID permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. SID permits of users subject to such standards shall be issued or reissued in compliance with such standards within the time frames prescribed by such standards. 
(Code 1992, § 13-56; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.07)  
Sec. 66-180. - Discharge prohibited on denial of SID permit. 
In any case, where a final determination has been made denying a SID permit, it shall be unlawful for any person so denied a SID permit to discharge industrial waste into the sewerage system. 
(Code 1992, § 13-57; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.08)  
Sec. 66-181. - Conditions for issuance or renewal of SID permit. 
A SID permit will be issued or renewed by ADEM only when satisfactory information has been submitted to indicate that: 
(1)  Sewerage system capacity is available for receiving the discharge of industrial waste at the proposed point of discharge. 
(2)  Waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged is amenable to treatment by the processes employed in the wastewater treatment plants of the city and will not impair the ability of the city to comply with water quality standards or effluent standards established by the state or by federal regulatory agencies. 
(3)  Waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged will not cause damage to the sewerage system including the wastewater treatment facilities, will not constitute a hazard to humans or animals and will not be capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(4)  Concentrations of substances, compounds and elements in the waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged do not exceed limits established by the city, state or federal authorities. 
(5)  Where the wastewater contains or may contain any substances, compounds or elements controlled or limited by this article, an adequate program of self-monitoring of flow and wastewater characteristics will be established and maintained by the industry effected by this article to ensure that the discharge meets the requirements of this article and any SID permit conditions. 
(Code 1992, § 13-58; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.09)  
Sec. 66-182. - Contents of SID permit. 
A SID permit shall include all appropriate requirements of this article and all other applicable regulations established by the city and ADEM. SID permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents, volume and characteristics. The city or ADEM may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(2)  Limits on average and maximum rates and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(3)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and/or sampling facilities. 
(4)  Specifications for monitoring programs that may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules. 
(5)  Compliance schedules. 
(6)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports as per sections 66-290 through 66-294. 
(7)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharges as specified by the city and ADEM and affording the city and ADEM access thereto. 
(8)  Requirements for notification of the city and ADEM of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial changes in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the sewerage system. 
(9)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges in accordance with sections 66-229 through 66-231. 
(10)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city or ADEM, to ensure compliance with the requirements and purposes of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 13-59; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.10)  
Sec. 66-183. - SID permit period. 
A SID permit shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed five years. The user shall apply for SID permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing SID permit. The terms and conditions of the SID permit may be subject to modification by the city or ADEM during the term of the SID permit as limitations or requirements as identified in division 5 of this article are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the SID permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the SID permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Code 1992, § 13-60; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.11)  
Sec. 66-184. - SID permit limited to specific user and operation. 
A SID permit is issued to a specified user for a specific operation. A SID permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without prior submission of applicable revisions to the application for the existing SID permit and without the approval of the city and ADEM. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing SID permit. 
(Code 1992, § 13-61; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 4.12)  
Secs. 66-185—66-206. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 66-207. - General prohibition. 
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the sewerage system. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the sewerage system whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(Code 1992, § 13-70; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 5.01)  
Sec. 66-208. - Enumeration of wastes prohibited generally under certain conditions. 
No user shall discharge or deposit any of the following materials, waste materials, wastes, gases or liquids into any sewer forming part of the sewerage system except where these may constitute occasional, intermittent inclusions in the wastewaters discharged from residential premises: 
(1)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment plant or resulting in other interference with the treatment processes but, in no case, wastewater with a temperature which exceeds 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit) at its introduction into the sewerage system or which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) at its introduction into a wastewater treatment plant. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing more than 50 mg/l of fat, oil or grease or other substances that will solidify or become viscous at temperatures between zero degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit) and 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(3)  Wastewater from industrial users containing floatable oils, fat or grease. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded so that no particles are any greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(5)  Any wastes capable of causing abnormal corrosion, abnormal deterioration, damage to or creating a hazard to structures or equipment of the sewerage system or to humans or animals or interfering with proper operation of the city's wastewater treatment plants. All wastes discharged to the sewerage system must have a pH value in the range of six to ten standard units. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, concentrated acids or alkalis and high concentrations of compounds of sulfur, chlorine and fluorine and substances which may react with water to form strongly acidic or basic products. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a color which is not removable by existing wastewater treatment processes and which causes plant effluent to exceed color requirements for discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1992, § 13-71; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 5.02)  
Sec. 66-209. - Enumeration of wastes prohibited absolutely. 
No user shall discharge or deposit any of the following materials, waste materials, waste gases or liquids into any sewer forming a part of the sewerage system: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious to any other way to the sewerage system or to the operation of the system. At no time shall two successive readings (15 to 30 minutes between readings) on an explosion hazard meter (model GX-3 as manufactured by Gas Tech, Inc., Mountain View, California, references to establish a standard of quality for a measuring device) at the point of discharge into the sewerage system be more than five percent, nor any single reading over ten percent, of the lower explosive limit (L.E.L.) of the meter. Prohibited materials covered by this section include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, fuel oil, motor oil, mineral spirits, commercial solvents, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides and hydrides. 
(2)  Any other solid or viscous substance in quantity or character capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or interference with proper operation of wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, eggshells from egg processors, ashes, cinders, ceramic wastes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, thread, glass, rags, metal, feathers, bones, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, insulation materials, fibers of any kind, stock or poultry feeds, processed grains, viscera or other fleshy particles from processing or packing plants or lime or similar sludges. 
(3)  Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases, which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are or may be sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair. 
(4)  Any substance which may cause wastewater treatment plant effluent or any other product of the sewerage system such as residue, sludge or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the sewerage system cause the system to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed by local, state or federal authorities. 
(5)  Any substance that will cause the sewerage system to violate its NPDES permit and/or the quality standards of the receiving stream. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or wastes in the sewerage system, releases obnoxious gases, forms suspended solids which interfere with the sewerage system or creates a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(7)  Any form of inflow as defined by section 66-46, including storm drainage and uncontaminated thermal process water. 
(8)  Infiltration as defined by section 66-46 in excess of 200 gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of pipe per day. 
(9)  Any unpolluted wastewater, as defined in section 66-46. 
(Code 1992, § 13-72; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 5.03)  
Sec. 66-210. - Prohibited wastes above certain limits. 
(a)  No user shall discharge into any sewer forming part of the sewerage system any of the following materials in concentrations exceeding the stated limits: 
(1)  Any waters or wastes that contain more than ten mg/l of hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide or nitrous oxide. 
(2)  Any toxic or poisonous substance or any other materials in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with the wastewater treatment processes or to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to cause a violation of the water quality standards or effluent standards for the stream or watercourse receiving the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant or to exceed limitations set forth in categorical pretreatment standards. 
(3)  Any waters containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual provisions, attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plants. 
(4)  Any waters containing quantities of radium or naturally occurring or artificially produced radioisotopes in excess of presently existing or subsequently accepted limits for drinking water as established by current drinking water regulations promulgated by EPA. 
(5)  Any wastewater containing in excess of: 
FIXED UPPER LIMITS FOR CONSTITUENTS 
(milligrams per liter) 
	Maximum instantaneous concentration (grab sample) 	Maximum daily average (24-hour flow proportional composite sample) 
Aluminum (dissolved) 	50.0 	25.0 
Arsenic 	2.0 	1.0 
Cadmium 	0.2 	0.1 
Chromium, Hexavalent 	0.2 	0.1 
Chromium, total 	2.5 	1.0 
Cobalt 	1.6 	0.8 
Copper 	2.0 	1.0 
Cyanide 	1.0 	0.5 
Iron 	20.0 	10.0 
Lead 	0.6 	0.4 
Mercury 	0.2 	0.1 
Nickel 	2.0 	1.0 
Silver 	0.5 	0.25 
Tin 	2.5 	1.0 
Zinc 	3.6 	1.8 
Phosphates (total as P) 	40.0 	20.0 
Total metals, As + Cd + Cr + Co + Cu + Hg + Pb + Ni + Ag + Sn + Zn 	10.5 	5.0 
 
(6)  The admission into the sewerage system of any waters or wastes having a BOD in excess of 500 mg/l on a 24-hour composite basis or for any single sample having a BOD in excess of 1,500 mg/l will be subject to review by the city. Where necessary, in the opinion of the city, the user shall provide and operate, at such user's own expense, such pretreatment as may be required to reduce the BOD to meet the above requirements. 
(7)  The admission into the sewerage system of any waters or wastes having a suspended solids content in excess of 500 mg/l on a 24-hour composite basis, or for any single sample having a suspended solids content greater than 1,500 mg/l will be subject to review by the city. Where necessary in the opinion of the city, the user shall provide and operate, at such user's own expense, such pretreatment as may be required to reduce the suspended solids content to meet the above requirements. 
(8)  The admission into the sewerage system of any waters or wastes, in volumes or with constituents such that existing dilution conditions in the sewers or at a wastewater treatment plant would be effected to the detriment of the sewerage system, shall be subject to review and approval of the city. Where necessary in the opinion of the city, pretreatment or equalizing units may be required to bring constituents or volumes of flow within the limits previously prescribed or to an otherwise acceptable level and to hold or equalize flows so that no peak flow conditions may hamper the operation of any unit of the sewerage system. Such equalization or holding unit shall have a capacity suitable to serve its intended purpose and be equipped with acceptable outlet control facilities to provide flexibility in operation and accommodate changing conditions in the waste flow. 
(b)  Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the categorical standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in the subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. All effected users shall notify the city of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(c)  State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those of this article. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to establish additional regulations containing more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the sewerage system if deemed necessary. 
(Code 1992, § 13-73; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 5.04)  
Sec. 66-211. - Fats, oils, and grease control. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Food services establishment means any user primarily engaging in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying, baking, grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling, boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. Said facilities shall include, but are not limited to, restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, churches, camps, caterers, hospitals, nursing homes, grocery stores, prisons, jails, and manufacturing plants. 
Grease means any material composed primarily of fats, oil, and grease (FOG) from animal or vegetable sources. The terms fats, oil, and grease shall be deemed as "grease" by definition and the term shall not include petroleum-based products. 
Grease interceptor or trap means any device designed for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Such devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
User means any person or establishment, including those located outside the city limits, who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the city's wastewater collection or treatment system. The term shall also include persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control discharges into the public sewage collection system and wastewater treatment plant that interfere with the operation of the system, cause blockage and plugging of sewer pipelines, interfere with normal operation of pumps and their controls, and contribute waste of a strength or form that either causes treatment difficulties or is beyond the treatment capability of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(c)  Scope. This section shall apply to all food service establishments, as defined by subsection (a) of this section operating within the service area of the Prattville Wastewater System. 
(1)  New construction or renovation. Any new construction of, renovation of an existing structure for use as or expansion of food service establishment shall be required to install a grease interceptor meeting the criteria in subsections (d) and (e) of this section. Detailed plans for the grease interceptor shall be submitted for review and approval by the city plumbing inspector. A permit shall be required from the city planning department prior to installation of the approved grease interceptor. 
(2)  Existing facilities. Existing food service establishments shall have 365 days from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived to install a grease interceptor meeting the criteria in subsections (d) and (e) of this section. Facilities without approved grease interceptors at the end of the 365 days period shall be in violation of this section. Detailed plans for the grease interceptor shall be submitted for review and approval by the city plumbing inspector. A permit shall be required from the city planning department prior to installation of the approved grease interceptor. 
(d)  General criteria. 
(1)  Installation requirement. An approved, properly operated, and maintained grease, interceptor shall be installed at the user's expense. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer flows. Discharges from toilets, urinals, lavatories, etc., shall not be discharged into a grease trap, but shall be conveyed separately to the sanitary sewer service lateral. 
(3)  Floor drains. Floor drains which discharge or have the potential to discharge grease shall be connected to the grease trap. 
(4)  Garbage grinders/disposers. All garbage grinders/disposers shall be connected to the grease trap. 
(5)  Dishwashers. Commercial dishwashers shall be connected to a grease trap and said grease trap properly sized to allow for the cooling and solidification of the grease contained in the discharge of the dishwasher. 
(6)  Location. Grease traps shall be installed outside of the building upstream from the sanitary sewer service lateral connection. 
(e)  Design criteria. 
(1)  Construction and capacity. All grease traps shall be constructed to the standards required by chapter 105, article VI, of this Code and set forth in section 1003 of the International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition. All grease traps shall have a capacity of not less than 1,000 gallons and shall not exceed 3,000 gallons in capacity. If the calculated capacity exceeds 3,000 gallons, multiple traps shall be plumbed in series. 
(2)  Access. Access to grease traps shall be available at all times for maintenance and inspection. 
(3)  Inlet and outlet piping. Wastewater discharging into a grease trap shall enter through only one inlet and discharge from only one outlet. 
(f)  Alternative standards. 
(1)  Generally. Where the design criteria for grease interceptors cannot be complied with due to site or building limitations, the wastewater superintendent may approve the use of an interceptor of a smaller capacity that required by subsections (d) and (e) of this section. In no case shall a food service establishment be permitted to operate without a grease interceptor. 
(2)  Superintendent's approval. Before approving the use of an alternative standard, the superintendent must determine the following: 
a.  A hardship exists due to space limitations in the building and lot and that the structure was built prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
b.  The food service establishment has provided the largest possible grease interceptor given the available space. 
c.  The food service establishment has provided a schedule for inspection and cleaning based on the manufacturer's requirements for the specific grease trap and the expected wastewater flow. 
(3)  Maintenance agreement. 
a.  In approving the use of alternative standards, the food service establishment and city shall enter into an agreement stating the following: 
1.  The hardship defined in subsection (f)(2)a of this section; 
2.  The design, size and location of the approved interceptor; and 
3.  The required clean-out schedule as required by the superintendent. 
b.  Maintenance agreements shall be kept on file by the city. A copy of the approved agreement shall be kept at the food service establishment and be available for review by the superintendent or his representative. 
c.  Failure by the food service establishment to comply with the terms of the maintenance agreement shall be a violation of this section and subject to subsection (j) of this section. 
(g)  Grease trap maintenance. 
(1)  Generally. The user shall maintain all grease traps to ensure proper operation and efficiency. Maintenance of grease traps shall include, but is not limited to, the complete removal of all contents, including floating material, wastewater, and bottom sludge and solids. Maintenance shall be performed by a qualified and licensed hauler. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the trap from which it was removed or any other grease trap is prohibited. Grease traps shall be inspected at the time of maintenance and repairs noted and made at the user's expense. 
(2)  Cleaning/pumping frequency. The grease trap shall be pumped out completely a minimum of once every four months, or more frequently if the wastewater superintendent determines it is needed to prevent the carry over of grease into the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  Disposal. All waste removed from each grease trap shall be disposed of at a facility approved to receive such wastes in accordance with the provisions of this section. In no way shall the pumpage be returned to any portion of the city's sanitary sewer collection system. 
(4)  Maintenance log. A grease trap cleaning/maintenance log indicating each pumping for the previous 24 months shall be maintained by each food service establishment. The log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler, and disposal site and shall be available on site for inspection. Said log shall be made available immediately when requested by the wastewater superintendent, the superintendent's representative or the code enforcement inspector. 
(5)  Submittal of records. 
a.  Each user shall submit a copy of all cleaning and maintenance records to the wastewater superintendent. The records shall be submitted in a format approved by the superintendent and must contain the following minimum information: 
1.  Facility name, address, contact person, and phone number. 
2.  Company name, address, phone number, and contact name of person responsible for performing the maintenance, cleaning, pumping, or repair of grease trap. 
3.  Types of maintenance performed. 
4.  Date maintenance was performed. 
5.  Date of next scheduled maintenance. 
b.  Maintenance recorded shall be submitted to the city on an annual basis. Records for the prior calendar year shall be submitted by January 31 of each year. Submissions shall be made to: City of Prattville, Wastewater Department, 101 West Main Street, Prattville, AL 36067. 
(6)  Inspection. The wastewater superintendent or his representative shall perform periodic inspections of food service establishment. The user shall be notified of any required maintenance or repairs. If determined by the wastewater superintendent during inspection, the user may be required to install, at the user's expense, additional interceptors or traps to prevent discharges of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system. 
(h)  Additives. The use of any biological additives in the grease trap or building discharge line including but not limited to, enzymes, commercially available bacteria, or other additives designed to absorb, purge, consume, treat, or otherwise eliminate fats, oil, and grease shall require written approval from the wastewater superintendent. Such written approval by the wastewater superintendent may also include modification of the grease trap pumping frequency required by subsection (g)(2) of this section. 
(i)  Chemical treatment. Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, acid, or other chemical solvents shall not be allowed to enter the grease trap. 
(j)  Enforcement. The wastewater superintendent, superintendent's representative, plumbing inspector, or the code enforcement inspector shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-013, §§ 1—10, 5-1-2007)  
Secs. 66-212—66-228. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PRETREATMENT, ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE AND FLOW MEASUREMENT 
 
Sec. 66-229. - Responsibility for method of making waste eligible for discharge. 
(a)  Any person who is denied a permit to discharge industrial waste, or who is prohibited from discharging any substance as specified in this article or who is required to provide pretreatment or flow equalization as a SIU under the federal effluent limitation guidelines for the appropriate industrial category, shall have the sole responsibility to devise at such person's own expense the methods for eliminating the problem so as to make any waste discharge eligible for a permit or for compliance with this article or the federal guidelines. Such sole responsibility shall not be effected nor shall any responsibility be assumed by the city, notwithstanding that the city may render any assistance to any person in overcoming such a problem by offering advice or suggestions. 
(b)  Additionally, the following apply: 
(1)  Where pretreatment or equalization of industrial wastewater flows prior to discharge into any part of the sewerage system are required, plans, specifications and other pertinent data or information relating to such pretreatment or flow control facilities shall first be submitted to the city and ADEM for review and approval in accordance with division 4 of this article. Satisfactory evidence must be included that the method of disposal of pretreatment sludges has the approval of the appropriate state and/or local solid waste program agency. Such approval shall not exempt the discharge or such facilities from compliance with any applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any governmental authority. Any subsequent alteration or addition to such pretreatment or flow control facilities shall not be made without due notice to and prior approval by the city and ADEM. 
(2)  If pretreatment or control of flows is required, such facilities shall be constructed, maintained in good working order and properly operated as efficiently as possible by the user at the user's own cost and expense, subject to the requirements of this article and all other applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1992, § 13-80; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 6.01)  
Sec. 66-230. - Accidental discharge. 
In the event of an accidental discharge as defined in section 66-46: 
(1)  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city and ADEM upon request for review and approval. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures does not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify such user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(2)  If, after taking action as provided in subsection (1) of this section, an industrial facility, for any unforeseen reason, fails to comply with any prohibition or limitation in this article, the user responsible for such noncomplying discharge shall immediately notify the city so that any feasible corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment system or to minimize adverse effects thereon. In addition, a written report addressed to the city and to ADEM detailing the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the discharge and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges shall be filed by the responsible industrial facility within five days of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who observe or who may cause to suffer such an accidental discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1992, § 13-81; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 6.02)  
Sec. 66-231. - Flow and concentration control. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any wastes or wastewaters in slugs as defined in section 66-46. 
(b)  Any person now discharging or proposing to discharge wastes which may include slugs may be required to provide facilities or adopt procedures for regulating, controlling or equalizing the concentration of any constituent and/or the rate of the waste discharge. 
(Code 1992, § 13-82; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), §§ 7.01, 7.02)  
Sec. 66-232. - Flow measurement methods; identification of water sources and discharges. 
(a)  The volume or quantity of industrial waste discharged by a user into the sewerage system shall be measured by one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  If the volume of water used by any user is substantially the same as the volume secured from the municipal waterworks system, then the volume of water purchased shall be considered to be the volume of waste discharged. 
(2)  If a substantial portion of the water secured by a user from the municipal waterworks system is not returned to the sewerage system, the quantity of wastewater shall be determined as follows: 
a.  By a meter on the water supply line to such user's industrial and/or process operations not discharging to the sewerage system; 
b.  By a meter on such user's waste line which discharges into the sewerage system; or 
c.  If meters as required under subsections (2)a and b of this section shall not have been installed, an estimate shall be made by the city for that proportion of water purchased which is used for industrial purposes and not returned to the sewerage system. 
(3)  If any user, now discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste into the sewerage system, does not secure such user's entire water supply requirements from the municipal waterworks system, such user shall install and maintain a meter on such user's waste line which discharges into the sewerage system or shall install such additional meters on the private water supply as required to permit determination of the total quantity discharged to the sewerage system from both sources under procedures comparable to subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(b)  All sources of water supply and all discharges of wastewater into the sewerage system must be identified in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. Any omission shall be considered as an unauthorized use of the sewerage system. 
(Code 1992, §§ 13-83, 13-84; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), §§ 8.01, 8.02)  
Secs. 66-233—66-257. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - MONITORING FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 66-258. - Required; specifications; location. 
Any user, who is discharging or proposes to discharge industrial waste into the sewerage system, shall provide, operate and maintain at the user's own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. These monitoring facilities shall be as specified in the user's SID permit. The monitoring facilities shall normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facilities to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that they will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(Code 1992, § 13-85; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 9.01)  
Sec. 66-259. - Spacing; maintenance. 
There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facilities to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facilities shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(Code 1992, § 13-86; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 9.02)  
Sec. 66-260. - Recording and sampling equipment. 
When deemed necessary by the city and/or ADEM, continuous recording and/or sampling equipment shall be installed and maintained at the user's expense. 
(Code 1992, § 13-87; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 9.03)  
Sec. 66-261. - Construction. 
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with requirements of the city, ADEM and/or all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city or ADEM. Additional construction time may be granted where so dictated by equipment availability. 
(Code 1992, § 13-88; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 9.04)  
Sec. 66-262. - Review. 
The city and/or ADEM shall review monitoring facilities of present users and may require additional monitoring facilities as required for compliance with sections 66-258 through 66-261. 
(Code 1992, § 13-89; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 9.05)  
Sec. 66-263. - New users. 
New users shall provide monitoring facilities as specified in their SID permits prior to the plant start-up. 
(Code 1992, § 13-90; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 9.06)  
Secs. 66-264—66-289. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - INSPECTIONS AND REPORTS 
 
Sec. 66-290. - Required 
Significant industrial users shall submit self-monitoring data at monthly intervals to the city and ADEM. These monthly reports will be submitted using copies of monitoring forms available from the city as approved by ADEM and will be due by the 28th of the month following the reporting period. 
(Code 1992, § 13-91; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 10.01)  
Sec. 66-291. - Periodic inspections; determining character and strength. 
Facilities generating industrial wastes and/or other pollutants that are discharged into the sewerage system shall be subject to periodic inspection. A determination of character and strength of such wastes may be made annually or more often as may be deemed necessary by the city and/or ADEM and as indicated in the SID permit to ascertain whether the purposes of this article are being met, all requirements are being complied with and to determine strengths of wastes for user charge computations. 
(Code 1992, § 13-92; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 10.02)  
Sec. 66-292. - Report of pollutants. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards as defined in section 66-46 or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewerage system, any user subject to pretreatment standards or who is so required by the city or ADEM, shall submit to the city and ADEM a report indicating the nature and concentrations of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated processes which are limited by pretreatment standards and/or limitations established in division 5 of this article and the average and maximum daily flows for these process units in the user's facility. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standard and/or ordinance limitations are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O and M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards and/or ordinance limitations. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(Code 1992, § 13-93; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 10.03)  
Sec. 66-293. - Collecting samples; examination methods. 
Samples shall be collected manually or mechanically over such periods of time and composited in such a manner as to be representative of the wastes being discharged. The laboratory methods followed in the examination of such wastes shall be those as set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods, as defined in section 66-46. 
(Code 1992, § 13-94; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 10.04)  
Sec. 66-294. - Finality of determination. 
When so requested by the industrial user, samples collected by the city or ADEM will be split with the industrial user for verification of analytical results. However, final determination of the character, strength or quantity of the wastes as made by the city or ADEM shall be binding as a basis for computation of charges or for actions by the city and/or ADEM. 
(Code 1992, § 13-95; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 10.05)  
Secs. 66-295—66-321. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 66-322. - Remedial action in case of discharge of excluded wastes. 
(a)  If the wastewaters containing any substance described in division 5 of this article are discharged, proposed to be discharged or accidentally discharged into the sewerage system, the city council may issue orders of enforcement relative to and take any action necessary to effectuate such of the following courses as may be appropriate: 
(1)  Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater. 
(2)  Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this article. 
(3)  Require pretreatment, including storage facilities or flow equalization, necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate this article. 
(4)  Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the purposes of this article. 
(b)  In addition to taking the remedial action in subsection (a) of this section, the city council may: 
(1)  Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any cost or expense incurred by the city, to include but not be limited to, damage to the sewerage system, damage to the city's wastewater treatment processes, extraordinary monitoring of the wastes and extraordinary treatment measures or processing imposed on the sewerage system by such discharge. 
(2)  Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any cost or expense incurred by the city for any fine or penalty imposed on the city by the state or federal government because of a violation of one of the city's national pollutant discharge elimination system permits or damage to the environment that is attributed to the discharge. 
(3)  Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to furnish a bond or other security, with terms specified by the city council, to hold harmless the city from any loss or expense that it may incur as a result of such noncompliance or any future noncompliance. 
(Code 1992, § 13-100; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 14.01)  
Sec. 66-323. - Causes for permit revocation. 
Any user who violates any conditions of this article or applicable state and federal regulations is subject to having such user's permit revoked. Among the conditions that may result in permit revocation are the following: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of such user's discharge. 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring in accordance with provisions of section 66-51. 
(Code 1992, § 13-101; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 14.02)  
Sec. 66-324. - Enforcement action upon noncompliance with orders. 
If the city council fails to obtain cooperation and compliance with the orders of enforcement as outlined in sections 66-322 and 66-323, further action may be taken by the city council, as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  The city council may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the sewerage system to show cause, before the city council, why proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the tie and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation, the reasons the action is to be taken, and the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(2)  The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the city council to: 
a.  Issue, in the name of the city council, notice of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
b.  Take the evidence. 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon. 
(3)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor. 
(4)  After the city council has reviewed the evidence and if it finds that the user is in violation of this article and refuses to comply with the findings of the city council or if the user waives the right to a hearing, the city council, through its authorized agents, including the mayor, may revoke the user's permit and will commence an action for appropriate injunctive, abatement and/or equitable relief in the circuit court. 
(Code 1992, § 13-102; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 14.03)  
Sec. 66-325. - Notice and report in case of nonuser violation. 
In any case which involves a person who fails to comply with this article, but who is not connected to or is not a user of the sewerage system, the city council shall give notice to such person by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the specifics of the failure of compliance and requiring that the person promptly remedy the failure. At the same time, the city council shall report the facts of such case in writing to such other government agency as may have jurisdiction and power to take appropriate enforcement action. 
(Code 1992, § 13-103; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 14.05)  
Sec. 66-326. - Punishment of violators. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate either willfully or negligently the provisions of this article or to fail to comply with same. A violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article, including the willful furnishing of false information relative to same for the use of the sewerage system, shall be and hereby is declared to be a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, any person in violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article or the use by any person of the sewerage system in violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than the limit specified in section 1-8 or by imprisonment as provided in section 1-8, or both, for each violation. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation hereunder. Every person concerned in the violation of any of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with same, or who furnishes false information relative to such person's use of the sewerage system aforesaid, whether such person directly commits the acts or aids and abets same and whether present or absent, shall be proceeded against and held as a principal. 
(Code 1992, § 13-104; Ord. of 3-15-1983(1), § 14.04)  
Secs. 66-327—66-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - CHARGES AND FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-014 , § 1, adopted Sept. 5, 2017, amended Div. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 10, §§ 66-356—66-363, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 3-1-2016. 
 
Sec. 66-356. - Cost recovery charges and fees; scope. 
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the sewerage system for the implementation of the program established herein and for the construction, operation and maintenance of the system: 
(1)  The city will adopt charges and fees that may include: 
a.  Service connection charges. 
b.  User charges. 
c.  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city pretreatment program. 
d.  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures. 
e.  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
f.  Fees for permit applications. 
g.  Fees for filing appeals. 
h.  Other fees contained herein. 
(2)  All charges, fees and other penalties may be published in schedules separate from this article and may be revised from time to time as the city finds necessary for maintenance of the purposes described in this section and in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2017-014, § 1, 9-5-2017 )  
Sec. 66-357. - Connection charges. 
(a)  It is hereby determined and declared that the city is entitled to impose a reasonable impact fee upon any person tapping, cutting or connecting onto its sanitary sewer lines within the corporate limits of the city for any structure, building, dumping station or other use for the cost of impacting the reserve capacity of sewer lines or treatment facilities. Such impact fee shall be based on the following chart where such connection is located within the corporate limits of the city. Any connection made outside the corporate limits may be subject to an additional 25 percent impact fee based upon the chart below. 
Effective Date: 	5/1/2016 	5/1/2017 	5/1/2018 	5/1/2019 	5/1/2020 & Thereafter 
Meter Size: 					
? inch 	$1,250.00 	$1,700.00 	$2,350.00 	$2,700.00 	$2,950.00 
¾ inch 	$2,750.00 	$2,750.00 	$3,025.00 	$3,300.00 	$3,575.00 
1 inch 	$3,675.00 	$3,675.00 	$4,050.00 	$4,425.00 	$4,800.00 
1½ inch 	$5,500.00 	$5,500.00 	$6,050.00 	$6,600.00 	$7,150.00 
2 inches 	$7,325.00 	$7,325.00 	$8,100.00 	$8,800.00 	$9,525.00 
3 inches 	$11,975.00 	$11,975.00 	$13,175.00 	$14,375.00 	$15,575.00 
4 inches 	$14,650.00 	$14,650.00 	$16,125.00 	$17,600.00 	$19,050.00 
6 inches 	$21,975.00 	$21,975.00 	$24,175.00 	$26,375.00 	$28,575.00 
8 inches 	$29,300.00 	$29,300.00 	$32,250.00 	$35,175.00 	$38,100.00 
10 inches 	$36,600.00 	$36,600.00 	$40,275.00 	$43,925.00 	$47,600.00 
12 inches 	$43,925.00 	$43,925.00 	$48,325.00 	$52,725.00 	$57,125.00 
 
(b)  It is hereby determined and declared that the city is entitled to impose a reasonable assessment charge upon any person tapping, cutting or connecting onto or utilizing its sanitary sewer lines within the corporate limits of the city any lot or portion thereof against which a sewer assessment has not already been made for the cost of constructing and maintaining such sanitary sewer lines. Such assessment shall apply if any portion of the line, leading from the structure to be connected to the public sewer, and from there to the appropriate sewage treatment plant has been constructed, in whole or in part, at city expense. 
(c)  Any or all of the above fees may be waived for connection to sewer lines constructed in whole or in part with community development block grant (CDBG) funds provided by the federal government where such connection is made to the home or dwelling of lower income persons as defined in the grant application or documents. 
( Ord. No. 2017-014, § 1, 9-5-2017 )  
Sec. 66-358. - Regular monthly charges—Schedule. 
Monthly charges for sanitary sewer service furnished by the sanitary sewer system are hereby imposed. Such charges are to be in the amounts specified as follows, and are to be applicable to any establishment required by this Code or any other ordinance to be connected with the sanitary sewer system, whether or not such establishment has actually been connected with the sanitary sewer system as required: 
(1)  For any establishment discharging sanitary sewer or process wastewater and which utilizes the city's sewage collection system, there is hereby established the following charges for each establishment or user as billed by the waterworks board, as follows: 
a.  Residential inside the city limits: 
1.  Effective May 1, 2016, base rate of $12.00 and $2.80 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
2.  Effective May 1, 2017, base rate of $13.00 and $3.00 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
3.  Effective May 1, 2018, base rate of $14.00 and $3.15 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
4.  Effective May 1, 2019, base rate of $15.00 and $3.25 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
5.  Effective May 1, 2020, base rate of $16.00 and $3.30 per 1,000 additional gallons of water. 
b.  Residential outside the city limits: 
1.  Effective May 1, 2016, base rate of $13.50 and $2.80 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
2.  Effective May 1, 2017, base rate of $14.50 and $3.00 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
3.  Effective May 1, 2018, base rate of $15.50 and $3.15 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
4.  Effective May 1, 2019, base rate of $16.50 and $3.25 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
5.  Effective May 1, 2020, base rate of $17.50 and $3.30 per 1,000 additional gallons of water. 
c.  Commercial customers inside the city limits: 
1.  Effective May 1, 2016, base rate of $19.00 and $3.45 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
2.  Effective May 1, 2017, base rate of $20.00 and $3.65 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
3.  Effective May 1, 2018, base rate of $21.00 and $3.80 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
4.  Effective May 1, 2019, base rate of $22.00 and $3.90 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
5.  Effective May 1, 2020, base rate of $23.00 and $3.95 per 1,000 additional gallons of water. 
d.  Commercial customers outside the city limits: 
1.  Effective May 1, 2016, base rate of $22.00 and $3.45 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
2.  Effective May 1, 2017, base rate of $23.00 and $3.65 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
3.  Effective May 1, 2018, base rate of $24.00 and $3.80 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
4.  Effective May 1, 2019, base rate of $25.00 and $3.90 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
5.  Effective May 1, 2020, base rate of $26.00 and $3.95 per 1,000 additional gallons of water. 
e.  All industrial users: 
1.  Effective May 1, 2016, base rate of $22.00 and $3.45 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
2.  Effective May 1, 2017, base rate of $23.00 and $3.65 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
3.  Effective May 1, 2018, base rate of $24.00 and $3.80 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
4.  Effective May 1, 2019, base rate of $25.00 and $3.90 per 1,000 additional gallons of water; 
5.  Effective May 1, 2020, base rate of $26.00 and $3.95 per 1,000 additional gallons of water. 
(2)  For the months of April, May, June, July, August and September of each calendar year, the basic sewer use charge for each month for any residential establishment shall be an amount equal to the average monthly charge for the preceding six months' charges as billed by the waterworks board. 
(3)  A flat rate sanitary sewer service charge may be levied for establishment not having a water meter to measure the amount of water furnished to such establishment. The sanitary sewer service charge for any such establishment shall be: 
a.  Effective May 1, 2016, rate shall be $12.00; 
b.  Effective May 1, 2017, rate shall be $13.00; 
c.  Effective May 1, 2018, rate shall be $14.00; 
d.  Effective May 1, 2019, rate shall be $15.00; 
e.  Effective May 1, 2020, rate shall be $16.00. 
( Ord. No. 2017-014, § 1, 9-5-2017 )  
Sec. 66-359. - Industrial user surcharge. 
(a)  Industrial discharge. Any industrial user (as defined by EPA in the General Pretreatment Regulations published in the June 26, 1978 Federal Register titled Part 403 General Pretreatment Regulations and any revision thereof) subject to, or that hereafter shall become subject to, the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or that requires a state indirect discharge permit issued by ADEM shall not connect or remain connected to the City of Prattville (city) sewer system without the prior written approval of the city. 
The city reserves the right to refuse and/or terminate service to any high strength industrial waste at its sole discretion. 
(b)  Industrial pollutant discharges. A wastewater treatment surcharge shall be assessed against any user whose discharge characteristics exceed the following pollutant strength in milligrams ("mg/L") per liter: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) above 250 mg/L 
Total suspended solids (TSS) above 250 mg/L 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) above 500 mg/L 
Fats, oils, and grease above 50 mg/L 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) above 60 mg/L 
Total dissolved solids (TDS) above 500 mg/L 
Total phosphorus above 4 mg/L 
If an industrial wastewater discharge contains excessive loading for both BOD and COD, the imposed surcharge will be based on one of the two parameters as determined by the city in its sole discretion. 
At the discretion of the director of public works and at such times when data has been compiled and established, additional or modified waste surcharge elements shall be imposed. Surcharges will be based upon the higher cost of treatment of the pollutant. 
Pollutant pounds shall be computed by multiplying a factor (to determine pounds from one mg/L for a liquid volume in hundreds of cubic feet) of 0.006242 times the volume of the wastewater (in hundreds of cubic feet) times the mg/L of wastewater as described in the table above. 
(c)  Surcharge rates. The rate at which the excess pollutants as identified in subsection (b) of this section shall be charged shall be determined on a periodic basis by the director of public works. The fee schedule may be obtained from the public works department. 
(d)  Sampling and analysis. Sampling and analysis charges shall be calculated and assessed as follows: 
(1)  Round trip mileage shall be charged per mile at the currently published Internal Revenue Service Standard Mileage Rate. 
(2)  Crew cost: $100.00 per hour (charged in ¼ hour segments at sampling site, each segment = $25.00). 
(3)  Laboratory analytical cost: Billed by wastewater characteristic, as defined in the laboratory fee schedule, which may be obtained from the Pine Creek CWF at 334.595.0888. 
(4)  Technical and administrative fees including data collection, calculations, entry, report dispersal and billing per sampling cycle: Flat rate of $50.00 per month. 
(e)  Fees . Cost incurred by the city for sampling, analysis and monitoring of industrial wastewater not otherwise provided for in this division shall be charged to the monitored industry on an actual cost basis. 
(f)  Sampling and flow measurement structures. Any person discharging or desiring to discharge an industrial waste mixture into the sewers or sewer works of the city, or any sewer connected therewith, shall provide and maintain in a suitable, accessible position on his premises, or such premises occupied by him, an inspection chamber or manhole, near the outlet of each sewer, drain, pipe, channel, or connection which communicates with any sewer or sewer works of the city, or any sewer connected therewith. 
Every such manhole, or inspection chamber, shall be of such design and construction which will prevent infiltration by ground and surface waters or introduction of slugs of solids by the installation of screens with maximum openings of one inch but of sufficient fineness to prevent the entrance of objectionable slugs of solids to the discharging wastes so that any authorized representative or employee of the city may readily and safely measure the volume and obtain samples of the flow at all times. Plans for the construction of control manhole, or inspection chambers, including such flow measuring devices as may be hereinafter required, shall be approved by the city prior to the beginning of construction. 
(g)  Volume of waste for surcharge calculations . When the public water supply is used exclusively, the water consumption during the previous month, as determined from the meter records of the city, shall be the valid basis for computing a sewage flow, to be used in calculation of the surcharge, unless actual sewage flow is measured by a recording meter of a type to be approved by the city. The owner shall maintain such device in proper condition to accurately measure such flow. Upon failure to do so, the water consumption shall be basis for charges. 
In cases where all or part of the water consumed is obtained from private supplies, wells, etc., the owner shall provide and maintain at all times suitable metering devices, approved by the city, in connection with each or all sources of private water unless the control manhole provided for above shall be equipped with an approved volume measuring device. The volume of private water consumed during the previous month, together with the consumption of public water as determined from the records of the city, shall be the basis for computing the sewage volume, to be used in calculation of the surcharge, or the owner may install at his expense an approved metering device to accurately measure sewage flow as before mentioned. 
When water is contained in a product, or is evaporated, or is discharged as unpolluted waste in an uncontaminated condition to surface drainage, an application may be made for a reduction in the volume of waste discharged to the public sewer, provided supporting data satisfactory to the city is furnished. 
( Ord. No. 2017-014, § 1, 9-5-2017 )  
Sec. 66-360. - Meter installation when water from source other than city. 
When an establishment discharges into the sanitary sewer system water obtained from any source other than the waterworks board's water system, the city may require installation of a meter at the expense of the occupant of such establishment for the purpose of measuring the quantity of wastewater discharged into its wastewater treatment system, in order to determine the sewer charge. 
( Ord. No. 2017-014, § 1, 9-5-2017 )  
Sec. 66-361. - Imposition of charge for cost of treatment. 
For disposal of sewage for which treatment is required as provided in section 66-229, the city shall impose an additional charge for each such classification of service, based upon cost of treatment. 
( Ord. No. 2017-014, § 1, 9-5-2017 )  
Sec. 66-362. - Wastewater haulers and dumping station permit fees. 
(a)  Wastewater haulers discharge permit fees, for sanitary wastes only, are as follows: 
(1)  Permit fee per year: $100.00. 
(2)  Tipping fees per load: $50.00. 
(b)  Wastewater haulers discharge permit fees, for industrial wastes, are as follows: 
(1)  Permit fee for single load: $100.00. 
(2)  Permit fee for multiple loads of the same waste from the same source, per year: $100.00. 
(3)  Tipping fees for multiple loads of the same waste from the same source, per load: $100.00. 
(c)  Permit and inspection fees for grease traps and sand filters: $150.00 annually. 
( Ord. No. 2017-014, § 1, 9-5-2017 )  
Sec. 66-363. - Billing procedure. 
(a)  Billing for any establishment discharging sewage only (no process wastewater) shall be rendered monthly on the same statement with bills for water furnished from the water system during the service billing period. Payment shall be made to the waterworks board for and on behalf of the city. 
(b)  Any establishment which creates a charge because of its discharge of wastewater, COD, BOD, or SS, shall have its discharge tested weekly to determine the amount of billable discharge. The billing to such establishment shall be rendered and payable monthly based upon the average of the discharge for three months prior to the billing. 
( Ord. No. 2017-014, § 1, 9-5-2017 )  
Sec. 66-364. - Enforcement of payment of user charges. 
In any case involving a person who has failed to pay any applicable and duly adopted user charges within the time limits prescribed for such payment, the procedure for enforcement shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city council shall give notice to such person by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the specifics of the nonpayment and requiring that the person make full payment within ten calendar days after receipt of notice. 
(2)  The city council may thereupon, without further notice, cause the water service from the public water system to be discontinued for such person or cause the connection to the sewerage system to be severed for such person. 
(3)  In any case where water service is discontinued or the sewer connection is severed by the city council for enforcement purposes, the restoration of such service shall be conditioned on full payment of all delinquent user charges and penalties and any expenses incurred in the enforcement proceedings and in the restoration of the service. 
( Ord. No. 2017-014, § 1, 9-5-2017 )  
Secs. 66-365—66-386. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-035, adopted Nov. 4, 2014 , amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 66-387—66-462, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Disposal Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-1 et seq.; local solid waste management programs, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-47; criminal littering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-29. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-387. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved bag means any flexible container that may be closed for holding, storing, or carrying garbage, as herein defined, constructed of any size of plastic or water resistant material. 
Approved container means any watertight receptacle or container approved by the city and equipped with a tight fitting lid or cover with one or more handles by which the same may conveniently be lifted or moved. The approved container shall be suitable for pickup and dumping by hydraulic lift or hoist. 
Bulk waste means large appliances, mattresses, furniture, bicycles, do-it-yourself construction debris, or other bulky items. 
Collection day means the day or days during Monday through Friday of each week which the city has designated as the day for curbside collection of garbage or trash in a particular area of the city. 
Curbside means the area in front of the premises immediately behind the curb or street; and where there is no curb or gutter, that area in front of the premises nearest and most convenient to the traveled portion of the street, the use of which will not block, hinder or obstruct, vehicular or other traffic lawfully using the street or in another location as otherwise specified by the director of public works. Where alleys provide access suitable for garbage pickup, the words "curbside" shall also mean the area in the rear of the premises most convenient to the traveled portion of the alley, the use of which will not block, hinder, or obstruct vehicular travel or other traffic lawfully using the alley. 
Garbage means all household waste including discarded food, animal and vegetable matter, and small debris. 
Occupant means any person, firm, or corporation who, as owner, tenant, occupant, or agent of either, resides upon or makes use of any premises within the city; the person who has obligated themselves for utility charges, until released by the city. 
Premises means any dwelling, residence, flat, rooming house, apartment house, hospital, school, hotel, club, restaurant, boardinghouse, eating place, shop, church, place of business, manufacturing establishment, courthouse, jail, city hall, post office or other public building. 
Rubbish means all nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, glass, crockery, excelsior, cloth, and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfill means a controlled area of land upon which solid waste is deposited. 
Trash means all trash including yard debris and bulk items. Yard debris consists of tree or shrubbery leaves, trimmings, limbs, straw, and grass clippings. Bulk waste consists of large appliances, mattresses, furniture, bicycles, do-it-yourself construction debris, or other bulky items. Items should be placed in two separate piles; one for organic material (yard debris) and one for non-organic material (bulk waste). 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-388. - Unauthorized removal of garbage, trash, or other like material from approved container or bag. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any garbage, trash, or other like material from any approved bag, container, or along any curbside after it has been placed therein, except under the orders of an officer, agent, or employee of the sanitation department or by some other person removing the same for disposal. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Secs. 66-389—66-418. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE 
 
Sec. 66-419. - Collection, hauling, and disposal of service established; collection frequency generally. 
There is hereby established in the city a garbage and trash collection, hauling and disposal service to be operated by the sanitation department or a designee of the city. The collection, hauling, and disposal of garbage and trash shall be performed by the sanitation department no less frequently than once per week for both garbage and trash in residential areas unless otherwise specified herein, and once a week in all business areas. The schedule is subject to change due to legal holidays or weather conditions. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-420. - Collection and disposal service in areas designated to use an approved bag. 
Garbage pickup at residences located in the city and designated to use an approved bag, shall be provided garbage service under the following provisions: 
(1)  Each residence covered by this section shall be required to place all garbage in an approved bag, securely sealed, and shall place such bag behind the curb or street for collection. In the case where there is no curb, street, or gutter, bags shall be placed in an area in front of the premises nearest and most convenient to the traveled portion of the street, and the use of which will not block, hinder or obstruct, vehicular or other traffic lawfully using the street or in another location as specified by the director of public works. Where alleys provide access suitable for garbage pickup, the words "curbside" shall also mean the area in the rear of the premises most convenient to the traveled portion of the alley, the use of which will not block, hinder, or obstruct vehicular travel or other traffic lawfully using the alley. 
(2)  No collection personnel shall enter any premises for the collection of garbage. Only garbage, as defined by this article, shall be placed in such bag. 
(3)  Bags may be placed for pickup only on the day scheduled for pickup and bags must be in place by 7:00 a.m. 
(4)  Garbage at residences covered under this section shall be scheduled for pickup twice each week. 
(5)  Any occupant who is a full-time resident who is disabled to the extent of being unable to move the approved bag and who obtains a physician's certificate as to this disability shall not be required to place the bag at the curb. The physician's certificate shall be mailed to the public works director and/or the superintendent of sanitation for appropriate notification of the pickup crews. 
(6)  Residences subject to this section shall pay the monthly fee for residential garbage and trash collection as set by the city. Where possible, such billing shall be provided by the waterworks serving such residences, otherwise, such residences shall be billed directly by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-421. - Collection and disposal service in areas designated to use an approved container. 
Garbage pickup at residences located in the city and designated to use an approved container, shall be provided garbage service under the following provisions: 
(1)  Each residence covered by this section shall be required to place all garbage in the container provided or approved by the city for collection. Such containers must be behind the curb or street. In the case where there is no curb, street, or gutter, container shall be placed in an area in front of the premises nearest and most convenient to the traveled portion of the street, and the use of which will not block, hinder or obstruct, vehicular or other traffic lawfully using the street or in another location as specified by the director of public works. Where alleys provide access suitable for garbage pickup, the words "curbside" shall also mean the area in the rear of the premises most convenient to the traveled portion of the alley, the use of which will not block, hinder, or obstruct vehicular travel or other traffic lawfully using the alley. 
(2)  No collection personnel shall enter any premises for the collection of garbage. Only garbage, as defined by this article, shall be placed in such container. 
(3)  Containers may be placed for pickup only on the day scheduled for pickup and containers must be in place by 7:00 a.m. All containers must be removed from the street by the end of the scheduled pickup day. 
(4)  Any occupant who is a full-time resident and who is disabled to the extent of being unable to move the approved container to the curb and who obtains a physician's certificate as to this disability shall not be required to place the container at the curb. The physician's certificate shall be mailed to the public works director and/or the superintendent of sanitation for appropriate notification of the pickup crews. 
(5)  Garbage at residences covered under this section shall be scheduled for pickup one day each week. 
(6)  The city shall provide each such residence one container at no cost. Containers that are unserviceable due to age or normal wear and tear shall be replaced by the city. Residents shall be charged for containers otherwise damaged. 
(7)  Residents may purchase an additional container from the city and shall be charged for the price of the container. Any such container shall be the personal property of the resident. 
(8)  Any resident placing two containers for pickup shall be charged an additional $10.00 per month for such additional pickup. 
(9)  Residences subject to this section shall pay the monthly fee for residential garbage and trash collection as set by the city. Where possible, such billing shall be provided by the waterworks serving such residences, otherwise, such residences shall be billed directly by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-422. - Trash and brush collection. 
(a)  All trash as defined in section 66-387 shall be behind the curb or street. In the case where there is no curb, street, or gutter, trash shall be placed in an area in front of the premises nearest and most convenient to the traveled portion of the street, and the use of which will not block, hinder or obstruct, vehicular or other traffic lawfully using the street or in another location as specified by the director of public works. Where alleys provide access suitable for trash pickup, the words "curbside" shall also mean the area in the rear of the premises most convenient to the traveled portion of the alley, the use of which will not block, hinder, or obstruct vehicular travel or other traffic lawfully using the alley. 
(b)  Trash described as yard debris in section 66-387 shall be placed in bags or boxes, each not exceeding 50 pounds in weight and placed behind the curb or street. 
(c)  During the period of October 1 through April 15 of each year, tree or shrubbery leaves are exempt from the requirement to be placed in bags or boxes. Tree or shrubbery leaves must be placed behind the curb or street in orderly piles. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to put trash described as yard debris in section 66-387 in any street. All limbs must be shorter than four feet in length and be placed with all tops facing the same direction, in a neat pile near the curb or street. Tree or shrubbery leaves, straw, and grass clippings shall be kept separate from limbs and other bulk waste as defined in section 66-387. 
(e)  All empty boxes shall be broken down and stacked in an orderly fashion before collection by the sanitation department. 
(f)  Trash as defined in section 66-387 shall be collected Monday through Friday of each week on a day which the city has designated as the day for curbside trash collection in a particular area of the city. 
(g)  When the amount of trash as defined in section 66-387 contains yard debris that would exceed one-fourth of a trailer load, approximately five cubic yards or more, or any bulk waste, it requires a special collection. The resident shall call the sanitation department to schedule the special collection pick up. For bulk waste, there will be a collection charge based on the current rate of disposal. This rate will be determined annually by the director of public works. Where the quantity hauled is less than a truckload, the collection charge will be prorated. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-423. - Dumping garbage or trash in sanitary landfill. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped any garbage or trash upon any property other than a sanitary landfill, as defined in section 66-387, or the recycling center. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-424. - Proximity of garbage containers to buildings. 
Every approved garbage container used for the storage of garbage and trash as defined by section 66-387 shall be unattached to any building and not less than ten feet from any combustible building. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-425. - Placement of garbage containers by business establishments. 
All approved containers placed for collection by the sanitation department from business establishments shall be placed as in a location determined by the sanitation department on the day and between the hours designated by such department. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-426. - Containers required for disposal of garbage and trash; private commercial removal; closed bags to be maintained; placing at curb. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any premises where garbage or other nonputrescible waste is created or accumulated to, at all times, keep or cause to be kept a sufficient number of approved bags or containers for deposit therein of garbage to prevent the spreading or scattering of such garbage upon such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any premises where garbage is created or accumulated, and, in case of multiple dwellings or multiple business occupancy, the owner of such premises, to at all times keep or cause to be kept a sufficient number of approved garbage bags or commercial containers for the deposit of garbage to prevent the spreading or scattering of such garbage upon such premises. 
(c)  Containers meeting the requirements and specifications as indicated in subsection (a) of this section and other containers larger than six cubic yards in capacity, conforming to the specifications as approved by the public works director, may be private contractors having a current City of Prattville business license to render such service to commercial establishments. 
(d)  Private solid waste disposal businesses shall only service commercial establishments or multi business, multi dwelling, or apartment complexes that elect consolidated collection in lieu of individual residential collection. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-427. - Maintenance of access, obstacles, and free of hazards. 
Where commercial collections are made from private alleys and access ways, the owners and operators of such commercial establishments shall maintain the approaches as to prevent hazards and obstacles to sanitation personnel or equipment. Failure to comply with this provision after notification by the sanitation department will cause service to be discontinued until hazards or obstacles are removed. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-428. - Removal of dead animals, animal wastes. 
(a)  Dead animals of not more than 50 pounds in weight will be picked up by the dead animal crews during normal business hours. All animals over 50 pounds must be removed within 12 hours by the owner. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or put any dead animal into the streets, lanes, alleys, parkways, or rights-of-way. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of those places of business which treat, handle, keep, or dispose of animals to remove all dead animals from their premises to a sanitary landfill under the same regulations as apply in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Animal wastes to be removed by the sanitation department must be placed by the curb in sealed airtight bags. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-429. - Schedule of service changes. 
For services to be rendered monthly, and on the first day of each month and continuing monthly thereafter, the following charges shall be paid to the city by every household for the collection, hauling, and depositing of garbage and trash: 
(1)  Residential charges: 
a.  $19.00 per unit. 
b.  There will be an additional $10.00 charge per month, for any occupant placing two containers on the curb or street for pickup. 
(2)  Business establishment charges: 
a.  $19.00 per month for each business using two approved containers or approved bags, not to exceed a 30-gallon capacity each; and $19.00 per month for each additional can or approved bag used. 
b.  Business establishments requiring bulk collection of containers, crates, baskets, etc., shall pay in addition to the charge set forth in subsection (2)(a) of this section $19.00 for each 30-gallon capacity container or bag used. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-430. - Billing procedure; exemption. 
(a)  Payment of the charge for garbage and trash service, as provided in this article, shall be made to the waterworks board. Statements for garbage and trash service will be mailed by the waterworks board with its regular billing for water service. Such bills shall be due and payable during the month such service is rendered. The waterworks board shall not exempt payment of any utility bill unless the charge imposed by this article is also paid. Delinquency in payment of such charge may result in the termination of garbage and trash service, and water and sewer service after notice and opportunity for hearing. 
(b)  Any person in whose name a water or gas meter is listed or registered, and whose sole source of income is Social Security benefits may apply for an exemption from the payment of any fees, provided the household seeking to claim the exemption shall present proof of income to the county health officer no later than the first billing date of any calendar year in which the exemption is desired. The exemption shall apply only so long as the household's sole source of income is Social Security and shall be requested each year in which the exemption is desired. 
(c)  Any person in whose name a water meter or gas meter is listed or registered, who shall state in writing and under oath that such person is over the age of 65 and is on a fixed income, which is defined as living solely on Social Security benefits, disability benefits included, and in proceeds from retirement benefits, and who is not gainfully employed, shall be granted a $2.00 discount from the prevailing fees for garbage handling and pickup service. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Secs. 66-431—66-458. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISPOSAL OF ITEMS NOT COLLECTABLE BY CITY 
 
Sec. 66-459. - Items designated; contractors. 
Building debris, such as scrap lumber, plaster, roofing, concrete, brickbats, and sanding dust, resulting from the construction, repair, remodeling, removal, or demolition of any building or appurtenances on private property, dirt, stumps, and tree trunks will not be collected by the sanitation department, but the owner shall cause such waste to be privately moved. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-460. - Responsibility of property owner or contractor for debris caused by construction of new building. 
The city shall not be responsible for the collection and hauling of rubbish, building materials, garbage, trash, or other debris from private property to, during, or subsequent to construction of new buildings of whatever type prior to occupancy. Such material shall be removed by the owner of such property or the contractor responsible for accumulation of the same. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-461. - Fence companies, tree surgeons, and nurseries, to remove debris after completing work on private premises. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of all licensed fence companies, tree surgeons, nurseries, or similar businesses doing work on private property to remove from premises all residue and debris resulting from such work. Items may be collected on a special schedule as determined by the director of public works. Charge for this service will be based on the current disposal rate and will be determined by the director of public works. 
(b)  Grass clippings, pine straw, tree and shrubbery leaves from routine weekly maintenance of property shall be exempt from this section. 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 66-462. - Required license; equipment; compliance. 
Private contractors must obtain a City of Prattville business license on an annual basis as defined in Chapter 38, Article V, Business License and Taxes. The license will only be issued to contractors having the proper type of equipment for commercial collection. Such license will authorize the contractor to salvage, collect, haul, and dispose of garbage, rubbish, trash, and other such substances as defined by this article, within the corporate limits of the city. The contractor shall be in compliance with Code Ala. 1975, Title 22, Ch. 27, Art. 1 (Code of Ala. 1975, 22-27-1 et seq.) 
( Ord. No. 2014-035, 11-4-2014 )  
Secs. 66-463—66-495. - Reserved.  
PART II - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES  
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 apply to this part.  
Sec. 101-2. - Status. 
This part is a codification of ordinance pertaining to land development ordinance of the city; however, provisions in part I of this Code may also pertain to land development. The failure to include provisions in this part does not excuse failure to comply with such provisions.  
Sec. 101-3. - Development fees. 
A fee shall be paid for the item addressed by the planning and development department that require staff review and approval or public notice and advertisement. Fees shall be charged according to the following schedule: 
Development plan review fee\$100.00 
Subdivision sketch plan review fee\100.00 
Subdivision preliminary plat fee\300.00 
Board of zoning adjustment variance application fee\50.00 
Board of zoning adjustment use-on-appeal application fee (churches or nonprofit uses shall be exempt from the fee)\250.00 
Annexation application and petition\50.00 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-26, 4-19-2005)  
Secs. 101-4—101-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Planning commission, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 101-25. - Created; composition; etc. 
There is hereby created a planning commission for the city to consist of nine members, to be appointed for terms and in the manner set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-3. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-1, 4-19-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority to create planning commission, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-2.  
Secs. 101-26—101-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 101-56. - Established. 
A planning and development department is hereby established as a subdivision of the city administration. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-20, 4-19-2005)  
Sec. 101-57. - Director. 
The department shall be under the administrative direction of a director with at least five years of experience as an urban or community planner or architect. The director shall report to and be subject to the administrative review of the mayor. The director shall make such reports and follow such procedures as the mayor shall direct. The director shall be the administrator of the city's zoning and flood damage prevention ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-21, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2014-033, 10-7-2014 )  
Sec. 101-58. - Staff. 
The director of planning and development, with the approval of the mayor, may appoint such number of deputies, assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-22, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2014-033, 10-7-2014 )  
Sec. 101-59. - Legal consultation and compliance. 
In accomplishing the department's functions, the director shall have the authority to consult with the city attorney, to issue notices of violations, and institute court proceedings which are necessary to obtain compliance with city laws, ordinances, codes, and regulations administered by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-23, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2014-033, 10-7-2014 )  
Sec. 101-60. - Functions. 
The planning and development department shall have the following functions: 
(1)  Direct and coordinate implementation of the policies and goals established by the city's comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Administer and enforce the city's zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, historic preservation ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, storm water management ordinance and other land development regulations as may be adopted by the city. 
(3)  Provide guidance, technical support, and administrative assistance to the city planning commission: 
a.  For development and maintenance of the city's comprehensive plan; 
b.  For development, maintenance and administration of the city's subdivision regulations; and 
c.  For its duties required by state code or city ordinance and its general operations. 
(4)  Provide guidance, technical support, and administrative assistance to the city board of zoning adjustment. 
(5)  Provide guidance, technical support, and administrative assistance to the city historic preservation commission. 
(6)  Through comprehensive study and analysis, prepare and recommend periodic amendments to city land development regulations for consideration by the planning commission and city council. 
(7)  Enforce, maintain, and recommend amendments for any other ordinances or codes assigned by the city council or the mayor. 
(8)  Provide technical advice and support to the mayor, city council, city boards, and other city departments, as requested or directed, on planning, development, or redevelopment matters. 
(9)  Preserve and maintain minutes, orders, letters, determinations, files, plats, maps and other records as required by state code relative to the matters which come before the city planning commission, board of zoning adjustment, and historic preservation commission. 
(10)  Issue all permits and certifications required by orders, ordinances, and codes administered by the department and collect properly authorized fees, fines and other moneys. 
(11)  Serve as city's liaison with federal, state and regional planning and development and grant organizations. 
(12)  Maintain city plans, maps, demographics, and development information. 
(13)  Receive and process requests for annexation into the city limits. 
(14)  Update and maintain city geographic information system for use by planning and development and other city departments. 
(15)  Other duties as assigned by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-24, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2014-033, 10-7-2014 )  
Secs. 101-61—101-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-033, adopted Oct. 7, 2014 , repealed § 101-61, which pertained to right of entry and stop work orders, and derived from Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-25, 4-19-2005.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning board of adjustment, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80 et seq. 
 
Sec. 101-81. - Meetings. 
The board of zoning adjustment shall meet at least once a month. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-30, 4-19-2005) 
State Law reference— Meetings of zoning board of adjustment, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80.  
Sec. 101-82. - Duties and responsibilities. 
In accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80, the board of zoning adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide requests for uses on appeal as permitted by appendix A, Zoning; and 
(2)  To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases such variance from the terms of appendix A, Zoning as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the appendix will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the appendix shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-31, 4-19-2005)  
Chapter 105 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-006 , adopted Mar. 15, 2016, amended Ch. 105 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 105, §§ 105-1—105-202, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-43-59, 11-45-8, 11-49-2, 11-53-1 et seq.; refusal to permit inspection, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-3; state minimum building standards code, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-9-160 et seq.; state energy conservation building code, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-9-170 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 105-1. - Scope and intent. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any facilities connected or attached to such buildings or structures. This chapter shall establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through the adoption of the minimum construction standards. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-2. - Building official. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city fire department, building division and codes and standards division. The director of the building division, as appointed by the mayor, shall be the building official. The fire marshal, as appointed by the mayor, shall be the deputy building official. The building official may delegate the responsibilities to additional deputies and inspectors as may be needed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Secs. 105-3—105-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 105-23. - Adopted. 
In accordance with the authority granted by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8(c) and Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-9-166, the International Building Code, 2015 edition, 2015 Alabama Residential Building and Energy Code, the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, and the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., except such sections and portions thereof as are herein modified, is hereby adopted by reference as the building code of the city. The same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and shall govern the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any facilities connected or attached to such buildings or structures. The mayor shall annually review the building code and report any recommended adjustments to the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 ; Ord. No. 2017-001 , 1-3-2017)  
Sec. 105-24. - Amendments. 
(a)  The International Building Code, 2015 edition, as adopted in this article is amended as follows: 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Prattville, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
Exceptions: 
1. Detached one-and two-family dwellings, bed and breakfast operations, multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code, 2009 edition. 
2. Existing buildings undergoing repair, alterations or additions and change of occupancy shall be permitted to comply with the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition. 
Section 101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
Delete Section 105.2, Building. 
Item 2. Fences not over 7 feet (1829mm) high. 
Section 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 after the time work has commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 180 days each. 
Exception: Demolition permits issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 30 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 30 after the time work has commenced. The building official may grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 30 days each. 
Delete Section 109.3 Building permit valuations. 
Section 113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created the Prattville Building Code Board of Appeals. The board shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the City Council of the City of Prattville and shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. Board members shall be appointed for four years terms or until their replacements are duly appointed. Board members may be reappointed at the conclusion of their term. The building official shall provide staff support and supplies for the Board. 
Add the following to Section 202, Definitions: BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATION—a private home, inn or other unique residential facility located in a structure of historical significance defined as a structure designated by the Historical Preservation Commission or a building located within the boundaries of the historical district offering bed and breakfast accommodations and one (1) daily meal and having less than four (4) guest rooms furnished for pay, with guest staying not more than fourteen (14) days, and where the innkeeper resides on the premises or property, or immediately adjacent to it. Guest rooms shall be established and maintained distinct and separate from the innkeeper's quarters. 
Add Appendices C, E, H, I and K. 
Delete Appendices A, B, D, F, G, J, L and M. 
(b)  The International Residential Code, 2009 edition, is amended as follows: 
Section R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Residential Code for One and Two-family Dwellings of the City of Prattville, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section R101.2 Scope. The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings, bed and breakfast operations, townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. 
Exception: Live work units complying with the requirements of Section 419 of the International Building Code shall be permitted to be built as one- and two-family dwellings or townhouses. Fire suppression required by Section 419.5 of the International Building Code when constructed under the International Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings shall conform to Section 903.3.1.3 of the International Building Code. 
Delete Section R103. 
Delete Section 105.2, Building. 
Item 2. Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high. 
Item 4. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of the height to the diameter does not exceed 2:1. 
Item 9. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
Delete Section R108. 
Section R112. Board of Appeals. 
Appeals of orders, decisions and determinations made by the code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code shall be made to the Building Code Board of Appeals established by Section 113 of the Building Code of the City of Prattville. 
Add the following to Section R202, Definitions: BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATION—a private home, inn or other unique residential facility located in a structure of historical significance defined as a structure designated by the Historical Preservation Commission or a building located within the boundaries of the historical district, offering bed and breakfast accommodations and one (1) daily meal and having less than four (4) guest rooms furnished for pay, with guest staying not more than fourteen (14) days, and where the innkeeper resides on the premises or property, or immediately adjacent to it. Guest rooms shall be established and maintained distinct and separate from the innkeeper's quarters. 
R302.2 Townhouses. Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building and shall be separated by a common 2-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263. 
Exception: A common 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 and an approved sprinkler system in accordance with Chapter 9 of the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against exterior walls and the underside of the roof sheathing. Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with Chapters 34 through 43. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance with Section R302.4. 
Delete Section R309.3. 
Delete Section R313. 
Section R314.5. Bed and Breakfast Operations. The fire alarm system for bed and breakfast operations located in existing and historical buildings shall comply with the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, and be monitored by an approved Fire Alarm Monitoring Service. 
Delete Section R502.2.2.3. Deck lateral load connection. 
Section N1103.2.1 Insulation. Supply ducts in attics shall be insulated to a minimum of R-6. Effective July 1, 2013, supply ducts located in attic space shall be insulated to a minimum of R-8. All other ducts shall be insulated to a minimum of R-6. 
Section M1502.4.4.1 Specified length. The maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be 35 feet (10,668 mm) from the connection to the transition duct from the dryer to the outlet terminal. Where fittings are used, the maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be reduced in accordance with Table M1502.4.4.1. 
Add Appendix E, omitting Sections AE 302.2, AE 302.3 and AE 303.2. 
Add Appendices G, H, J, and M. 
Delete Appendices A—D, F, I, K, L, and N—Q. 
(c)  The International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the City of Prattville, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Delete Section 108. 
Add Appendix B. 
(d)  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Prattville, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Delete Sections 103, 106, 107, 110, and 111. 
Add Appendix A. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-25. - Removal or repair of unsafe structures. 
The provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-53B-1 et seq., are adopted and shall govern the repair and removal of dilapidated and dangerous structures. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-26. - Schedule of permit fees. 
(a)  Permits—Generally. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing the application for permit in accordance with following schedule: 
(1)  Building permits. 
Total Valuation 	Fee* 
$100.00 and less 	No fee unless inspection required, in which case a $25.00 fee for each inspection will be charged. 
$101.00 to $2,000.00 	A $5.00 permit fee plus $25.00 for each inspection required. 
$2,001.00 to $15,000.00 	$10.00 permit fee for the first $2,000.00 plus $1.50 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $15,000.00 plus $25.00 inspection fee. 
$15,001.00 to $50,000.00 	$49.00 for the first $15,000.00 plus $1.25 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof to and including $50,000.00. 
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 	$93.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $1.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00. 
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 	$143.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $0.75 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00. 
$500,001.00 and up 	$443.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $0.50 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof. 
 
*One-quarter of one percent (.25%) shall be added to the final permit fee. 
(2)  Valuation . All fees for building permits shall be calculated on the basis of the true value of the building, structure, addition or alteration. 
a.  Single-family residential structures . For new one- and two-family residential structures, valuations shall be based on the square footage of the structure and calculated using the most recent building valuation data table published by the International Code Council, Inc. (ICC) in effect on January 1 of each year. The value per square footage shall be based on type of construction as classified by the ICC table. 
b.  Valuation for all structures other than single-family residential shall be based on the actual value or contract price rounded up to next thousand dollars. Permit valuations shall include total value of the contract, including material and labor. 
c.  The building official may request all appraisal or contract information necessary to determine the true value of the building, structure, addition or alteration. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final permit valuation shall be set by the building official. 
d.  Projects with multiple general contractors shall designate one contractor or construction manager for obtaining and paying for a building permit. 
(3)  Electrical, plumbing and mechanical permit fees. 
a.  Electrical fees . 
Permit Type 	Fee 
For issuing all permits 	$10.00 
	
New and Existing Commercial Meter Loops 
Up to 100 amps 	$6.00 
200 amps 	$8.00 
400 amps 	$10.00 
600 amps 	$15.00 
800 amps 	$20.00 
1200 amps 	$25.00 
1600 amps 	$30.00 
2000 amps 	$45.00 
New and Existing Residential Meter Loops 
Up to 100 amps 	$10.00 
200 amps 	$15.00 
400 amps 	$20.00 
Over 400 amps 	$25.00 
Each additional meter loop 	$5.00 
Appliances 
Ranges, including cook tops and ovens 	$2.50 
Clothes dryers 	$2.50 
Water heaters 	$2.50 
Garbage disposals 	$2.50 
Similar appliances not listed 	$2.50 
Motors 	
 Motors up to six hp 	$2.50 
 Motors over six hp, each hp 	$0.35 
Electric heat up to 15 kw 	$2.50 
Electric heat over 15 kw, each kw 	$0.25 
Electric-controlled floor furnace, unit heaters, ventilating and types of connected fans, including control and outlets 	$2.00 
Other 
Swimming pools 	$15.00 
Temporary poles 	$5.00 
Mobile home hookup 	$5.00 
Reconnection of service 	$5.00 
Signs and outdoor wiring single circuit 	$5.00 
Each additional circuit 	$2.50 
Transformers 
All types, first 15 kva 	$2.50 
Each additional kva 	$0.20 
Shop inspections 	
Neon, per transformer 	$0.60 
Plastic, per lamp 	$0.30 
Incandescent, first circuit 	$2.00 
Each additional circuit 	$1.50 
Commercial and residential, concealed work to outlets 	
One to ten outlets 	$2.50 
11 and above, per outlet 	$0.30 
Ranges, including cook tops and ovens 	$2.50 
Water heaters 	$2.50 
Clothes dryers 	$2.50 
Inspection fees on concealed work do not include fixtures for which there is a separate fee 
 
b.  Plumbing fees. 
For issuing each permit 	$10.00 
In addition 
 For each plumbing fixture, floor drain or trap or set of fixtures on one trap, including fixture water supply and drainage piping 	$2.00 
 For each house sewer 	$2.00 
 For each house having to be replaced or repaired 	$3.00 
 For each electric water heater 	$2.00 
Dishwasher 	$2.00 
Garbage grinder 	$2.00 
Washing machine 	$2.00 
Rain leader and roof drain piping 	$2.00 
Ejectors, pumps or sumps 	$2.00 
For repairs or alteration of draining or vent piping 	$2.00 
For vacuum breakers or backflow protection devices 	$2.00 
Each fixture not above provided 	$2.00 
In excess of four inspections 	$5.00 
 
c.  Fuel gas fees. 
For issuing permit 	$10.00 
Piping inspection at one location rough and final 	$5.00 
For five fixtures or less 	$5.00 
Per fixture over five 	$2.00 
Conversion burners, floor furnaces, incinerators, boilers, or central heating or air conditioning units 	$5.00 
Vented wall furnaces 	$2.50 
Water heaters 	$2.50 
For additional unit 	$2.00 
 
d.  Mechanical fees. 
Issuance Fee 	Residential 	Commercial 
Permit fee 	$10.00 	$12.00 
A/C With or Without Heating 
Up to and including three tons 	$9.00 	$10.00 
Over three tons and including five tons 	$12.00 	$15.00 
Over five tons and including ten tons 	$15.00 	$18.00 
Over ten tons, each ton over 	$2.00 each 	$2.50 
Refrigeration 
Up to and including three hp 	$9.00 	$10.00 
Over three hp and including ten hp 	$12.00 	$15.00 
Over ten hp and including 20 hp 	$15.00 	$18.00 
Over 20 hp, each hp over 	$2.00 	$2.50 
Chillers, each ton 	$2.00 	$0.50 
Each cooling coil 	$3.00 	$1.00 
Boilers 	$15.00 	$20.00 
Each heating coil 	$3.00 	$1.00 
Thru Wall Unit 
Heating or cooling, each unit 	$5.00 	$7.00 
Cooling tower (water) 	$8.00 	$10.00 
Heating Only 
Gas or electric, each unit 	$2.00 	$5.00 
Reinspection fee 	$2.00 	$10.00 
Ventilation hood, each hood 	$2.00 	$10.00 
Incinerators 	$2.00 	$3.00 
Vent fans, each fan 	$2.00 	$5.00 
Dryers 	$2.00 	$5.00 
 
(4)  Miscellaneous permits and fees. 
a.  Work prior to permit. Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter commences prior to obtaining said permit, the permit fee herein specified shall be doubled. 
b.  Moving fee. For the relocation of any building or structure, the fee shall be $100.00 per section. 
c.  Demolition fee. For the demolition of any building or structure, the fee shall be $25.00 per story. In addition, the application for a demolition shall be accompanied by a $1,000.00 surety, which shall be refunded by the building official when all demolition debris has been properly removed from the site. Said bond or cash deposit shall indemnify the city against damage to the public streets and sidewalks, and against unwarranted litter and debris allowed to remain on the premises, which constitutes a public nuisance. Interior demolition shall be based on the contract value provided by the permittee. 
d.  Mobile or manufactured home . For the placement of any manufactured home covered by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (commonly known as the HUD Code), a fee of $50.00 shall be paid prior to placement of the structure. The permit fee shall cover the inspection of correct installation, flood hazard determination, electrical connection and plumbing connection. 
e.  Fence or wall fee. Permits for the construction of all fences or walls, the fee shall be $10.00. 
f.  Plan review fee. A plan review fee of $100.00 shall be paid for the review of all multi-family, commercial and industrial projects. Said fee shall be paid at the time said plans are submitted to the city planning and development department. 
g.  Re-inspection fee. A fee of $25.00 shall be paid for each re-inspection of a failed initial inspection. 
h.  Pursuant to Alabama Act 2015-308, the city shall assess a fee on all non-residential construction-work permitted within the city in the amount of $1.00 for every $1,000.00 of said non-residential construction-work permitted. 
The fees shall be collected by the city and shall be electronically remitted monthly to the department of finance, division of construction management, by the twentieth day of the month following the issuance of the applicable permits as required by Act 2015-308. 
(5)  Fee refunds. The building official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
a.  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected. 
b.  Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under the permit issued in accordance with this chapter. 
c.  Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before the plan review has been completed. 
(b)  The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed with the city planning and development department by the original permittee. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 ; Ord. No. 2016-A-018 , 11-1-2016)  
Sec. 105-27. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-28. - Business license prerequisite to building permit. 
No person shall be issued a building permit unless he holds a valid business license issued by the city. Nothing in this section requires a homeowner to obtain a business license in order to do work on his own property. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-29. - Building permit required for subcontractors. 
(a)  All builders and contractors shall upon request furnish the building official or the license inspector a full and complete list showing the names, addresses and license numbers of all subcontractors to whom any work has been let or sublet to be done and will not allow any work to be done by such subcontractor until the permit required by the code adopted by this article has been obtained by the subcontractor. If any changes to the subcontractors list are made after the issuance of a permit, the builder or contractor must notify the building official, in writing, of such changes. 
(b)  If all subcontracts have not been closed or awarded at the time application is made for such permit by the builder or contractor or by the owner, they shall not allow any work to proceed by any subcontractor until such subcontractor has exhibited to such subcontractor's permit for the work to be done on the job, and unless such subcontractor is certified by the license division or by the building official as having paid for the permit. 
(c)  In the event that no contract has been let by the owner, then the owner shall be subject to all of the provisions herein required of a builder or contractor. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Secs. 105-30—105-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 105-47. - Definition. 
The term "electrical inspector," as used in this article, shall mean the primary inspector designated by the building official to make electrical inspections. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-48. - Records and reports of electrical inspection. 
Inspectors shall keep a full and complete daily record of all work done, permits issued, examinations made, and other official work performed as required by this article, and shall make a report thereof to the city council at the first meeting of each year. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Secs. 105-49—105-64. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY FOR ELECTRICIANS 
 
Sec. 105-65. - Electrical examining board. 
(a)  There shall be an electrical examining board consisting of the primary electrical inspector and four other persons having a practical knowledge of electricity and electrical wiring. The members of the board, other than the electrical inspector, shall be appointed by the city council. Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the council for a period of three years or until their replacement has been duly qualified and appointed. The electrical inspector shall be chairman of the board. No member of the board shall receive any compensation for services as such. The board shall adopt rules governing its operation. 
(b)  A majority vote shall be necessary to determine any decision to be rendered by the board. 
(c)  No regular meeting of the electrical examining board shall be held. The electrical inspector shall call meetings of the board at such times as may be deemed necessary, such meetings to be held in the city hall. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-66. - Certificate required; exceptions. 
(a)  Every person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contracting or installation of wiring and apparatus for electric lights, heat or power in the city, whether by contract or otherwise, shall, before doing so, obtain from the electrical examining board a certificate of competency, and it shall be unlawful for any person to do any electrical installation or construction work in the city unless such person is a certified master electrician or does such work in the capacity of an employee and under the direct supervision of a certified master electrician; provided, however, that any regular salaried employee of any person may do such work for and upon the ways, works, machinery, plant or property of such employee's regular employer, when such employee demonstrates to the electrical inspector that such employee is qualified and receives from the electrical inspector a special permit to do such work; and provided, further, that any regular salaried fellow servant of such qualified salaried employee holding such special permit may do any work upon the ways, works, machinery, plant or property of such employee's regular employer, when acting under the immediate supervision of such qualified special permit holder; and, provided further, that any individual may do such work upon such individual's own premises, when such individual demonstrates to the electrical inspector that such individual is qualified and receives from the electrical inspector a special permit to do such work. 
(b)  A person shall be deemed "qualified" within the meaning of this section when such person possesses an accurate knowledge of the fundamentals of electricity, a practical working knowledge of the theory and correct practice of electrical installation and construction in relation to the work which such person proposes to do, a throughout knowledge of the laws of the city relating to the work which such person proposes to do, and sufficient experience and ability in electrical construction and installation to safely and competently apply such person's knowledge in practice. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a public utility corporation operating under a franchise from the city to transmit and sell electrical energy. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons holding a license issued by the state pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, title 34, ch. 36 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-36-1 et seq.). 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-67. - Prerequisite to issuance of license. 
The revenue inspector shall refuse to issue a license to any person to engage in the business or trade of electrical construction and installation, unless such person holds a valid unrevoked and unsuspended certificate of competency, or has in such person's regular employ a person who holds such certificate. The revenue inspector shall also refuse to issue a license to a partnership to engage in such trade or business, unless the partnership has in its regular employ, or as a member, a person who holds such a certificate. The revenue inspector shall also refuse a license to any corporation that has not in its regular employ a person who holds such a certificate. Every such license shall stand suspended during any period in which the conditions requisite to issuance of a license do not continue. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the issuance of a license to a person holding a license issued by the state pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, title 34, ch. 36 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-36-1 et seq.). 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-68. - Applicant examination. 
It shall be the duty of the electrical examining board to examine and pass upon the qualifications of every person who applies in writing for a certificate of competency required by this division and who has paid to the building official a fee equal to the cost to the city for administering the master electrician's examination. A separate fee is required for each separate examination. Applicants shall be examined upon the fundamentals of electricity, the laws of the city pertaining to electrical installation and construction, the theory and practice of electrical installation and construction and the experience and ability of the applicant in practical electrical installation and construction. Examinations shall be oral or in writing, in whole or in part. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-69. - Issuance and signing of certificate. 
If any applicant for a certificate under this division is found to possess an accurate knowledge of the fundamentals of electricity, a practical working knowledge of the theory and correct practice of electrical installation and construction, a thorough knowledge of the laws of the city relating to electrical construction and installation and sufficient experience and ability in electrical construction and installation to safely and competently apply such knowledge in practice, there shall be issued to such applicant a certificate of competency. The certificate shall be signed in the name of the electrical examining board by the primary electrical inspector. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-70. - Revocation or suspension of certificate. 
The electrical examining board shall have the power to revoke or suspend any certificate of competency issued under this division for willful, ignorant or habitual neglect upon the part of the holder thereof to observe and cause to be observed the laws of the city pertaining to electrical installation, construction or repair work by or under authority of such person's certificate. Before revoking or suspending any certificate, the board shall give the certificate holder a reasonable opportunity to be heard in such holder's defense. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-71. - Records to be kept. 
The electrical examining board shall keep, in the office of the building official, a book in which shall be recorded the names and addresses of each applicant for a certificate under this division, the date of filing of the application, the final action of the board upon each application, the date of such action, whether grant of a certificate was made with or without examination, date and action of the board in revocation or suspension proceedings, and the signatures of the members of the board participating in any action. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-72. - Appeals from rulings of electrical examining board. 
Any person feeling aggrieved by the action of the electrical examining board in refusing to grant a certificate of competency, or in revoking or suspending a certificate already issued, or by any ruling of the board, may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken within ten days from the date of the action complained of by filing with the board and with the city council, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. Upon notice of appeal being filed with the examining board, it shall forthwith transmit to the city council, over the signature of the chairman of the board, all the paper constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Secs. 105-74—105-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WORK PERMITS 
 
Sec. 105-90. - Application. 
Application for a permit under this division shall be made in writing to the building official by the person installing the work. Such application shall show the name of the property owner, the name of the electrician or electrical contractor who is to do the work, the exact location of the premises by number of block, lot and house, or other good and sufficient description, a clear description of the work to be done, and the number of lights, fixtures, circuits and equipment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-91. - Filing of plans and specifications by applicant. 
The person making application for a permit under this division shall, when required by the electrical inspector, file with the inspector complete plans and specifications for the installation, showing sizes of all conductors and such other details as may be necessary to determine whether the installation as described will be in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-92. - Not to issue to person failing to correct defects. 
Any person who shall fail to correct any defect in such person's work, after having been duly notified by the electrical inspector, shall not receive any further permit under this division until such defect has been corrected. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-93. - Effect; compliance. 
A permit issued under this division shall be for such installation as is described in the application and no deviation shall be made from the installation so described, without the written approval of the electrical inspector. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Secs. 105-94—105-116. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 105-117. - Electrical code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations, including the practice, materials and fixtures used, for the installation, construction, maintenance, extension, removal, demolition, and erection of electrical wiring, construction, electrical signs, and installation of electrical fixtures, machinery, equipment and appurtenances, the 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code, NFPA 70. Such code shall be subject to all amendments, modifications and conflicting provisions contained in this code. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-118. - Regulating the placement, etc., of wires and appliances. 
The electrical inspector is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate and determine the placing of electric wires or other appliances for electric light, heat or power in the city and to cause all such wires or appliances to be placed, constructed and guarded as not to cause fires or accidents, endangering life or property. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-119. - Inspection and approval of wiring installations. 
Upon the completion of any wiring installation of any building for light, heat or power, it shall be the duty of the person doing the same to notify the electrical inspector, and all wiring shall then be inspected and, if found properly installed and protected so as not to endanger life or property, the inspector shall notify the utility furnishing electric current and power in that section that it is ready to be used; thereby permitting connection to the system at the pleasure of the owner. There shall not be any approval issued on any installation not in accordance with this article, nor shall current be turned on to such installations until such approval is issued. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-120. - Discontinuing electric service to defective systems. 
In any case of failure to comply with this article, the electrical inspector shall have authority, after due notice, to cut off, or cause to be cut off, electric current or power in the locality involved, and it shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected any system cut off for this purpose, until such corrections are made as are deemed necessary by the electrical inspector for the protection of life and property. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-121. - Electrical inspector's right of entry; removal of defects in wires or appliances. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall have the right, in the discharge of official duties, to enter, during reasonable hours, any building, manhole, or subway, or to climb any pole, for the purpose of examining and testing the electrical appliances therein or thereon contained. For that purpose, such inspector shall be given prompt access to all buildings, public and private, and to all manholes, subways or poles. 
(b)  Whenever an electric wire or appliance shall be defective through improper or insufficient insulation, or for any other reason, the electrical inspector shall at once cause the removal of such defects at the expense of the owner of such wires or appliances. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-122. - Review when installation condemned. 
When the electrical inspector condemns all or part of any electrical installation, the owner may, within five days after receiving written notice, file a petition in writing for review of such action of the electrical inspector with the electrical examining board, upon receipt of which the board shall determine whether the electrical installation complies with the law, and render its decision accordingly. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Secs. 105-123—105-142. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 105-143. - Adopted. 
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, as revised, published by the International Code Council, Inc., pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8, which provides rules and regulations for gas standards, is hereby adopted as the gas code of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Secs. 105-144—105-171. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 105-172. - Adopted. 
The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, as revised, published by the International Code Council, Inc., pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8, which provides rules and regulations for mechanical standards, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Secs. 105-173—105-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 105-200. - Plumber certification required; filing application for examination. 
All plumbers doing plumbing work in the city shall be certified as provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-37-1 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Sec. 105-201. - Adopted. 
The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition as revised, published by the International Code Council, Inc., pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8, as amended, which provides rules and regulations for plumbing standards, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-006, 3-15-2016 )  
Chapter 109 - FLOODS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 109-1—109-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 109-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter loadbearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for the building code board of appeals to review and interpret any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in division 3 of this article. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before October 20, 1987. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 20, 1987. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Hardship means a restriction on property so unreasonable that it results in an arbitrary and capricious interference with basic property rights. Hardship relates to the physical characteristics of the property, not the personal circumstances of the owner or user, and the property is rendered unusable without the granting of a variance. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after October 20, 1987, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October 20, 1987. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this article or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
Section 1316. No new flood insurance shall be provided for any property which the administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances which are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in floodprone areas. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any requirements of this article.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground. This definition shall include gas or liquid storage tanks. 
Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development; or any division of a parcel of land of a new street or road is involved. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the building should be (i) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (ii) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means that the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the Code of Federal Regulations (44 CFR §§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5)) and corresponding parts of this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-53, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-53, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-20. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers that are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-51, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-51, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-21. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-52, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-52, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-22. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-57, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-57, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-23. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-54, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-54, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-24. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS) for Autauga County effective February 1978 and Elmore County dated November 19, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
(b)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private entities. Such areas shall be added by reference and amendment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-55, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-55, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-25. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-58, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-58, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-26. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-59, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-59, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-27. - Warning. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-60, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-60, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-28. - Violations. 
Any person who violates a provision of this article or fails to comply with any requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-61, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-61, 6-2-2009)  
Secs. 109-29—109-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 109-60. - Designation of administrator. 
The director of planning and development is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-62, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-62, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-61. - Duties and responsibilities of administrator. 
Duties of the administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied, and that sites are reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  When Base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 109-24, then the administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(4)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 109-63. 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with sections 109-88 and 109-90. 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 109-88 and 109-90. 
(7)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Alabama Emergency Management Agency (AEMA). 
(8)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA and state to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article to the building code board of appeals. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-64, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-64, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-62. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-56, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-56, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-63. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the planning and development department on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information shall be required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory lowest floor level, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of sections 109-88 and 109-90; 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level using appropriate FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of the required application or certifications shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-63, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-63, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-64. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The building code board of appeals as established by the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the local official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the building code board of appeals may appeal such decision to the circuit court as provided by law. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the building code board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in a hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal and state emergency management agencies upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the building code board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-70, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-70, 6-2-2009)  
Secs. 109-65—109-86. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 109-87. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by approved methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest-floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including duct work), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring must comply with 44 CFR §§ 60.3 (b)(8), (c)(6), and (c)(12). This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-65, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-65, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-88. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 109-87. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 109-61(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: (i) individual lots or parcels, (ii) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (iii) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (iv) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 60 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system designed by a registered engineer to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, fully licensed and ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions; or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 109-24, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Where no regulatory floodway has been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE, as designated on the effective FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
c.  Only if subsections (4)a and (4)b of this section are satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-66, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-66, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-89. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 109-24, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (approximate A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 109-24, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the provisions in subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  All development in zone A must meet the requirements of sections 109-87 and 109-88(1) through (3). 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 109-87. 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-67, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-67, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-90. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 109-24, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 109-87. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus two feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-68, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-68, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 109-91. - Standards for subdivisions and developments. 
The following standards for subdivisions shall apply: 
(1)  All subdivision and development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  All subdivisions and development proposals, including manufactured home parks of any number of units, of which any portion is located in an area of special flood hazard within the city limits shall provide base flood elevation data with the preliminary plat or development plan submission. The special flood hazard area and the corresponding base flood elevations shall be included on final subdivision plats prior to presentation to and approval by the city planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2005-019, § 16-69, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2009-009, § 16-69, 6-2-2009)  
Chapter 113 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 113-1. - Designation of historic districts or properties. 
(a)  The city may designate local historic properties or historic districts according to the procedure and criteria specified by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-6. 
(b)  Before the city historic preservation commission shall recommend the designation of a historic property or district, it shall hold a public hearing according to the requirements of Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-7. 
(c)  Within 30 days following adoption of an ordinance designating a historic district or property, the commission shall give written notice of that designation to all agencies and departments of the city, and to all owners of property included in the historic designation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-024, § 6, 10-15-2002)  
Secs. 113-2—113-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 113-21. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created the city historic preservation commission, as provided for under Code of Ala. 1975, title 11, ch. 68A (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68A-1 et seq.) which shall be referred to hereafter as the "commission." 
(Ord. No. 2002-024, § 1, 10-15-2002)  
Sec. 113-22. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the commission is the: 
(1)  Preservation and protection of buildings, sites, structures, areas and districts of historic significance in the city; 
(2)  Maintenance of the distinctive character of the historic districts; 
(3)  Fostering and encouraging of the preservation, restoration and use of buildings of historic and architectural value in the historic districts. 
(Ord. No. 2002-024, § 2, 10-15-2002)  
Sec. 113-23. - Composition; qualifications of members. 
The commission shall be composed of seven members. To the extent possible, commission members shall have demonstrated training or experience in the fields of history, architecture, architectural history, urban planning, archaeology or law, or who shall be a resident of a local historic district. Members of the commission shall be bona fide residents of the city. Not more than one member of the commission shall be a public official. 
(Ord. No. 2002-024, § 3, 10-15-2002)  
Sec. 113-24. - Administrative staff. 
The city planner shall provide administrative staff for the commission. The city planner or the planner's designee shall attend all commission meetings. The city shall supply a secretary to the commission. In addition, the commission may seek technical advice from outside the city staff. 
(Ord. No. 2002-024, § 4, 10-15-2002)  
Secs. 113-25—113-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRATTVILLE HISTORIC DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 113-51. - Findings. 
The city council has determined and hereby finds and declares the following facts are true and correct: 
(1)  The Daniel Pratt Historic District was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1984 recognizing the unique industrial and architectural heritage found in downtown Prattville. National Register designation provides protection from actions by the federal government, but no protection from action by state or local governments and private entities. 
(2)  Code of Ala. 1977, title 11, ch. 68 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-1 et seq.), permits cities, upon recommendation by their historic preservation commission, to designate and protect historic districts and properties. 
(3)  The Prattville Historic Preservation Commission has completed detailed surveys of historic properties in downtown Prattville in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-6, and determined that the Daniel Pratt Historic District and additional areas of downtown Prattville are worthy and eligible for designation as a local historic district. The commission further finds that the area represents a significant aspect of the cultural, political, economic and social history of Prattville and contains structures which contribute to city's overall character and sense of place. 
(4)  The Prattville Historic Preservation Commission conducted a public hearing on November 29, 2007, at 6:00 p.m. to receive comment concerning the proposed district as required by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-7. 
(5)  Notice of said public hearing was given in the November 24, 2007, issue of the Prattville Progress. Written notice of the hearing was provided to all of the owners of properties within the proposed historic district 20 days prior to the hearing. 
(6)  Based on the commission's report and recommendation, it is advisable and in the public interest that the city council designate the area generally known as downtown Prattville as a historic district as permitted by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-6. 
(Ord. No. 2008-002, § 1, 1-3-2008)  
Sec. 113-52. - Designation of historic district. 
(a)  The Daniel Pratt Historic District and surrounding portions of downtown Prattville are hereby designated a historic preservation district and shall be known as the "Prattville Historic District." The boundary of said historic district is described as follows: 
Begin at the intersection of Gin Shop Hill Road and West 4th Street, thence east along West 4th Street to its intersection with Lower Kingston Road, thence northward to the centerline of west 5th Street, thence east along the center line of West 5th Street to its intersection with North Court Street, thence north along North Court Street to its intersection with the Norfolk Southern Railroad, thence eastward along the centerline of said railroad to East 6th Street, thence eastward along the centerline of East 6th Street to its intersection with Pine Street, thence northward along Pine Street to the rear property line of 199 East 6th Street, thence eastward along said rear property line of 199 East 6th Street to North Northington Street, thence north along North Northington Street to the south property line of 244 North Northington Street, thence eastward along said south property line to the intersection of the south and east property lines of 244 North Northington Street thence, south to East 6th Street, thence eastward along the centerline of East 6th Street until it intersects with a stream known as Hadnot Branch, thence southward along the centerline of said stream until it intersects with the rear property line of 140 North Northington Street, thence south along the rear property lines of 140, 132, and North Northington Street to an intersection with the Norfolk Southern Railroad, thence southeastward along the centerline of said railroad to the south property line of Oak Hill Cemetery, thence westward along said south property line to the east property line of 325 East 3rd Street, thence south along said property line to East 3rd Street, thence west along the centerline of said street to the rear property line of 324 East 3rd Street, thence southward along the rear property lines of 324 East Third Street, 213, 219, 237, 239, 250, 305, 315, 323, 335 South Northington Street and 307 First Street to First Street, thence eastward along First Street to its intersection with Pratt Street, thence south along Pratt Street to its intersection with Doster Street, thence westward along the centerline of Doster Street to its intersection with South Washington Street, thence southward along the centerline of South Washington Street to its intersection with Maple Street, thence northwestward along the south right-of-way of Maple Street to the east property line of 133 Pletcher Street, thence southward along said property line to Pletcher Street, thence northwestward along Pletcher Street to Maple Street and the east property line of 148 Maple Street, thence southwestward to the rear property line of 148 Maple Street, thence along the south property lines of 148, 138, 124 and 100 Maple Street to Bridge Street, thence south and west along Bridge Street to its intersection with Gin Shop Hill Road, thence north and west to the point of beginning. 
(b)  A map showing the boundaries of the Prattville Historic District is attached to Ordinance No. 2008-002 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2008-002, § 2, 1-3-2008)  
Sec. 113-53. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
No change in the exterior appearance of any building, structure or site within the Prattville Historic District may be undertaken, and no building or structure in said district may be erected or demolished unless and until a certificate of appropriateness for such change is approved and issued by the Prattville Historic Preservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2008-002, § 3, 1-3-2008)  
Chapter 117 - STORMWATER REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-007 , adopted June 5, 2018, and Ord. No. 2018-008 , adopted June 5, 2018, did not specifically amend the Code. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Ch. 117, Arts. I, II, §§ 117-1—117-172. 
 
ARTICLE I. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 117-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms are defined as hereinafter set forth, to wit: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the MS4 or community water which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Adverse impact means any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property or to biological productivity, diversity or stability, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. 
Agriculture means activities undertaken on land for the production of plants, crops, and animals which are useful to man. 
Alabama Department of Environmental Management ("ADEM") means the state regulatory agency, created under Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-22A-1 et seq., responsible for administering and enforcing the stormwater laws of the United States of America and the state. 
Alabama Water Pollution Control Act ("AWPCA"). means the state act found in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-22-1 et seq. and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Applicant means any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure approval of CBMP plans from the city official to obtain a grading permit. 
Best management practices ("BMPs") means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices designed to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater conveyance systems. Best management practices also include treatment systems and requirements, operating procedures and practices to control facility site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw material storage and construction sites. 
City means the City of Prattville, Alabama, a municipal corporation organized under the laws of the State of Alabama. 
City stormwater and illicit discharge official ("city official") means the director of public works or his designee shall serve as the administrator and enforcement agent for both the administration and enforcement of this article. 
Clean Water Act ("CWA") means the federal Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 through 1387) which was formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483 and Public Law 97-117, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251-1387 and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Clearing means the removal of trees, brush and/or vegetation from the land, not including the ordinary mowing of grass or the maintenance of previously cleared areas. 
Commercial facility means any facility associated with commercial and/or industrial activity which is not subject to an individual NPDES permit or an ADEM general stormwater permit. 
Construction activity means activities that require a grading permit and are subject to the city's erosion and sedimentation control provisions and/or NPDES construction permits. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Construction best management practices plan ("CBMP plan") means a set of drawings and/or other documents submitted by a person as a prerequisite to obtaining a grading permit, which contain all of the information and specifications pertaining to BMP. 
Contour means a line of equal elevation above a specified datum, usually mean sea level. 
Contour line means a line joining points having or representing equal elevations. 
Discharge means the passing of water or other liquid through an opening or along a pipe, conduit or channel; the rate of flow of water, silt, or other mobile substance which emerges from a pipe, conduit or channel, usually expressed as cubic feet per second, gallons per minute or million gallons per day. 
Drainage means the removal of surface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping; commonly applied to surface water and groundwater. 
Drainage area means that area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridge line; the area of a drainage basin or watershed, expressed in acres, square miles or other unit of area. 
Engineer or land surveyor means a person currently licensed by the Alabama State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors to provide engineering or land surveying services respectively. 
EPA means United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Erosion means the process by which the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Erosion control means the application of measures to reduce erosion of land surfaces. 
Grading means any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified, or filled, or any combination thereof, but shall not include standard agricultural practices. 
Grading permit means a permit issued pursuant to this article and pursuant to National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System requirements. 
Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
High-risk facility means municipal landfills; other treatment, storage, or disposal facilities for municipal waste; hazardous waste treatment, storage, disposal and recover facilities; facilities subject to Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA), Title III, Section 313; and any other industrial or commercial facility that the city official determines may make or has made a substantial pollutant contribution to the MS4. 
Illicit connection means an illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, drain, open channel, connection or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the city's MS4 including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said pipe, drain, open channel, connection or conveyance had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, drain, open channel, connection or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the city's MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any discharge (whether direct or indirect) to the city's MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges as otherwise exempted in this article. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14) by the EPA. 
Minor extension means an addition to an existing utility pipeline or other utility line in which the land disturbed consists of fewer than 1,000 linear feet. 
Municipal court means the municipal court of the City of Prattville, which has jurisdiction within its corporate limits and police jurisdiction of the city and as appointed by the city council as provided by law, shall adjudicate all violations of this article. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system ("MS4") means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including, but not limited to, sidewalks, highways, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, inlets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, swales, or piped storm drains) owned, operated or maintained by the City of Prattville, Alabama; designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater; not used for collecting or conveying sewage; and not part of publicly-owned sewage treatment works as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.2. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States and waters of the state, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the city's MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Outfall means a point source (meaning any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, or discrete fissure from which pollutants are or may be discharged, but not including return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural water runoff) at the point of a discharge to waters of the United States of America. 
Permittee means a person, party, government entity and all others who receives a grading permit for site grading as per the approved grading plan and in accordance with the CBMP plan to discharge under the NPDES. 
Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner of a premise or as the owner's agent. 
Pollutant includes, but is not limited to, the pollutants specified in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-22-1(b)(3) and any other effluent characteristics specified in a permit. Also includes anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: sediment; paints, varnishes, and solvents; cleaning chemicals; degreasers; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollutant loading means the amount of a pollutant entering the MS4. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including facilities, adjacent sidewalks and parking strips located thereon and includes all land uses. 
Qualified credentialed inspector (QCI) means an operator, operator employee, or operator designated qualified person who has successfully completed initial training and annual refresher qualified credentialed inspection program (QCIP) training, and holds a valid certification from an ADEM approved cooperating training entity. 
Qualified credentialed professional means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPECS) as determined by the Soil and Water Consideration Society (SWCS) or the International Erosion Control Association (IECA). Other registered or certified professionals; such as registered professional engineer, registered landscape architect, registered land surveyor, registered architect, registered geologist, registered forester, registered environmental manager as determined by the National Registry of Environmental Professionals (NREP), Certified Professional Soil Scientist (CPSS) as determined by the American Registry of Certified Professionals in Agronomy, Crops and Soils (ARCPACS), who can document the necessary education, training, and professional certification, registration, or credentials acceptable to the city official and can demonstrate proven experience in the field of erosion and sediment control shall be considered a qualified credentialed professional. The qualified credentialed professional must be in good standing with the authority granting the registration. The qualified credentialed professional must be familiar, and have expertise, with current industry standards for erosion and sediment controls and must be able to inspect and assure that nonstructural BMPs or other pollution control devices (silt fences, erosion control fabric, rock check devices, etc.) and erosion control efforts, such as grading, mulching, seeding and growth management, or management strategies have been properly implemented and regularly maintained according to good engineering practices and the requirements of this grading permit. A professional engineer (PE) registered in the state must certify the design and construction of structural practices such as spill prevention control and counter measures (SPCC) plan containment structures, dam construction, etc. 
Sediment means solid material settled from suspension in a liquid that has been transported and deposited from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below a water surface, usually, inorganic or organic particles originated from weathering, chemical precipitation, or biological activity. 
Silviculture means the care and cultivation of forest trees, including site preparation, planting, pruning, thinning and harvesting. 
Site means any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous tracts, lots or parcels of land which are in one ownership, and any combination of tracts, lots and parcels which are contiguous, are owned by two or more parties and are to be developed as a unit, subdivision or project. 
Stabilization means the prevention of soil movement by any of various vegetative and/or structural means. 
State means the State of Alabama. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. It is that portion of the rainfall and resulting surface flow that is in excess of that which can be absorbed through the infiltration capacity of the surface of the basin. 
Stormwater discharge means any discharge to the city's MS4 that is composed entirely of stormwater. 
Stormwater management means the incorporation of a variety of activities and equipment into a plan to address concerns associated with stormwater for the purpose of preventing pollution, improving water quality, keeping pollutants out of runoff, and the implementation of best management practices. 
Stormwater management program ("SWMP") means a program developed by the city that covers the duration of the NPDES permit. The program addresses the best management practices (BMPs), control techniques and systems, design and engineering methods, public participation and education, monitoring, and other appropriate provisions designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable. The program includes controls necessary to reduce the discharge of pollutants from its MS4 consistent with section 402(p)(3)(B) of the Clean Water Act and 40 CFR Part 122.34. 
Stormwater permit means a NPDES permit issued by ADEM under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of stormwater to waters of the United States and waters of the state, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Stream means a course of running water usually flowing in a particular direction in a definite channel and discharging into some other course of running water or body of water. 
Structural controls means engineered BMPs constructed with rigid walls and/or weirs and piped drainage that utilize active or passive treatment and/or mechanical systems for the purpose of treating stormwater runoff. 
Turbidity means a condition in water or wastewater caused by the presence of suspended matter, resulting in the scattering and absorption of light rays. A measure of fine suspended matter in liquids. 
Utility means a business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, water, telephone service and telegraph service. 
Waters of the state means groundwater (percolating or otherwise), lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or non-navigable, and including the bed and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
Waters of the United States means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined in 40 CFR § 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-2. - Administration. 
The Director of Public Works for the City of Prattville shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article, on behalf of the city as a part of the city's SWMP, and shall act as the "city official" for the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city official may be delegated by the director of public works to persons in the employment of the city or, by written delegation of the director of public works, to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-3. - Grading permit required. 
No person may conduct any land-disturbing activity without having obtained a grading permit from the city official. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-4. - Land-disturbing activities. 
Land-disturbing activities shall include any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediment to the municipal separate storm sewer system ("MS4"), including, but not limited to, the clearing, dredging, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include the following: 
(1)  Agriculture. 
(2)  Silviculture. 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens, landscaping on individual residential lots (excluding landscaping performed by, or on behalf of, a developer or builder, who builds a house on any such lot), home repairs, home maintenance work, minor additions (less than 1,000 square feet) to houses, the construction, maintenance or repair of accessory structures and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. Minor land-disturbing activities will include any area which is less than one acre. Notwithstanding, if warranted by the circumstances, the city official has the discretion to impose a CBMP plan and require a grading permit even though an excavation is less than one acre. 
(4)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as individual connections for utility services and sewer services for single or two-family residences, minor grading for driveways, yard areas and sidewalks, excluding any grading done by, or on behalf of, a developer or builder in connection with the construction of a house. 
(5)  Minor maintenance, minor repair, and the minor extension of any existing underground public utility lines; provided, that the utility company which owns such lines has received approval of a general best management practices ("BMP") plan from the city official for such maintenance, repair, and extension; and provided further, that any utility company making a minor extension in connection with which the land disturbed consists of more than 1,000 linear feet must give the city official written notice of such extension prior to the commencement of such minor extension. 
(6)  The construction, repair or rebuilding of railroad tracks. 
(7)  Minor subsurface exploratory excavations under the direction of soils engineers or engineering geologists. 
(8)  The opening of individual burial sites in property which has been approved for such use by all necessary governmental authorities. 
(9)  Digging of water wells or environmental monitoring wells. 
(10)  A fill which is less than one foot in depth and placed on a natural ground surface with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical or does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot, is less than three feet in depth, is not intended to support structures, and does not obstruct a drainage course. 
The activities referred to in items (1) through (10) above may be undertaken without a grading permit; however, the persons conducting these excluded activities shall remain responsible for otherwise conducting such activities in accordance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable law, including the proper control of sedimentation and runoff to the MS4. This article shall apply to such land-disturbing activities that drain to the MS4 if a stormwater pollution problem is shown to be caused by such activity following monitoring procedures and complaints. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-5. - Grading permit—One- or two-family residential units. 
(a)  Construction of new one- or two-family residential units shall be considered a land disturbance activity requiring a grading permit. 
(b)  The required grading permit shall be issued concurrent with any required building permits. 
(c)  One- or two-family residential units of less than one acre, and not a part of a common plan of development of greater than one acre, shall not be required to submit a CBMP plan meeting the requirements of section 117-12 of this article. Permit holders remain responsible for conducting construction activities in accordance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable laws including the proper control of soil erosion into the MS4. A simplified plan for preventing soil erosion into the MS4 must be submitted with the grading permit application. If after monitoring and inspection, the construction activity is shown to be allowing pollutants to flow into the MS4 the city official may require a separate CBMP plan meeting the requirements of section 117-12. 
(d)  One- or two-family residential units required to obtain coverage under the ADEM general construction stormwater permit shall submit a copy of the permit or application and CBMP plan to the city official when applying for a city grading permit. 
(e)  Construction of new one- or two-family residential units shall be exempt from section 117-12(11) of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-6. - Application. 
(a)  Before the commencement of any land-disturbing activity that is not exempted from obtaining a grading permit under this article, the owner of the land on which such activity shall be conducted, or his duly authorized agent, must file with the city official an application for the approval of the owner's construction best management practices plan ("CBMP plan"). The city official must either approve or disapprove the CBMP plan within 30 days of the day a complete application and CBMP plan is filed with the city official. If the application and/or CBMP plan is disapproved, the city official must inform the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for its disapproval. If the applicant, on one or more occasions, revises the CBMP plan or submits to the city official additional documents or information in connection with the CBMP plan, the city official must make a written response to the applicant with respect to whether such revised CBMP plan and/or additional documents and information have been approved or disapproved by the city official. All such additional responses must be made by the city official to the applicant within 14 days of the day such revised CBMP plan or additional documents or information are submitted to the city official. The land-disturbing activity may not be commenced prior to the issuance of the grading permit by the city official. The issuance of the grading permit shall not excuse the owner from the need to obtain other required federal, state and local permits or licenses. 
(b)  The minimum standards for the issuance of a grading permit must meet the requirements of this article and the requirements set forth in the Alabama Handbook for Erosion Control, Sediment Control, and Stormwater Management on Construction Sites and Urban Areas Vols. 1 and 2 or the latest edition. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-7. - Data required on the application for a grading permit. 
(a)  All applications for a grading permit must include the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Telephone number of applicant, telecopier number, if any, of applicant, and e-mail address, if any, of applicant; 
(3)  Address where applicant, or other person who can furnish information about the land-disturbing activity (such other person must be a resident located within 20 miles of the city), ("contact person") can be reached; 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number, telecopier number, if any, and e-mail address, if any, of the owner of the project, the owner of the property on which the project is to be located and the ground lessee of the property, if any, on which the land-disturbing activity is to be conducted if the applicant is not the owner of the project and such property; 
(5)  Legal description and address, if any, of the property upon which the land-disturbing activity is to be conducted; 
(6)  Names, addresses, telephone numbers, telecopier numbers, if any, and e-mail addresses, if any, of all contractors and subcontractors who shall implement any CBMP plan; provided, however, that if the contractor and the subcontractors have not been selected when the application for a grading permit is filed, the applicant shall furnish such information to the city official within five days of the day or days on which the contractor and/or subcontractors are selected; 
(7)  Name, address, telephone number, telecopier number, if any, and e-mail address, if any, of the qualified credentialed professional who has approved the CBMP plan application (this is required for all land-disturbing activities except those related to the construction of individual single-family residences); and 
(8)  Each application for a grading permit must be accompanied by a map or a plan of the land on which the land-disturbing activity will be conducted and any other information that is required under the provisions of sections 17-11 and 17-12. 
(b)  The detail of the CBMP plan must be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition and potential for offsite damage, as provided in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-8. - Grading permit application fee. 
Each application for the issuance of a grading permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $400.00 for all other types of land-disturbing activities, to help defray the city's cost of processing and reviewing the application and the inspections associated with the application. The applicant must submit three sets of its CBMP plan and a copy in a PDF format with its application and fee to the city official. The grading permit application fee is $150.00 for an individual single-family residential construction plan. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-9. - Signatory requirements. 
(a)  All applications and correspondence required by this article to be submitted to the city official shall be signed as follows: 
(1)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by a corporation, it must be signed by the president of the corporation or by a vice-president of the corporation who is in charge of a principal business function of the corporation, or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making functions for the corporation, or who has been authorized to sign such applications and/or correspondence by a resolution adopted by the board of directors of the corporation. Proof of the authority of the signatory shall be provided to the city official, upon his request. 
(2)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by a limited liability company, it must be signed by the manager who is in charge of a principal business function of the limited liability company, or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making functions for the limited liability company, or who has been authorized to sign such applications and/or correspondence. Proof of the authority of the signatory shall be provided to the city official, upon his request. 
(3)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by a partnership, it must be signed by a general partner of the partnership. 
(4)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by a sole proprietorship, it must be signed by the proprietor. 
(5)  If an application or correspondence is submitted by the state or the federal government or by any municipal, state or federal agency, it must be signed by either the chief executive officer or a principal executive officer of any such government or by either the chief executive officer, a principal executive officer, or a senior executive officer having responsibility for the overall operations of a principal geographic unit of any such governmental agency. 
(b)  Any person signing any application or correspondence required by this article shall make the following certification: "I certify, under penalty of law, that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision, and I am familiar with, the information in this document and such attachments. Based on my inquiry of those individuals immediately responsible for obtaining the information or of the Qualified Credentialed Professional responsible for preparing any portion of the application or correspondence, I believe the submitted information is true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and civil penalty." 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-10. - Amended application; transfer of grading permit. 
(a)  Amended grading permit. A grading permit may be amended, without the payment of an additional fee, upon the filing with the city official of an amended or restated grading permit application, containing all changes from the original application; provided, that the holder of the grading permit shows to the reasonable satisfaction of the city official that there are no proposed changes which may affect the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff. If an amended or restated application is filed with the city official with respect to land-disturbing activities for which a grading permit has been issued, such existing grading permit shall continue in effect, and the holder of the grading permit may continue to operate under it unless and until an amended grading permit is issued in response to the amended or restated application ("amended grading permit") at which time the original grading permit shall expire and all land-disturbing activities must be conducted in accordance with the amended grading permit. 
(b)  Transferred grading permit. A grading permit may be transferred, without the payment of an additional fee, upon the filing with the city official of an application for transfer, provided, that the holder and proposed transferee of the grading permit show to the reasonable satisfaction of the city official that, upon or following the transfer, there will be no proposed changes which may affect the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff. If there is a request for the transfer of a grading permit and there are to be one or more changes in the operation of the project which is the source of the land-disturbing activity which may affect the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff, the new owner or operator of such project must apply to the city for a new grading permit prior to his involvement with the operation of such project. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-11. - CBMP plan approval requirements—General requirements. 
No land-disturbing activity shall be conducted within the city until a grading permit has been issued by the city official allowing such activity pursuant to the provisions of this article. The following are CBMP plan approval requirements: 
(1)  Persons conducting land-disturbing activities shall take all reasonable measures referred to, or provided for, in this article to protect all public and private property from damage caused by such activities and to reduce stormwater pollution to the maximum extent practicable. 
(2)  No land-disturbing activities subject to this article shall be undertaken except in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  The person(s) proposing to conduct any land-disturbing activity or an agent, contractor or other representative of such person must contact the city official at least two business days before commencement of the land-disturbing activity to advise the city official of the commencement of such land-disturbing activity, unless, for good cause shown, the city official permits such person, contractor, agent or other representative to contact him nearer to the date of the commencement of such land-disturbing activity. 
b.  Other than land-clearing activities required to install the appropriate BMPs in accordance with the CBMP plan, any downslope erosion and sediment control measures, on-site stream channel protection and up slope diversion of drainage required by the CBMP plan shall be in place and functional before any clearing or earth-moving operations begin, and shall be constructed and maintained throughout the construction period. 
c.  The angle for graded slopes and fills shall be no greater than the angle, which can be retained by vegetative cover or other adequate erosion control devices or structures. Any slope or fill which has been graded shall, within 14 days of the completion of such grading or the completion of any phase of grading, be planted or otherwise provided with ground cover, materials, devices or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. The BMPs shall remain in place in accordance with the CBMP plan until the graded slope or fill is stabilized. 
d.  Adequate protective measures shall be provided for the containment of hazardous substances and any other materials which may pollute the MS4, including petroleum products, lubricants, paint, chemicals, concrete truck washout, discarded building materials, litter and sanitary waste. 
e.  All control measures shall be checked, and repaired as necessary, monthly in dry periods and within 24 hours after any rainfall at the site of three-quarters (0.75) inch within a 24-hour period. During prolonged rainfalls, daily checking and, if necessary, repairing shall be done. The permittee shall maintain written records of such checks and repairs, which records shall be subject to the inspection of the city official at any reasonable time. 
f.  The CBMP plan shall show the size of disturbed area and a schedule of the projected starting and completion dates of the land-disturbing activity. 
g.  A site plan, accompanied by a written description of BMPs which are shown on the site plan and a schedule of implementation during land-disturbing activities and construction shall be furnished to the city official prior to the commencement of any land-disturbing activities. 
h.  A description of, and procedures for, proper storage, handling and disposal of construction materials stored on-site which could contribute to the pollutant loading to the MS4, shall be furnished to the city official prior to the commencement of any land-disturbing activities. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-12. - BMP approval requirements—Design and performance standards. 
The following are required for all land-disturbing activities. All applications for a grading permit must contain, or be accompanied by, the materials and information necessary to satisfy the requirements of this article and must be accompanied by a CBMP plan. The CBMP plan shall be prepared by a qualified credentialed professional and shall include the following: 
(1)  The CBMP plan shall be accompanied by an engineering map or plan of the property upon which land-disturbing activities are to be conducted, prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor, showing the present contour lines of such property, and the present contour lines of at least the nearest 25 feet of the properties immediately adjacent to such property and the existing grades and evaluations of all streets which abut such property. Such map or plan shall show all existing drainage facilities and all natural drainage on such property and on such adjacent property. 
(2)  All proposed contours, the proposed temporary and permanent disposition of surface water and the proposed drainage structures; provided, however, the CBMP plan for utility projects, shall not be required to show the proposed contours. 
(3)  The proposed contours in the map or plan shall be depicted in contour intervals of two or fewer feet; provided, however, the CBMP plan for utility projects, except sewer projects, shall not be required to show the proposed contours. All maps and plans submitted shall be on a standard sized sheet 24 inches by 36 inches and drawn to a scale of not less than one inches equals 100 feet. Contour intervals of more than two feet and maps or plans which are smaller than the standard size may be approved by the city official, upon written request and for good cause shown. All sheets will be standard paper sizes. 
(4)  The CBMP plan shall contain a description of the existing site conditions, a description of adjacent topographical features, the information necessary to determine the erosion qualities of the soil on the site, potential problem areas of soil and erosion and sedimentation, soil stabilization specifications, stormwater management considerations, a sequence of construction and projected time schedule for the commencement and completion of the land-disturbing activity, specifications for CBMP plan maintenance during the project and after completion of the project, clearing and grading limits, and all other information needed to depict accurately the solutions to potential soil erosion and sedimentation problems to the MS4. The CBMP plan shall include the series of BMPs and shall be reviewed by, and subject to the approval of, the city official prior to the issuance of the grading permit. 
(5)  Where appropriate, in the opinion of the qualified credentialed professional who prepares the CBMP plan, to the maximum extent practicable, the CBMP plan shall include measures to reduce erosion and other adverse impact to MS4 drainage which would result from an increase in the volume of water and the rate of runoff of water during the conduct of land-disturbing activities. 
(6)  Whenever the city official determines that a CBMP plan does not comply with this article, he shall notify the applicant in writing of the ways in which the CBMP plan does not comply with this article. 
(7)  To the maximum extent practicable, sediment in runoff water must be minimized by using appropriate BMPs. 
(8)  Structural controls shall be designed by a registered professional engineer. Structural controls shall be designed and maintained as required to minimize erosion and pollution to the maximum extent practicable. All surface water flowing toward the construction area shall, to the maximum extent practicable, either be passed through the site in a protected channel or diverted by using berms, channels or sediment traps, as necessary. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be designed, according to the size and slope of the disturbed areas or drainage areas, to minimize erosion and to control sediment, to the maximum extent practicable. Discharges from sediment basins and traps must be conducted in a manner consistent with good engineering practices. Sediment-laden, or otherwise polluted, water discharged to MS4 must be addressed in a manner consistent with good engineering practices and the requirements of this article. 
(9)  Control measures shall be maintained as an effective barrier to sedimentation and erosion in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(10)  There shall be no distinctly visible floating scum, oil or other matter contained in the stormwater discharge. The stormwater discharge to an MS4 must not cause an unnatural color (except dyes or other substances discharged to an MS4 for the purpose of environmental studies and which do not have harmful effect on the bodies of water within the MS4) or odor in the community waters. The stormwater discharge to the MS4 must result in no materials in concentrations sufficient to be hazardous or otherwise detrimental to humans, livestock, wildlife, plant life or fish and aquatic life in the community waters. 
(11)  The CBMP plan must be accompanied by a letter of credit, a surety bond or a cash bond, with the city having the right to determine which type of security shall be furnished. A letter of credit, a surety bond or a cash bond (a letter of credit, a surety bond and a cash bond shall be herein collectively referred to as "security") shall be furnished to the city in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  The city official shall require a letter of credit, a surety bond or a cash bond in such amount as specified herein to assure that the work, if not completed or if not in accordance with the permitted plans and specifications will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions, erosion and/or drainage problems. In lieu of a letter of credit or a surety bond required by the city, the owner may file a cash bond with the city in an amount equal to that which would be required in the letter of credit or the surety bond. 
b.  The security shall contain, or have attached to it as an exhibit, a legal description of the site. The security shall remain in effect for such reasonable period of time as may be required by the city official. 
c.  The security for clearing operations only shall be in the amount of $1,000.00 per acre for each acre, or fraction of an acre, disturbed or affected by such operations. 
d.  The security for earthwork or clearing and earthwork operations shall be in the amount of $3,000.00 per acre for each acre, or fraction of an acre, disturbed or affected by such operations. 
e.  Security equal to double the amounts required in subsections (12) c. and d. herein, shall be required where clearing or earthwork is performed in areas designated as flood ways, flood plains or areas susceptible to landslides. 
f.  Each letter of credit must be issued by a bank which has its principal office in the city. 
g.  Each letter of credit must be issued by a bank which is reasonably satisfactory to the city and each surety bond must be issued by a surety company which is qualified to do business in the state and which is otherwise reasonably satisfactory to the city. 
(12)  When the land-disturbing activity is finished and stable vegetation or other permanent controls have been established on all remaining exposed soil, the owner of the land where the land-disturbing activity was conducted, or his authorized agent, shall notify the city official of these facts, and request a final inspection. The city official shall then inspect the site within five working days after receipt of the notice, and may require additional measures to stabilize the soil and control erosion and sedimentation. If additional measures are required by the city official, written notice of such additional measures shall be delivered to the owner, and the owner shall continue to be covered by the grading permit issued with respect to the land-disturbing activity until a final and complete inspection is made to the satisfaction of the city official. Additionally, after the city official receives certification from the owner's QCP that land-disturbing activity is finished and stable vegetation or other permanent controls have been established on all remaining exposed soil for the site; the city official will, based on the QCP certification of the project, deliver to the owner, within ten days of the date of such certification and that all work is to the satisfaction of the city official, a certification of completion showing that the requirements of the grading permit have been fulfilled. At that time, the site and/or the project constructed thereon may come under the operation of other ordinances of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-13. - Maintenance of records. 
Records of compliance with the provisions of the grading permit shall be kept on site for review by the city official; until the completion of the project. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-14. - Grading permit closeout. 
(a)  A grading permit required by section 117-3 of this chapter shall remain in effect until all land-disturbance activity is concluded, stable vegetation or other permanent controls have been established on all exposed soil, and a certification of completion is issued by the city official. 
(b)  When all land-disturbance activity is finished and stable vegetation or other permanent controls have been established on all exposed soil, the holder of a grading permit, or his agent, shall notify the city official and request a certificate of completion. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a request for certificate of completion, the city official shall inspect the subject site within five working days. 
(2)  If the city official determines that all disturbance activity is complete and the site appropriately stabilized, a certificate of completion may be issued and the grading permit closed out. 
(3)  If additional measures are required to stabilize the subject site, the city official shall provide a written notice to the permit holder or his agent. Notices shall be issued within five working days following the inspection. The site grading permit shall remain in effect until all outstanding violations items are corrected, a follow-up inspection conducted, and a certificate of completion issued. 
(4)  Certificates of completion shall be issued within ten working days following a satisfactory final inspection. 
(c)  In lieu of the procedure specified by subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2), the city official may accept a certified inspection report prepared by the permit holder's QCP stating that all land disturbance activity is concluded and stable vegetation or other permanent controls have been established on all exposed soil. Certificates of completion shall be issued within ten working days after receipt of the QCP certification. 
(d)  One- or two-family dwellings. A release from a grading permit issued for one- or two-family dwelling may be requested concurrent with the final inspections for compliance with the city building codes. The building official shall withhold the certificate of occupancy for the one- or two-family dwelling until the city official issues a certificate of completion. 
(e)  The security furnished to the city as required by section 117-12(11) shall be returned to the permit holder within 20 working days following the issuance of a certificate of completion. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-15. - Monitoring and inspection. 
The city official may periodically monitor the quality of stormwater and the concentration of pollutants in stormwater discharges from land-disturbing activities permitted to the MS4 pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-16. - Detection of illicit connections, improper disposal and/or discharges. 
The city official shall take appropriate steps to detect illicit connections and eliminate improper disposal and/or discharge to the MS4, including the required dry-weather and wet-weather programs to screen illicit connections and improper discharges and identify their source or sources from land-disturbing activities. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-17. - Inspections, right for inspection for compliance. 
(a)  Pursuant to the terms of the grading permit and/or the grading permit application, the city official, bearing proper identification, may enter and inspect all land-disturbing activities for regular periodic inspections, investigations, monitoring, observations, measurements, enforcement, sampling and testing to verify compliance with the provisions of this article and the specific CBMP plan for such land-disturbing activities. The city official shall inspect the construction site to confirm the implementation and the maintenance of the CBMP plan; otherwise, such site shall be inspected when the city official believes, as a result of complaints or monitoring activity, that land-disturbing activities on the site are causing a substantial pollutant loading which threatens the MS4. 
(b)  Upon the refusal by any property owner to allow the city official to enter, or to continue an inspection on, a site on which land-disturbing activities or construction work is being done, the city official shall terminate the inspection or confine the inspection to areas to which no objection is raised. If an agent of the city official was making, or attempting to make, such inspection, the agent shall promptly report to the city official the refusal and the reasons for the refusal, if the reasons are known by the agent. The city official may seek appropriate legal remedies to enable him to make or complete such inspection, including seeking appropriate legal remedies from the court of appropriate jurisdiction. If the court grants a remedy to the city official, the property owner must reimburse the city of all the costs and expenses incurred by the city in obtaining such remedy, including court costs and reasonably attorney's fees. 
(c)  If the city official has reasonable cause to believe that discharges from the land-disturbing activities to the MS4 may cause an imminent threat to human health or the environment, an inspection of the site may take place at any time and without notice to the owner of the property or a representative on site. The city official shall present proper credentials upon request of the owner or his representative. 
(d)  At any time during an inspection, or at such other times as the city official may request information from an owner or his representative, the owner or representative may identify areas of its business, material or processes which contain a trade secret and an inspection of which might reveal such trade secret. To the extent practicable and as allowed by law, the city official shall protect all information, which is designated as a trade secret by the owner or his representative. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-18. - Unauthorized discharge prohibited and declared a public nuisance. 
(a)  Any discharge of stormwater made in violation of this article or of any condition of a grading permit issued pursuant to this article is prohibited and is hereby declared a public nuisance subject to correction and/or abatement in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  Exceptions . Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the MS4 and to waters of the United States and waters of the state when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present and therefor shall not be considered unauthorized discharges unless determined by the city official to cause a violation of the provisions of the AWPCA, CWA or this article: 
(1)  Discharge from emergency fire-fighting activities; 
(2)  Water used to control dust, as long as no runoff is generated; 
(3)  Potable water including uncontaminated water line flushing not associated with hydrostatic testing; 
(4)  Routine external building wash down associated with construction that does not use detergents; 
(5)  Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used; 
(6)  Uncontaminated air conditioning or compressor condensate associated with temporary office trailers and other similar buildings; 
(7)  Uncontaminated ground water or spring water; 
(8)  Foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents. 
(c)  Except for emergency discharges noted above, allowable discharges shall not allow sediment to wash offsite and into the MS4 and waters of the United States. 
(d)  The prohibition shall not apply to any stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the ADEM or EPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the city for any discharge to the MS4. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-19. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Release of hazardous materials . In the event of any discharge of a hazardous substance or a significant spill of a hazardous substance to the MS4 which could constitute a threat to human health or the environment, the premises owner or operator of the premises shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911) and shall also notify the city official in person or by phone or facsimile not later than 24 hours from the date and time of the release as to the occurrence of and the quantity of the release. 
(b)  Release of non-hazardous materials . In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the fire department and the city official in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the 24 hours from the date and time of the release as to the occurrence of and the quantity of the release. 
(c)  The owner or operator of such property shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such spill so as to minimize any adverse impact to the waters of the state and waters of the United States caused by discharges to the MS4, including such improved or additional monitoring as may be necessary to determine the nature and impact of the discharge. Absent a compelling public interest to the contrary, it shall not be a defense for the owner or operator in an enforcement action, that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the business or activity of the site, or any project or facility thereon, to maintain water quality and minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause. 
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city official within three business days of date of the phone or in person notice. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-20. - Immediate threats to public health, welfare or the environment. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this article to the contrary, in the event of an immediate threat to the public health or welfare, the city official may take all appropriate measures to remove or alleviate such threat. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Secs. 117-21—117-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION ("IDDE") 
 
Sec. 117-41. - Administration. 
The director of public works of the City of Prattville shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article, on behalf of the city as a part of the city's SWMP, and shall act as the "city official" for the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city official may be delegated by the director of public works to persons in the employ of the city or, by written delegation of the director of public works, to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-42. - Applicability. 
This article applies to all properties (whether developed or undeveloped) that have stormwater discharges associated with any and all land uses within the City of Prattville, including, but not limited to, residential, industrial, commercial, agricultural, and construction activity. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-43. - Regulatory consistency. 
This article shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the CWA and the AWPCA and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto or any other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-44. - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-45. - Prohibitions of illicit discharges and illicit connections. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
(1)  Prohibition. Unless otherwise excepted herein, no person shall spill, dump, throw, drain, make, cause to be made or continue to be made; allow others under such person's control to spill, dump, throw, drain, make, cause to be made or continue to be made; or otherwise discharge and/or dispose of into the city's MS4 or watercourses any illicit discharge, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(2)  Exceptions. Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the MS4, waters of the state or to waters of the United States when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefor shall not be considered illicit discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the AWPCA, CWA or this article: 
a.  Water line flushing; 
b.  Landscape irrigation (not consisting of treated, or untreated wastewater unless authorized by ADEM); 
c.  Diverted stream flows; 
d.  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration; 
e.  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
f.  Discharges from potable water sources; 
g.  Foundation and footing drains; 
h.  Air conditioning drains; 
i.  Irrigation water (not consisting of treated, or untreated, wastewater unless authorized by ADEM); 
j.  Rising ground water; 
k.  Natural springs; 
l.  Water from crawl space pumps; 
m.  Lawn watering runoff; 
n.  Individual residential car washing, to include charitable carwashes; 
o.  Residential street wash water; 
p.  Discharges or flow from firefighting activities (including fire hydrant flushing); 
q.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
r.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and 
s.  Discharges authorized by and in compliance with a separate NPDES permit. 
Discharges associated with dye testing are also allowable discharges under the terms of this section, but this activity requires written notification to and approval in writing by the city official at least 14 days prior to the date of the test. 
(3)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of ADEM, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the city for any discharge to the storm drainage system/MS4. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  Prohibition. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(2)  Past connections prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such an illicit connection to continue. 
(4)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or a sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City of Prattville. 
(5)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or the equivalent and which may be connected to the MS4 shall be located by the owner or occupant of that premises upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city official requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm drainage system, sanitary sewer, or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm drainage system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided in writing to the city official. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-46. - Watercourse protection. 
No person owning a premises or leasing a premises through which a watercourse passes [shall] throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, maintained or kept in any part of a watercourse any trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. A person shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse on the premises owned or leased by such person free from any such trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. A person shall only be liable under this article for trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that originate from the premises owned or leased by such person. In addition, the owner or lessee of a premises shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse on such premises, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-47. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
(a)  NPDES permit. Any person subject to an industrial, general or construction activity NPDES permit shall comply with all terms and provisions of such NPDES permit. Any person with a NPDES permit shall provide to the city official a copy of the permit, a copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan and copies of all monitoring data and reports submitted to ADEM as required by the NPDES permit. Copies of monitoring data and reports shall be submitted to the city in the same manor and frequency as is submitted to ADEM. 
Proof of compliance with said permit in a form acceptable to the city official is required prior to the allowing discharges to the MS4. Compliance with an NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Notice of intent (NOI). The owner and/or operator of a facility required to have an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial and/or construction activity shall submit a copy of the NOI to the city official concurrently with the NOI submittal to ADEM. 
The copy of the NOI may be delivered to the city official (director of public works) either: 
In person to: 
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater 
Director of Public Works 
City of Prattville 
530 Doster Road 
Prattville, Alabama 36067 
Or by mailing to: 
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater 
Director of Public Works 
City of Prattville 
101 West Main Street 
Prattville, Alabama 36067 
(c)  A person commits an offense under this article if such person operates a facility on a premises that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial and/or construction activity without having obtained an NPDES permit and/or submitted a copy of the original NOI to discharge to the city official. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-48. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. Upon reasonable notice to the premises owner and/or person in possession thereof, the city official shall be permitted to enter and inspect premises and facilities subject to regulation under this article during normal business hours as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. Identification issued by the city shall be presented by the city official at the time of entry. 
(1)  If security measures are in force on a premises, then the premises owner shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the city official for the purposes of this article. Proof of an illicit discharge or an illicit connection is not required for entry onto a premises. 
(2)  Owners and/or operators of a premises shall allow the city official ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, testing, and examination; for the copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater; and for the performance of any additional duties as required by state and federal law. 
(3)  The city official shall have the right to set up on any premises such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city official to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the premises' stormwater flow discharges. 
(4)  The city official may require the owner and/or operator of a premises to install monitoring equipment as necessary and to make monitoring data available to the city official. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe, calibrated and proper operating condition by the owner and/or operator at his/her/its own expense. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction that prohibits safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner of the premises at the written or oral request of the city official and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner and/or operator of the premises. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city official access to a premises is a violation of this article. A person who is the operator of a premises with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater commits an offense if such person denies the city official reasonable access to the permitted premises for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the city official has been refused access to any part of a premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city official is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city official may seek issuance of a search warrant from the city municipal court. 
(c)  Emergency discharge. The city official shall have the right to enter upon any and all parts of a premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, and/or examination in the case of an emergency illicit discharge or a suspected emergency discharge as is necessary in the opinion of the city official to contain an illicit discharge. Reasonable notice of such entry under the circumstances must be given to the owner and occupant of a premises. Entry must be made during normal business hours, if possible. Identification issued by the city shall be presented at the time of entry by the city official. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-49. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants through the use of best management. 
(a)  BMPs required. All commercial, industrial and high-risk facilities shall identify, implement and maintain BMPs for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the MS4, waters of the state or waters of the United States. Noncompliance with such BMPs will constitute a violation of this article. 
(1)  Exceptions . 
a.  Where BMPs are promulgated by the city or any federal, state or regional agency for any specific activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4, waters of the state or waters of the United States, every person undertaking such activity or operation or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. Compliance with such BMPs shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this article. 
b.  Compliant with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with construction and/or industrial activity shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Responsibility to implement best management practices. Except as set forth herein, any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the MS4, waters of the state or the waters of the United States shall implement BMPs to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. 
The owner or operator of a commercial, industrial or high risk facility shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-50. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any premises' owner or person responsible for a premises, facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a premises, facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which is resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, waters of the state or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(1)  Release of hazardous materials. In the event of a release of hazardous pollutants or materials into the MS4, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911) and shall also notify the city official in person or by phone or facsimile not later than 24 hours from the date and time of the release as to the occurrence of and the quantity of the release. 
(2)  Release of non-hazardous materials. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the fire department and the city official in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the 24 hours from the date and time of the release as to the occurrence of and the quantity of the release. 
(3)  Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city official within three business days of date of the phone or in person notice. 
(4)  If the discharge of prohibited pollutants or materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years from the date of the discharge. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no reoccurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(5)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-51. - Immediate threats to public health, welfare or the environment. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this article to the contrary, in the event of an immediate threat to the public safety, health or welfare, the city official may take all appropriate measures to remove or alleviate such threat. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Secs. 117-52—117-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 117-71. - Enforcement remedies for violations. 
(a)  Warning notice. When the city official finds that any person has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article or any order issued hereunder, the city official may serve that person a warning notice specifying the particular violation to have occurred and requesting that the discharger immediately seek to cease any offending discharge and/or to correct any inadequate erosion/siltation control. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice does not relieve the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the city official to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice. 
A warning notice, unless the city official later elects to issue a notification of violation, will not be considered a first violation for the purposes of this article; however, a warning notice will be considered an additional violation. 
(b)  Compliance order. When the city official finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, this article, he may issue a compliance order to the violator, directing that, within a specified time period, adequate structures and devices be installed, or procedures implemented, and properly operated or other action be taken to remedy such violation. Compliance orders may also contain such other requirements as may reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address such violation, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices and self-monitoring and management practices. 
(c)  Stop-work order; revocation of grading permit. In the event that any person holding a grading permit or building permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of the grading permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the environment, health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city official may immediately suspend or revoke the permit. 
(d)  Notification of violation. Whenever the city official finds that any person is in violation of any provision of this article, permit, or any order issued hereunder, the city official or his agent may serve upon such person written notice of the violation by a uniform non-traffic citation and complaint. This notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The address of the premises (when available) or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring or has occurred; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; and 
(4)  Scheduled court date and/or pay date. 
(e)  The city official or agent may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections and/or illicit discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of an amount equal to administrative and remediation; and/or 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-72. - Authority of municipal court. 
The municipal court is vested with the power and jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate the violations provided in this article and to issue orders imposing the fines, costs and fees not otherwise provided for by section 117-77. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-73. - Miscellaneous offenses; unlawful acts; misdemeanor. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor violation for any person to: 
(1)  Violate any provision of this article; 
(2)  Violate the provisions of any grading permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful notice to abate issued by the city official; 
(4)  Violate any lawful order of the city official; or 
(5)  Violate the provisions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions. 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Prattville from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-74. - Fines. 
(a)  First violation. The fine of $60.00 shall be assessed for a first violation of this article. 
(b)  Second violation. The fine of $150.00 shall be assessed for a second violation of this article within a 30-day period. 
(c)  Third or subsequent violation. For a third or subsequent violation committed by the owner during a 30-day period or longer, the violation will be adjudicated and the penalty determined by the municipal judge. 
(d)  If after a 90-day period, all violations of this article have been rectified and no additional violations have occurred during that 90-day period, then any further violations of this article will be assessed as a first violation. 
(e)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-75. - Right to appeal. 
A person found liable for a violation of this article may appeal within 14 days to municipal court for trial de novo. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-76. - Notices. 
Whenever the city is required or permitted to: 
(1)  Give a notice to any party, such notice must be in writing; or 
(2)  Deliver a document to any party, such notice or document may be delivered by personal delivery, certified mail (return receipt requested), registered mail (return receipt requested) or a generally recognized overnight carrier, to the address of such party which is in the records of the city or is otherwise known to the city. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-77. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. 
( Ord. No. 2018-007, 6-5-2018 )  
Secs. 117-78—117-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 117-101. - Construction of drainage facilities. 
No person shall lay, construct, modify or alter any creek, stream, waterway, storm drainage facility, stream enclosure, dam, culvert or spillway without first obtaining the required approvals and/or permits specified in the City of Prattville Zoning Ordinance, City of Prattville Subdivision Regulations, City of Prattville Public Works Manual and the City of Prattville Erosion and Sedimentation Control ordinance which, as approved and adopted by the Prattville City Council, are hereby incorporated into this article. All design and construction shall be in accordance with the specifications outlined in the above referenced regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Secs. 117-102—117-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 117-111. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Development and redevelopment alters the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, nonpoint and point source pollution, and sediment transport and deposition, as well as reducing groundwater recharge; 
(2)  These changes in stormwater runoff contribute to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants and alterations in hydrology, which are harmful to public health and safety, as well as to the natural environment; 
(3)  These impacts may be managed and minimized by applying proper design and well-planned controls to manage stormwater runoff from development and redevelopment sites; and 
(4)  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 ("Clean Water Act") and federal phase II stormwater rules promulgated under it, as well as rules of the Alabama Department of Environmental Management promulgated in response to federal phase II requirements, compel certain urbanized areas, including the City of Prattville, to adopt the minimum stormwater controls such as those included in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-112. - Purpose. 
(a)  General . The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased stormwater runoff and nonpoint and point source pollution associated with development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of construction-related and post construction stormwater runoff can safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare; minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure; and protect water and aquatic resources. 
(b)  Specific . This article seeks to meet its general purpose through the following specific objectives and means: 
(1)  Establish standards for development and redevelopment that protects the integrity of watersheds and preserves the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-construction hydrologic response in their post construction state as nearly as practicable for the applicable design storm(s) in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, point and nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post construction stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and review criteria for the construction, function, and use of structural BMPs that may be used to meet the minimum post construction stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of low impact site design practices, such as the use of vegetated stormwater conveyances and the preservation of green space and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of the stormwater management systems to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose no threat to public safety or public health; 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, and approval of stormwater management systems, for the inspection of approved projects, and to assure appropriate long-term maintenance; 
(8)  Assign responsibility and processes for approving the creation and maintenance of adequate drainage and flood damage prevention. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-113. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  General . Beginning with, and subsequent to its effective date, this article shall be applicable to all developments and redevelopments, that require post construction stormwater management per the post construction technical memorandum, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt or excluded pursuant to subsection (d) or (e) of this section. Nothing contained in this article shall relieve an owner of any obligations or duties imposed under any other statutory or common law. 
(b)  No development or redevelopment until compliance and permit. No development or redevelopment shall occur unless it is in compliance with the provisions of this article and any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Geographic application. The provisions of this article shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Prattville. The administrator shall keep on file a map that shows the locations of all structural BMPs constructed after the effective date of this article. 
(d)  Exemptions . The following instances of development or redevelopment are determined to be exempt and not subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  A development that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan of development, redevelopment or sale is exempt from the quality management provisions of this article. A development or redevelopment that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre is not exempt if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, redevelopment or sale, even though multiple, separate or distinct activities take place at different times on different schedules; 
(2)  Activities exempt from permit requirements of Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act, as specified in 40 CFR 232 (primarily, ongoing farming and forestry activities). 
(e)  Exclusions . Development or redevelopment conducted pursuant to one of the following authorizations that was obtained prior to the effective date of this article is determined to be excluded and is not subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  A grading permit or building permit; 
(2)  A site-specific development or redevelopment plan or site specific phased development or redevelopment plan submitted prior to the effective date of this article, and approved within six months of the effective date of this article and which has substantial progress made within two years of the site plan approval; 
(3)  Any subdivision which has received stormwater management plan approval prior to the effective date of this article and substantial progress is made within two years of the effective date of this article; 
(4)  A right that has vested under statutory or local law prior to the effective date of this article. 
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, if a stormwater management system approved pursuant to one of the above authorizations remains incomplete, and intervening state or federal regulatory changes make completion of the approved system impossible, then any such development or redevelopment activity must comply with the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-114. - Interpretation. 
(a)  Authority for interpretation . The city's administrator has authority to determine the interpretation of this article. Any person may request an interpretation by submitting a written request to the administrator who should respond in writing within 30 days. The administrator shall keep on file a record of all written interpretations of this article. 
(b)  Delegation of authority . Any act authorized by this article to be carried out by the administrator may be carried out by his or her designee. 
(c)  Meaning and intent . All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this article shall be construed according to the general and specific purposes set forth in section 117-112. If a different or more specific meaning is given for a term defined elsewhere in the city's Code of Ordinances, the meaning and application of the term in this article shall control for purposes of application of this article. 
(d)  Text controls in event of conflict . In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this article and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control. 
(e)  References to statutes, regulations, and documents . Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, manual (including the design manual), or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such that has been finalized and published with due provision for notice and comment, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(f)  Usage of words. 
(1)  Mandatory and discretionary terms . The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The word "should" is an indication of what action the ordinance encourages to be taken. The word "may" is permissive in nature. 
(2)  Conjunctions . Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: The word "and" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply. The word "or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(3)  Tense, plurals, and gender . Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa. 
(g)  Computation of time . The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the city. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-115. - Relationship to other laws, regulations and private agreements. 
(a)  Conflict of laws. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever is more restrictive shall control. 
(b)  Private agreements. This article is not intended to revoke or repeal any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. Nothing in this article shall modify or repeal any private covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not legitimize any failure to comply with this article. In no case shall the city be obligated to enforce the provisions of any easements, covenants, or agreements between private parties. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-116. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-117. - Effective date and transitional provisions. 
(a)  Effective date . This article is effective four months after the date of adoption. 
(b)  Final approvals, complete applications . All development and redevelopment projects for which complete and full site plan applications were submitted to the city prior to the effective date of this article, and approved within six months of the effective date of this article and which have substantial progress made within two years of the site plan approval, shall be exempt from complying with all provisions of this article, provided that if a stormwater management system approved prior to, or within six months of, the effective date of this article remains incomplete, and intervening state or federal regulatory changes make completion of the approved system impossible, then any such development or redevelopment activity must comply with the requirements of the instant ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Secs. 117-118—117-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER PERMIT 
 
Sec. 117-131. - Permit administrator. 
(a)  Designation . The public works director shall be designated by the mayor as the administrator of this article. 
(b)  Powers and duties . In addition to the powers and duties that may be conferred by other provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances and other laws, the administrator shall have the following powers and duties under this article: 
(1)  To review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove applications for approval of plans pursuant to the standards set out in this article; 
(2)  To make determinations and render interpretations of this article; 
(3)  To establish application requirements and schedules for submittal, to review applications and request for variances, and to review and make recommendations on applications for development or redevelopment; 
(4)  To enforce the provisions of this article in accordance with its enforcement provisions; 
(5)  To maintain records, maps, and official materials as related to the adoption, amendment, enforcement, interpretation, and/or administration of this article; 
(6)  To provide expertise and technical assistance to the city's council regarding this article; 
(7)  To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall carry out the powers and duties of the administrator; and 
(8)  To take any other action necessary to administer the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-132. - Permit. 
(a)  Permit required; must apply for permit . A stormwater management permit is required for all development and redevelopment unless exempt or excluded pursuant to subsection (d) or (e) of this article. A permit may only be issued subsequent to a properly submitted and reviewed permit application. 
(b)  Effect of permit. 
(1)  A stormwater management permit shall govern the design, installation, construction and maintenance of the stormwater management system for all developments and redevelopments. 
(2)  The permit is intended to provide a mechanism for the review, approval, and inspection of the stormwater management system, consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(3)  The permit does not continue in existence indefinitely after the completion of the project; rather, compliance after project construction is assured by the operation and maintenance agreement required by section 117-155. 
(4)  Approval authorizes the owner to go forward with only the specific plans and activity authorized in the permit. The approval shall not be construed to exempt the owner from obtaining other applicable approvals from local, state, and federal authorities. 
(5)  The approval of the stormwater management permit shall constitute an enforceable restriction on property usage that runs with the land, such as recorded deed restrictions and protective covenants, to ensure that future development and redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the approved project plans. 
(c)  Time limit/expiration. An approved stormwater plan and permit shall become null and void if the owner has failed to make substantial progress on the site within two years after the date of approval. The administrator may grant a single, one-year extension of this time limit, for good cause shown, upon receiving a written request from the owner before the expiration of the approved plan. In granting an extension, the administrator shall require compliance with standards adopted since the original application was submitted unless the change in standards would infringe upon the applicant's vested rights. 
(d)  Other city permits. 
(1)  No building permits shall be issued by the building official, working in consultation with the administrator, until a stormwater permit has been approved and issued. 
(2)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building official, working in consultation with the administrator, until a final inspection and approval are issued by the administrator. Where multiple units are served by the stormwater management system, the building official may elect to withhold a percentage of certificates of occupancy until final inspection and approval are issued by the administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-133. - Permit application. 
(a)  Authority to file applications . All applications required pursuant to this article shall be submitted to the administrator by the owner or the owner's duly authorized agent. 
(b)  Establishment of application requirements, schedule, and fees—Application contents and form. The administrator shall establish requirements for the content and form of all applications and shall amend and update those requirements from time to time as required. At a minimum, the application shall describe in detail how the post construction stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed, the design of the stormwater management system, and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Permit fees. The city council shall establish a schedule of permit review fees, as well as policies regarding refund of any fees upon withdrawal of an application, and may amend and update the fees and policies from time to time. 
(d)  Complete application. Applications shall be submitted to the administrator in the form established by the administrator, along with the permit review fee. An application shall be considered as submitted only when it contains all elements of a complete application pursuant to this article, along with the permit review fee. If the administrator finds that an application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of the deficient elements and shall be provided with an opportunity to submit a complete application. 
(e)  Review—Time and procedure. 
(1)  The administrator shall establish and publish the procedure for application review and approval. 
(2)  Review . Within 30 days after a complete application is submitted, the administrator should review the application and determine whether the application complies with this article. 
(f)  Approval . If the administrator finds that the application complies with this article, the administrator shall approve the application and notify the applicant in writing. The administrator may impose conditions of approval as needed to ensure compliance with this article. The conditions shall be included as part of the approval. 
(g)  Fails to comply . If the administrator finds that the application fails to comply with this article or if the application is incomplete, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing and shall indicate how the application fails to comply. The applicant shall have an opportunity to submit a revised application. 
(h)  Revision and subsequent review. A complete revised application should be reviewed by the administrator within 30 days after its resubmittal and shall be approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved. If a revised application is not resubmitted within 30 days from the date the applicant was notified, the application shall be considered withdrawn, and a new submittal for the same or substantially the same project shall be required along with the permit review fee. One resubmittal of a revised application may be submitted without payment of an additional permit review fee. Any resubmittal after the first resubmittal shall be accompanied by an additional permit review fee as established pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Secs. 117-134—117-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 117-141. - General standards. 
All development and redevelopment to which this article applies shall comply with the standards of this section for both quality and quantity. 
(1)  Best available technology/information. The best available technology and information shall be used for analysis and design of a stormwater management system to meet the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Additional requirements. As part of the approval process, the administrator may impose additional requirements related to a proposed stormwater management system to address such issues as maintenance, drainage, inspection, operation, access easements, and restrictive covenants to ensure compliance with this article. 
(3)  Low-impact development practices. Owners of development and redevelopment projects are hereby encouraged to use low impact development (LID) practices where practicable that will aid stormwater quality and quantity management by reducing impervious surfaces, increasing the use of natural conveyances, maintaining natural vegetation areas, increasing infiltration of surface waters to replenish ground waters, and conserving stormwater for alternative compatible uses. 
(4)  Regional stormwater control facilities. The use of regional stormwater control facilities may be allowed when space is available, in order to treat multiple parcels of land which are subject to the provisions of this article. Regional facilities may be allowed as joint ventures between private entities and/or public and private entities. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-142. - Design memorandum. 
(a)  Specific standards for stormwater quality, quantity, and control measures shall be determined and established by the Prattville City Engineer and published in a design memorandum. 
(b)  The design memorandum shall reflect the general standards contained in section 117-141 and implement the requirements of the City of Prattville most recent Phase II NPDES Stormwater Permit issued by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management. 
(c)  The initial design memorandum shall be issued within 60 days of adoption of this article and be effective 90 days thereafter. 
(d)  The design memorandum shall be filed with the city clerk and available as an ordinary public record. 
(e)  The design memorandum shall be reviewed annually by the city engineer. Annual revisions to the design memorandum shall be completed and published by the first day of October 1 of each year and be effective on the following January 1. 
(f)  The design memorandum shall establish a process for issuing variances from the published standards. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Secs. 117-143—117-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 117-151. - General standard of maintenance. 
The owner of each structural BMP installed pursuant to this article shall maintain and operate it so as to preserve and continue its function in controlling stormwater quality and quantity at the degree or amount of function for which the structural BMP was designed. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-152. - Annual maintenance inspection and report. 
The person responsible for maintenance of any structural BMP installed pursuant to this article shall submit to the administrator an inspection report from a qualified registered Alabama professional engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect performing services only in their area of competence. At a minimum, the inspection report shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner; 
(2)  The recorded book and page number of the lot of each structural BMP; 
(3)  A statement that an inspection was made of all structural BMPs; 
(4)  The date the inspection was completed; 
(5)  A statement that all inspected structural BMPs are performing properly and are in compliance with the terms and conditions of the approved maintenance agreement required by section 117-142; and 
(6)  The original signature and seal of the engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect. 
All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the administrator. All completed forms shall be submitted to the administrator at, 101 West Main Street, Prattville, AL 36067. An original inspection report shall be provided to the administrator beginning one year from the date of final inspection and approval of the stormwater facility. Each year thereafter, the inspection report will be due on the first day of September. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-153. - Records of installation and maintenance activities. 
The owner of each stormwater management system shall keep records of inspections, maintenance, and repairs for at least five years from the date of creation of the record and shall submit the same upon reasonable request to the administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-154. - Inspection program. 
Inspections and inspection programs by the city may be conducted or established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to, routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in structural BMPs; and evaluating the condition of structural BMPs. No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with the administrator while carrying out his official duties. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-155. - Operation and maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Prior to the conveyance or transfer of any portion of a development or redevelopment to be served by a stormwater management system pursuant to this division, and prior to the issuance of any permit for a development or redevelopment requiring a stormwater management system pursuant to this division, the owner must execute an operation and maintenance agreement, also known as an OMA, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the whole or any portion of the development or redevelopment served by the stormwater management system. 
(b)  Until the transfer of all property, sites, or lots served by the stormwater management system, or the transfer of legal and managerial responsibility, therefor, the original owner shall have primary responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the OMA. The OMA shall require the owner to construct, maintain, repair, and, if necessary, reconstruct, the stormwater management system, and shall state the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for the stormwater management system. 
(c)  The OMA shall grant to the city a perpetual easement across those portions of the property necessary for inspection monitoring, maintenance, repair, or reconstruction of the stormwater management system. 
(d)  The OMA shall also provide that, in the event the owner defaults on any of its obligations, hereunder, and it becomes necessary for the city to complete construction on, maintain, repair, or reconstruct, the stormwater management system, the city may recover any and all costs it, thereby, incurs. 
(e)  The OMA shall, furthermore, grant to the city a lien on the property subject to the stormwater management permit, including the property upon which the stormwater management system is constructed, to secure the payment of the costs of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and repair. 
(f)  In no case shall the easement or the liens confer an obligation on the city to assume responsibility for the stormwater management system. The OMA shall contain a statement informing all future transferees of the property that the property is subject to restrictive covenants/agreements which require the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and repair of the stormwater management system, which covenants and agreements shall run with the land. 
(g)  The OMA shall contain a provision whereby the owner releases, and agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless, the city, its officials, officers, agents, and employees, from any and all claims, actions, suits, liabilities, losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees, and costs of litigation, of any nature, whatsoever, including claims for special and consequential damages, arising out of, or in any way related to, the stormwater management system and/or the city's entry onto the property and use of the easement, thereupon. 
(h)  The OMA must be approved by the administrator prior to plan approval, shall be referenced on the final plat, and shall be recorded with the county register of deeds upon final plat approval. A copy of the recorded maintenance agreement shall be given to the administrator within 14 days following its recordation. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-156. - Requirement for homeowners' and other associations. 
For all stormwater management systems required pursuant to this division and that are to be or are owned and maintained by a homeowners' association, property owners' association, or similar entity, the required OMA shall include the following provisions: 
(1)  Acknowledge that the association shall continuously operate and maintain the entire stormwater management system, even though the association is required to escrow funds based on the cost to construct, maintain, operate, repair and inspect only the structural BMPs; 
(2)  Establish an escrow account in the amount of half of the initial construction cost, which shall be used to maintain, operate, repair, inspect or reconstruct the stormwater management system; 
(3)  Prior to plat recordation or issuance of building permits, whichever shall occur first, the owner shall pay into the escrow account, at a minimum, an amount equal to ten percent of half the initial construction cost of the structural BMPs. The administrator shall review and approve the estimate of costs for the structural BMPs; 
(4)  Require the owner or homeowners' association to contribute into the escrow account, at a minimum, an amount satisfactory to support the operation, maintenance and annual inspection of the structural BMPs such that: 
a.  Ten percent of the initial construction cost of the structural BMPs shall be deposited into the escrow account annually, and the full amount shall be deposited within ten years following initial construction of the structural BMPs; 
b.  The association shall allocate a portion of the association's annual assessments to the escrow account; and 
c.  Any funds drawn down from the escrow account shall be replaced in accordance with the schedule of anticipated work used to originally fund the escrow account. 
(5)  Grant to the city an easement to construct, inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, and reconstruct the stormwater management system; 
(6)  Allow the city to recover from the association and its members, any and all costs the city expends to maintain or repair the stormwater management, system, pursuant to Division 6, Enforcement and Violations; 
(7)  A statement that this agreement shall not obligate the city to maintain or repair any stormwater management system, and the city shall not be liable to any person for the condition or operation of the stormwater management system; 
(8)  A statement that this agreement shall not in any way diminish, limit, or restrict the right of the city to enforce any of its ordinances as authorized by law; and 
(9)  A provision releasing, indemnifying, and holding harmless the city, its officials, officers, agents, and employees for any claims, actions, suits, liabilities, losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees, and costs of litigation, including special and consequential damages, arising from or related to the stormwater management system and/or the city's entry onto the property and use of the easement thereupon, unless the city has agreed in writing to assume the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater management system and has accepted dedication of any and all rights necessary to carry out that maintenance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-157. - Notice to owners. 
(a)  Deed recordation and indications on plat . The applicable OMA, conservation easement, or dedication and acceptance into public maintenance (whichever is applicable) pertaining to the stormwater management system shall be referenced on the final plat and shall be recorded with the office of the probate judge upon final plat approval. If no subdivision plat is recorded for the site, then the operations and maintenance agreement, conservation easement, or dedication and acceptance into public maintenance, (whichever is applicable) shall be recorded with the office of the probate judge so as to appear in the chain of title of all subsequent purchasers under generally accepted searching principles. 
(b)  Signage . Where appropriate, as determined by the administrator, all or a portion of the stormwater management system shall be posted with conspicuous signage stating who is responsible for required maintenance and annual inspection. The signage shall be maintained so as to remain visible and legible. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Secs. 117-158—117-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 117-171. - General. 
(a)  Authority to enforce. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the administrator or any authorized agent of the city. 
(b)  Violation unlawful . Any failure to comply with an applicable requirement, prohibition, standard, or limitation imposed by this article, or the terms or conditions of any permit or other development or redevelopment approval or authorization granted pursuant to this article, is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  Each day a separate offense . Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense. 
(d)  Responsible persons/entities . Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether actively or passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or maintain all or any portion of a stormwater management system in violation of this article shall be subject to the remedies, penalties, and/or enforcement actions as permitted by city ordinance or state code. Persons subject to the remedies and penalties set forth herein may include the owner as well as any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or any other person who has control over, the responsibility for, or the use of the property on which the violation occurs and who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or constitutes a violation of this article, or fails to take appropriate action, so that a violation of this article results or persists. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 117-172. - Procedures. 
(a)  Initiation/complaint. Whenever a violation of this article occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the alleged violation and the basis thereof, and shall be filed with the administrator, who shall record the complaint. The complaint shall be investigated promptly by the administrator. 
(b)  Inspection . The administrator shall have the authority, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any land, building, structure, or premises to ensure compliance with this article. 
(c)  Notice of violation and order to correct. When the administrator finds that any building, structure, or land is in violation of this article, the administrator shall notify, in writing, the owner and/or other person violating this article. The notification shall indicate the nature of the violation, contain the address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring, order the necessary action to abate the violation, and give a deadline for correcting the violation. The administrator may deliver the notice of violation and correction order personally, by the local law enforcement, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by any means authorized by state code. Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the violator of the obligations set forth herein. If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time, as provided in the notification, the administrator may take appropriate action under this article to correct and abate the violation and to ensure compliance with this article. 
(d)  Extension of time. A person who receives a notice of violation and correction order, or the owner, may submit to the administrator a written request for an extension of time for correction of the violation. On determining that the request includes enough information to show that the violation cannot be corrected within the specified time limit for reasons beyond the control of the person requesting the extension, the administrator may extend the time limit as is reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation, up to, but not exceeding 60 days. The administrator may grant 30-day extensions in addition to the foregoing extension if the violation cannot be corrected within the permitted time due to circumstances beyond the control of the person violating this article. The administrator shall grant an extension only by written notice of extension. The notice of extension shall state the date prior to which correction must be made, after which the violator will be subject to the penalties described in the notice of violation and correction order. 
(e)  Enforcement after time to correct. After the time has expired to correct a violation, including any extensions authorized by subsection (d) of this section, the administrator shall determine if the violation is corrected. If the violation is not corrected, the administrator may act to impose one or more of the remedies and penalties authorized by this article. 
(f)  Emergency enforcement. If delay in correcting a violation would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this article or pose an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, then the administrator may order the immediate cessation of a violation. Any person so ordered shall cease any violation immediately. The administrator may seek immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, through any remedy or penalty authorized by this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-008, 6-5-2018 )  
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PRATTVILLE, ALABAMA, AS FOLLOWS: 
THAT THE "ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PRATTVILLE, ALABAMA," ADOPTED ON FEBRUARY 10, 1950, AS SUBSEQUENTLY AMENDED, FROM TIME TO TIME, IS HEREBY AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS: 
AN ORDINANCE, IN PURSUANCE OF THE AUTHORITY GRANTED BY TITLE 11, CHAPTER 52, SECTIONS 70 TO 84 INCLUSIVE, CODE OF ALABAMA 1975, TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF PRATTVILLE, ALABAMA, TO REGULATE WITHIN SUCH DISTRICTS THE HEIGHT, NUMBER OF STORIES AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES, THE PERCENTAGE OF LOT THAT MAY BE OCCUPIED, THE SIZE OF YARDS AND OTHER OPEN SPACES, THE DENSITY OF POPULATION AND THE USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND LAND; AND TO PROVIDE METHODS OF ADMINISTRATION OF THIS ORDINANCE AND PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF. 
THE PUBLIC WELFARE REQUIRING IT, be it ordained by the City Council of Prattville, Alabama, as follows: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is Ord. No. 1-63, adopted May 21, 1963. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Municipal zoning generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - CLASSIFICATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
 
Section 1. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of Prattville, Alabama," and the map herein referred to, identified by the title "Zoning Map of Prattville," shall be further identified by the signature of the Mayor of Prattville, and attested by the City Clerk. The Zoning Map of Prattville and all explanatory matter thereon are hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. Such map shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall show thereon the date of adoption of this ordinance.  
Section 2. - Districts. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Prattville is hereby divided into the types of districts designated as follows: 
R-1 Residential District 	(Single Family) 
R-2 Residential District 	(Single Family) 
R-3 Residential District 	(Multifamily) 
R-4 Residential District 	(Multifamily) 
R-5 Mobile Home Subdivisions 	
R-6 Townhouse District 	
RD-1 	Redevelopment District 
B-1 Business District 	(Local Shopping) 
B-2 Business District 	(General Business) 
B-3 Business District 	(Community Shopping) 
B-4 Highway Commercial District 	(Highway Commercial) 
M-1 Manufacturing District 	(Light Industry) 
M-2 Manufacturing District 	(General Industry) 
T-1 Mobile Home Subdivisions 	
T-2 Mobile Home Parks 	(Mobile Homes) 
T-3 Mobile Home Condominiums 	
FAR Forest, Agricultural, Recreation 	
O-1 Office District 	
PUD Planned Unit Development District 	
 
(Ord. of 5-6-1975; Ord. of 9-19-1989; Ord. of 3-19-1991)  
Section 3. - District boundaries. 
The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map of the municipality. Unless otherwise shown on said zoning map, the boundaries of districts are lot lines, the center lines of streets or alleys or such lines extended, railroad right-of-way lines, or the corporate limit lines as they existed at the time of enactment of this ordinance. Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be decided by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.  
Section 4. - Uses. 
(A)  In each district, no use other than the types specified as "permitted" or "permitted on appeal," shall be allowed. (See: Article 7.) Uses specified as "permitted" shall be permitted upon application to the Director of Planning and Development. Uses specified as "permitted on appeal" are exceptions and no permit shall be issued for such uses except with the written approval of the Board of Zoning Adjustment and subject to such conditions as said Board may require to preserve and protect the character of the district. 
(B)  Any use or structure existing at the time of enactment or of subsequent amendment to this ordinance, but not in conformity with its provisions, may be continued with the following limitations: Any use or structure which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance, except with the written approval of the Board of Zoning Adjustment, shall not be: 
(a)  Chained to another nonconforming use. 
(b)  Re-established after discontinue [discontinuance] for one (1) year. 
(c)  Rebuilt after fire or storm loss, exceeding its value, above foundation, at the time of loss. 
(C)  Mobile homes which do not conform to the district in which they are located may be replaced if totally destroyed or moved by fire, wind, flood or the elements, provided that such replacement occurs within ninety (90) days of the initial movement or distinction. Nonconforming mobile homes shall not be otherwise replaced. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1983(2))  
Section 5. - Building lots, yards and open spaces. 
In each district, each structure, hereafter erected or altered, shall be provided with the yards specified and shall be on a lot of the area and width specified in Article 7. No open space or lot required for a building or structure shall during its life be occupied by or counted as open space for another building or structure. 
Exceptions to the district requirements for building lots and yards follow: 
a.  Where the owner of a lot of official record at the time of adoption of this ordinance does not own sufficient adjacent land to enable him to conform to the yard and other requirements of this ordinance, one (1) building and its accessory structures may be built provided the yard space and other requirements conform as closely as possible, in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Adjustment, to the requirements of the district in which it is located; and further provided that neither side yard shall be reduced to less than five (5) feet in width. 
b.  No building need be set back more than the average of the setbacks of the existing residences within one hundred (100) feet each side thereof.  
Section 6. - Height. 
In each district, each structure, hereafter erected or altered, shall not exceed the heights specified in the district requirements, Article 7. 
Height limitations shall not apply to church steeples, hospitals, sanitariums, barns, silos, farm structures, chimneys, flagpoles, public utility poles, radio and television towers and aerials, cooling towers, water tanks, and industrial structures when required by manufacturing process but not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the lot.  
Section 7. - Off-street automobile storage. 
In each district, each structure, hereafter exerted or altered, shall be provided, with off-street automobile storage as specified in the district requirements, Article 7. No off-street automobile storage space required for a building or structure shall during its life be occupied by or counted as off-street automobile space for another building or structure, but may be included in the required yard space.  
Section 8. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
In each business and industrial district, each structure hereafter erected or altered, shall be provided with off-street loading and unloading facilities as specified in the district requirements, Article 7.  
Section 9. - Structures. 
(a)  [General.] It is the intent of this ordinance, that there shall be but one (1) main structure on any lot zoned or used for single-family residential purposes; also, accessory structures shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total floor area of any main structure. No accessory structure shall be used as living quarters; however, protective shelters may provide temporary living quarters in times of danger or emergency. This section shall not apply to multifamily developments as defined herein. 
(b)  [Antennas.] 
(1)  Antennas for the reception or transmission of radio and television signals located in FAR, residential, or manufactured (trailer or mobile home) housing zones shall be considered public utilities, if used for any commercial purpose, and shall be allowed only as a use on appeal. 
(2)  Antennas for the reception or transmission of radio or television signals located in FAR, residential, or manufactured (trailer or mobile home) housing zones, used for noncommercial purposes, shall be considered accessory uses which must be located to the rear of the front building line. No antenna or its support structure shall be placed upon any other principal or accessory structure, but may be anchored to such structure(s). 
(3)  All antennas, which in combination with the support structure are greater than forty-five (45) feet in height shall be treated as accessory structures and shall require the issuance of building permits and inspections in accordance with this ordinance and the building code. 
(4)  The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall not issue variances to these provisions unless it is proven to the Board's satisfaction that no useful signal can be received or transmitted by an antenna located in a manner conforming to this ordinance. 
(5)  In making its determination, the Board of Zoning Adjustment may require proof or evidence of failed reception or transmission which may include but is not limited to: 
a.  For reception antennas: Video or audio tapes of reception at the site; or 
b.  For transmission antennas: Signal strength readings of a received signal certified by a registered electrical engineer; or 
c.  For all types of antennas: Theoretical calculations by a registered electrical engineer. 
(6)  Building permits shall be required for all antennas and structures over forty-five (45) feet in height. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1990) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 13, 1990, amended § 9 in its entirety. For purposes of classification and clarity, the editor has added the words in brackets [ ] and redesignated subsections (b)—(g) as (b)(1)—(6) herein.  
Section 10. - Site plan review. 
It is the intent of this section to provide for the review of site plans to assure public safety and welfare with respect to traffic, drainage, flooding, fire hazards, and compatibility with existing development in the City of Prattville. 
A.  Applicability. These provisions apply to all business, industrial, public, semi-public, multifamily residential or rental mobile homes/rental manufactured housing developments, buildings or structures. This procedure shall not apply to residential subdivisions, mobile home subdivisions, garden and patio home developments or townhouse developments. Accessory structures of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet are exempt from these requirements. 
No building permit shall be granted for a structure, building, or use controlled by this section until a site plan has been submitted and approved by the Prattville Planning and Development Department or such other department as may be designed or created to perform this function by the Prattville City Council. 
B.  Contents of site plan. Such site plan shall contain: 
a.  The direction of north; 
b.  The scale of not less than one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet; 
c.  Topography at not greater than two-foot contour intervals; 
d.  The proposed location of all buildings and existing buildings with dimensions shown; 
e.  The use of all buildings and premises; 
f.  The areas, number of lots, and dimensions of all parking to be included; 
g.  The location of all streets, driveways, walks, ingresses and egresses, and curb cuts; 
h.  All service and loading spaces; 
i.  The location and areas of illumination of all exterior lighting; 
j.  The location, size[,] number, and character of all exterior signs; 
k.  The location, character, and extent of landscaping, retaining and screen walls, and other treatments; 
l.  The provision for surface drainage of the premises; 
m.  Public and private easements (public easements are subject to acceptance by the Prattville City Council); 
n.  Finished floor elevation and whether or not the area is subject to flooding; 
o.  The location of all water and sewer lines and location of proposed taps to public lines; and 
p.  The location of fire hydrants; and 
q.  The findings of a registered engineer relative to the probable noise generated by the proposed use. This item shall not be required unless, in the opinion of the Director of Planning and Development, the proposed use is likely to generated excessive noise or if the property upon which the use is to be carried out is adjacent to residential uses or zones. 
C.  Site plan review consideration. In reviewing the site plans, reviewers shall consider: 
I.  Traffic safety: 
a.  Proper sight distances; 
b.  Need for acceleration and deceleration lanes; 
c.  Probable traffic generated and adequacy of public roads to support it. 
In making determination relative to the above items, reviewers shall be guided by "State of Alabama Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, 1985." 
II.  Public facilities: 
a.  Adequacy of public water facilities. 
b.  Adequacy of public sewer facilities. 
c.  Adequacy of fire protection. 
d.  Proper design for police protection and public safety needs. 
In making determination relative to the above items, reviewers shall be guided by the adopted Code of the City of Prattville, and policies of appropriate city departments. 
III.  Compatibility with existing development: 
a.  Proper drainage. 
b.  Need for screening, planting, or landscaping. 
c.  Nonobtrusiveness of illumination. 
d.  Compliance with City Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations. 
In making determination relative to the above items, reviewers shall be guided by the adopted Code of the City of Prattville, and policies of appropriate city departments. 
IV.  Noise standards. The following noise standards shall apply to industrial and commercial uses: 
TABLE 1. - Limiting Sound Levels 
Maximum permissible sound level at residential property lines: 62 decibels using the "a" scale and slow meter movement. 
TABLE 2. - Corrections for Sound Duration 
Noise source operated less than 20% of any one-hour period; plus 5 decibels. 
Noise source operated less than 5% of any one-hour period; plus 10 decibels. 
Noise source operated less than 1% of any one-hour period; plus 15 decibels. 
Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.); minus 5 decibels. 
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.); minus 5 decibels. 
Any use operating between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall reduce sound created by 3 decibels during these hours. 
D.  Site plan approval. The site plan shall be approved upon signature on the site plan or appropriate certification sheet of the Director of the Planning and Development Department, the City Engineer, the Chief of the Police Department, the Fire Chief, or persons designated by the City Council to act on their behalf; and other signatures deemed advisable by the Director of the Planning and Development Department. In reviewing site plans the person[s] named or referred to above shall confine their review to the aspects of the site plan which are related to their departmental responsibilities or charge from the City Council. Whenever any person named or referred to above disapproves a site plan he shall submit his reasons for disapproval in writing to the Director of the Planning and Development Department, who shall inform the applicant of reasons for disapproval. 
E.  Time limit for review. Site plan shall be deemed approved unless disapproved in writing by one (1) or more of the persons named or referred to in Paragraph E[D] within forty-five (45) days of submission. 
F.  Appeal. Appeals of site plan decision or orders shall be made to the City of Prattville Board of Adjustments in accordance with appeal procedures stated in section 11-52-80 of the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80], and the general governing rules and operating procedures of the Board of Zoning Adjustments. 
(Ord. of 6-2-1987; Ord. of 10-15-1991)  
ARTICLE 2. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Section 21. - Enforcing officer. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Planning and Development. This official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary in carrying out his duties in the enforcement of this ordinance.  
Section 22. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or other structure, including accessory structures or to store building materials or erect temporary field offices, or to commence the moving, alteration, or repair (except, repairs not changing the character of the structure and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) in cost, or painting or wallpapering) of any structure including accessory structures, until the Director of Planning and Development, or designee, of the municipality has issued for such work a building permit including a statement that the plans, specifications and intended use of such structure in all respects conform with the provisions of this ordinance. Application for a building permit shall be made to the Director of Planning and Development of the municipality on forms provided for that purpose.  
Section 23. - Approval of plans and issuance of building permit. 
It shall be unlawful for the Director of Planning and Development, or designee, to approve any plans or issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them in conformity with this ordinance. To this end, the Director of Planning and Development, or designee, shall require that every application for a building permit for excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration be accompanied by a plan or plat drawn to scale and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the Director of Planning and Development, or designee, to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration is in conformance with this ordinance: 
a.  The actual shape, proportion and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
b.  The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
c.  The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures. 
d.  The setback and side lines of buildings on adjoining lots and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. 
If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration, as set forth in the application, are[is] in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the Director of Planning and Development of the municipality shall issue a building permit accordingly. If an application for a building permit is not approved, the Director of Planning and Development of the municipality shall state in writing on the application the cause of such disapproval. Issuance of a building permit shall, in no case, be construed as waiving any provision of this ordinance.  
Section 24. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved or altered in its use shall be used until the Director of Planning and Development of the municipality shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land or structure or part thereof is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Within three (3) days after the owner or his agent has notified the Director of Planning and Development of the municipality that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Director of Planning and Development of the municipality to make a final inspection thereof, and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or premises or part thereof is found to conform with the provisions of this ordinance or, if such certificate is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause.  
Section 25. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be fined upon conviction not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of court for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.  
Section 26. - Remedies. 
In case any building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Director of Planning and Development of the municipality or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to correct or abate such violation or to prevent occupancy of such building, structure or land.  
ARTICLE 3. - BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-011 , adopted June 20, 2017, repealed former Art. 3, §§ 31, 32, and enacted a new Art. 3 as set out herein. Former Art. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-80, 11-52-81; Ord. of 4-1-1975. 
 
Section 31. - Appointment, duties and responsibilities. 
A Board of Zoning Adjustment is hereby established. The appointment, procedure, powers and action of said Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be governed and controlled by Code of Ala. 1975, Title 11, Chapter 52, §§ 80 and 81, as the same may be amended. 
( Ord. No. 2017-011, 6-20-2017 )  
Section 32. - Board procedures. 
1.  The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall adopt rules and procedures in accordance with state law and the provisions of this article. Board rules and procedures shall specify the selection of officers and their terms; the meeting dates, times and procedures; the format and content of applications to the Board; the format of and timeframe for hearing notices; and the maintenance and retention of board records. 
( Ord. No. 2017-011, 6-20-2017 )  
Section 33. - Powers and duties. 
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers as defined by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80, as amended. 
a.  Administrative appeals . To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Enforcing Officer acting under the authority of this ordinance. 
b.  Variances . To hear and decide appeals for a variance from the provisions of this ordinance where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of such provisions would result in unnecessary hardship, but where the spirit of the ordinance can be observed and substantial justice done. 
c.  Uses-on-appeal. To hear and decide uses-on-appeal as provided in Article 1, Sections 4 and 5. 
( Ord. No. 2017-011, 6-20-2017 )  
Section 34. - Administrative appeals. 
a.  The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that an error exists in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the Enforcing Officer in the interpretation or enforcement of this ordinance. 
b.  Appeals to the Board of Zoning Adjustment may be taken by any person or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City of Prattville aggrieved or affected by any zoning-related decision of the Enforcing Officer. 
c.  All appeals shall be filed in writing on forms prescribed by the Board and made available by the Enforcing Officer. Any such appeal shall be filed with the Board and the Enforcing Officer within a reasonable time period, as defined by the Board, of the date of the decision being appealed. The Enforcing Officer shall present to the Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for hearing the appeal. Notice of the hearing to the public and the parties in interest shall be provided in accordance with board rules and procedures. 
d.  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed therefrom, unless the Enforcing Officer certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal has been filed that by reason of facts cited in such certification a stay would, in the Enforcing Officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record. 
e.  In exercising the power of administrative review the Board must apply, not vary, the terms of this ordinance. 
f.  The Board may affirm, reverse wholly or in part, or modify the Enforcing Officer's decision, order, or determination as in its opinion ought to be done, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Enforcing Officer. 
( Ord. No. 2017-011, 6-20-2017 )  
Section 35. - Uses-on-appeal. 
a.  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for approval of uses permitted on appeal as defined by Article 1, Section 4 and non-conforming uses as defined by Article 1, Sections 4 and 5. 
b.  Uses-on-Appeal shall require the submission of an application to the Board. The application shall be filed according to rules and submission requirements published by the Board. 
c.  Notice of the scheduled hearing shall be to the applicant and other interested parties in accordance with board rules. 
d.  The Board shall review the application for compliance with this ordinance and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. The Board shall make written findings determining that the proposed use-on-appeal will not: 
1.  Be contrary to the public interest and will insure that the spirit of this ordinance is observed; 
2.  Permit the establishment of a use prohibited in the zoning district; or 
3.  Cause a substantial adverse impact on property or improvements in the vicinity or in the district in which the proposed use is located. 
e.  The Board may impose such conditions for approval that it deems necessary in the particular case to protect the public interest and the intent of the Comprehensive Plan and this ordinance. Such conditions shall apply to the land, structure, and use for which the use-on-appeal is granted and not to a particular person. Violations of conditions lawfully attached to any use-on-appeal shall be deemed to be violations of this ordinance. 
f.  Any approval granted by the Board for a use-on-appeal shall pertain solely to that specific use at the location specified in the application. Such approval shall not be transferable to another use at that location or the same use at another location. 
g.  A use-on-appeal granted by the Board shall lapse and be of no effect if, after the expiration of one (1) year from the date of such action by the Board, no construction or change in use pursuant to such use-on-appeal has taken place. The Board may, for good cause shown, specify a longer period of time in conjunction with its approval to grant the use-on-appeal. 
( Ord. No. 2017-011, 6-20-2017 )  
Section 36. - Variances. 
a.  The Board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
b.  A variance may be granted in such individual cases upon a finding by the Board that an unnecessary hardship does, in fact, exist. In no case shall the Board grant a variance that permits the land, building or structure to be occupied by a use prohibited within the zoning district in which the land, building or structure is located. 
c.  It is the intent of this ordinance that a variance be issued only to mitigate a physical condition of a parcel of land which poses a practical barrier to its development and use conformance with this ordinance. Variances shall be limited to the minimum adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land. 
d.  Before any variance is granted, the Board shall make written findings certifying the existence of the following standards. 
1.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands structures, or buildings in the same district. 
2.  That a literal interpretation of the ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of the ordinance. 
3.  That special conditions do not result from actions of the applicant (self-imposed hardship); 
4.  That granting of the variance will not confer any special privilege on the applicant that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
5.  That granting of the variance is in harmony with the intent and purposes of the ordinance; 
6.  That the variance will not adversely affect surrounding property, the general neighborhood, or the community as a whole; 
7.  That no non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or non-conforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts were considered as a basis for the issuance of a variance; 
8.  That the variance will not allow the establishment of a use not permissible under the terms of the ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of the ordinance in said district; 
9.  The variance requested is the minimum adjustment necessary to enable the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
e.  A variance granted by the Board shall lapse and be of no effect if, after the expiration of one (1) year from the date of such action by the Board, no construction pursuant to such variance has taken place. The Board may, for good cause shown, specify a longer period of time in conjunction with its action to grant the variance. 
( Ord. No. 2017-011, 6-20-2017 )  
Section 37. - Decisions and rehearing. 
a.  All decisions rendered by the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be final and binding upon all parties. 
b.  No appeal of an administrative decision shall be reheard by the Board. 
c.  Once the Board of Adjustment has rendered a decision on a request for a variance or a use-on-appeal on parcel of property or portion of a parcel of property, no new application for a variance or use-on-appeal on the same property or portion thereof shall be accepted by the Board for a 365-day period. 
d.  However, during the 365-day period, the owner, or other party owning a legal interest in the property, may request a hearing before the Board of Zoning Adjustment to present facts or evidence demonstrating that conditions, as they existed at the time of the previous request, have changed substantially to warrant consideration of a request for a variance or a use-on-appeal prior to the end of the 365-day period. 
1.  Any applicant requesting a waiver of the 365-day period shall appear before the Board in accordance with the regular application and hearing procedure. 
2.  If the Board finds, by the affirmative vote of four members, that conditions have substantially changed and a waiver warranted, the applicant may submit a new application. Such new application shall be heard at a subsequent meeting, and shall be subject to all regular advertising and procedural requirements. 
3.  Allowing a new application and hearing does not obligate the Board to grant the requested action. 
( Ord. No. 2017-011, 6-20-2017 )  
Section 38. - Appeals. 
Final judgments or decisions by the Board of Zoning Adjustment may be appealed as specified by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-81, as amended. Written notice of appeal must be filed with the Board within fifteen (15) days following the decision by the Board. 
( Ord. No. 2017-011, 6-20-2017 )  
ARTICLE 4. - AMENDMENT 
 
Section 41. - Procedure. 
The regulations and the number, area and boundaries of districts established by this ordinance may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the municipal governing body, but no amendment shall become effective unless it is first submitted to the Municipal Planning Commission for its recommendation. The Municipal Planning Commission upon its own initiative may hold public hearings, public notice of which shall be given, for the consideration of any proposed amendment to the provisions of this ordinance or the zoning map and report its recommendation to the municipal governing body. The provisions of section 11-52-77, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-77] shall apply to all changes and amendments. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1982)  
Section 42. - Application fee. 
Any person making application to the City of Prattville for a change or alteration in any zoning district shall furnish an accurate legal description and a plat plan if required, and shall pay an application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The application fee shall be refundable if the application does not result in notice by publication. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1975)  
Section 43. - Reapplication. 
If a parcel of property or portion of a parcel of property has been considered by the Prattville City Council for rezoning, neither the City Council nor the Prattville Planning Commission may consider another application to change the zoning district classification of the same parcel of property or a portion of that same parcel of property for a period of 365 calendar days from the day the City Council takes action on the rezoning. During the 365-day period, the owner, or other party owning a legal interest in the property, may request a public hearing before the Prattville Planning Commission to present facts demonstrating that conditions, as they existed at the time of the previous request, have changed sufficiently to warrant consideration of a rezoning request prior to the expiration of the 365-day period. Such public hearing must be advertised in the legal section of a paper of local circulation at least seven (7) days before the date of the hearing. The Planning Commission may grant a waiver by resolution of the Commission. Such resolution must be approved by six affirmative votes and contain a statement detailing what conditions that have changed since the previous rezoning request. 
( Ord. No. 2015-044, 12-1-2015 )  
ARTICLE 5. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
 
Section 51. - Interpretation and purpose. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community. Where other ordinances or regulations which may be adopted hereafter impose greater restrictions than those specified herein, compliance with such other ordinances or regulations is mandatory. This ordinance shall not lower the restrictions of plats, deeds or private contracts if such are greater than the provisions of this ordinance.  
Section 52. - Saving clause. 
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance which is not in and of itself invalid or unconstitutional.  
ARTICLE 6. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 61. - Reductions in lot area prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced in area so that yards and other spaces total less than the minimum area required under this ordinance.  
Section 62. - Corner visibility in residential and local business districts. 
In a residential or local business district, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three and one-half (3½) feet and fifteen (15) feet above street level shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets or railroads or of a street and a railroad right-of-way line. 
Accessory structures within twenty-five (25) feet of the rear lot line of a corner lot shall be set back the minimum front yard depth required on the side street.  
Section 63. - Swimming and wading pools. 
Swimming pools and wading pools with a depth of one (1) foot or more in any portion of the pool, and not located within a permanently and completely walled structure, shall be constructed no closer than ten (10) feet of any property line. 
( Ord. No. 2015-045, 12-1-2015 )  
Section 64. - Fall-out shelters; satellite dishes. 
Fall-out shelters are permitted as principal or accessory uses and structures in any district, subject to the yard and lot coverage regulations of the district. Such shelters may contain or be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately, and in addition to shelter use may be used for any principal or accessory use permitted in the district, subject to the district regulations on such use, but shall not be used for principal or accessory uses prohibited expressly or by implication in the district. 
Satellite dishes are permitted as accessory uses provided they are not larger than twelve (12) feet in diameter.  
Section 65. - Future street lines. 
On any lot which, at the time of adoption of this ordinance, or at the time this ordinance is changed by amendment hereafter, may be reduced in area by widening a public street to a future street line as indicated on the duly adopted "major thoroughfare plan," or as same may be hereafter amended, the minimum required yards, the maximum required lot area, the minimum required lot width and the maximum building area shall be measured by considering the future street lines as the lot line of such lot.  
Section 66. - Abatement of noise, smoke, gas, vibration, fumes, dust, fire and explosion hazard or nuisance. 
The Board of Zoning Adjustment may require the conduct of any use, conforming or nonconforming, which results in unreasonable noise, smoke, gas, vibration, fumes, dust, fire, radio interference, or explosion hazard or nuisance to surrounding property to be modified or changed to abate such hazard to health, comfort and convenience. The Board of Zoning Adjustment may direct the Director of Planning and Development, or designee, to issue an abatement order, but such order may be directed only after a public hearing by the said Board, notice of which shall be sent by registered mail to the owners and/or operators of the property on which the use is conducted in addition to due notice of advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation. A hearing to consider issuance of an abatement order shall be held by the Board of Zoning Adjustment either upon petition signed by any person affected by the hazard or nuisance or upon the initiative of the Board. An abatement order shall be directed by the Board of Zoning Adjustment only upon reasonable evidence of hazard or nuisance and such order shall specify the date by which the hazard or nuisance shall be abated. 
Whenever the nuisance alleged involves the creation of excessive noise by a commercial or industrial user, the Board of Adjustment shall be guided by the standards contained in Section 10, Paragraph C of this ordinance. In determining the extent of conformance or nonconformance with this section the Board may require acoustical studies by registered engineers in addition to any other information which they deem necessary. 
(Ord. of 10-15-1991)  
Section 67. - Multifamily housing projects. 
In the case of a multifamily housing project consisting of a group of two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least four (4) acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and not to be so subdivided or where existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the requirements of this ordinance to the individual buildings in such housing projects, the application of such requirements to such housing projects shall be done by the Board of Zoning Adjustment with the advice of the Planning Commission, in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will insure substantially the same character of occupancy, a density of land use no higher and a standard of open space at least as high as required by this ordinance in the district in which the proposed project is to be located, and will provide layout design and public utilities in harmony with the general requirements and minimum standards of design of the subdivision regulations of the municipality. 
In no case shall the Board of Zoning Adjustment authorize a use or a building height or building area prohibited in the district in which the housing project is to be located.  
Section 68. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. Words and terms are defined as follows: 
Accessory structure. Any detached minor building in the rear of the main building consisting of masonry or frame walls and roof, one (1) or two (2) stories in height, necessary as an adjunct to the use or occupancy of a principal or main structure. 
Alteration or altered. The word "alteration" shall include any of the following: 
a.  Any addition to the height or depth of a building or structure. 
b.  Any change in the location of any of the exterior walls of a building or structure. 
c.  Any increase in the interior accommodations of a building or structure. 
In addition to the foregoing, a building or structure shall be classified as altered when it is repaired, renovated, remodeled, or rebuilt at a cost in excess of fifty (50) percent of its value prior to the commencement of such repairs, renovation, remodeling or rebuilding. 
Boardinghouse. A building other than a hotel, cafe, or restaurant where, for compensation, meals are provided for three (3) or more persons. 
Building area. The portion of the lot occupied by the main building, including porches, carports, accessory buildings, and other structures. 
Business recycling facility. A facility engaged in the processing, storage, or transportation of recyclable material created by an otherwise conforming business upon its own premises for the purpose of reuse, sale, or energy extraction. This definition shall include items generated as a by-product of normal business operations and shall not include items purchased, delivered, traded or exchanged in a used or inoperable state. 
[ Camping and recreational equipment. ] As used in this ordinance, "camping and recreational equipment" is defined and shall include the following: 
Recreational vehicle. A recreational vehicle is a vehicular-type structure, primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle which is self-powered. With allowances for engineering variations, the basic entities are: 
(a)  A "travel trailer" is a vehicular portable structure, mounted on wheels, of such a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a stock passenger automobile, primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping and travel use. 
(b)  A "camping trailer" is a vehicular portable structure, mounted on wheels, constructed with collapsible partial side walls of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material for folding compactly while being drawn by another vehicle, and, when unfolded at the site or location, providing temporary living quarters, and whose primary design is for recreation, camping or travel use. 
(c)  A "truck camper" is a portable structure, designed to be loaded onto, or affixed to, the bed or chassis of a truck, constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use. 
(d)  A "motor home" is a structure built on and made an integral part of a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis other than a passenger car chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, and travel use. 
(e)  Vehicle shall also include any boat or vehicle designed to be used on waterways, lakes, rivers, or any other large body of water. 
Community recycling facility. A facility engaged in the collection and transportation of externally generated recyclable materials. Such operations may be either stationary or mobile. Said operations may include packing, bailing, storage, crushing or compaction or other operations necessary to preparing the material for delivery or sale to a facility which will actually reuse or remanufacture said products; but may not include the processing of materials for direct reuse or sale. 
Community recycling receptacle. A completely enclosed bin or container made of metal or other impervious material into which recyclable materials may be placed. All such receptacles shall display the name of the owner or sponsor, their address, telephone number, and contact person. Cleanliness and pickup of matter in and around said receptacle shall be the responsibility of the sponsor. 
Drive-in restaurant. A restaurant or public eating business so conducted that food, meals or refreshments are brought to the motor vehicles for consumption by the customer or patron. 
Drive-in theater. A theater so arranged and conducted that the customer or patron may view the performance while being seated in a motor vehicle. 
Dwelling. A house or other building used primarily as an abode for one (1) family except that the word "dwelling" shall not include boarding or rooming houses, tents, tourist camps, hotels, trailers, trailer camps, or other structures designed or used primarily for transient residents. 
[ Dwelling unit. Any portion of a building used, intended or designed as a separate abode for a family.] 
Family. The term "family" shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  A person living alone as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit; 
(2)  A family unit comprised of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, eating and housekeeping facilities; 
(3)  A number of unrelated persons but not exceeding four living together as single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, eating and housekeeping facilities; 
(4)  A number of unrelated persons but not exceeding two and any children related to either of them by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship, living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, eating and housekeeping facilities. 
Home occupation. Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on solely by the inhabitant thereof, and which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and does not change the character thereof, and in which not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the dwelling is used for said home occupation, and in which any signs advertising said home occupation are limited to one (1) unlighted sign, not over two (2) square feet in area attached to the dwelling, and also in which there is no public display of goods. Examples of home occupations are telephone service, typing or word processing, dressmaking, the taking of not more than two (2) boarders and the renting or leasing of not more than two (2) rooms, each of which shall have not more than one (1) occupant; tutoring and teaching the fine arts; but shall not include beauty parlors, barbershops, furniture upholstering, baking, and offices for any professional or business use. 
Hotel. Any building or portion thereof which contains at least ten (10) guest rooms intended for occupancy by individuals for compensation whether paid directly or indirectly. 
House trailer. The term "house trailer" shall be construed to mean and include any structure intended for, or capable of, human habitation, mounted upon wheels and capable of being driven, propelled, or towed from place to place without change in structure or design, by whatsoever name or title it is colloquially or commercially known. Removal of wheels and placing such a structure on the ground, piers, or other foundation, shall not remove such a vehicle from this definition; provided, that this definition shall not include transport trucks or vans equipped with sleeping space for a driver or drivers. 
Junkyard. Junkyard shall include any lot or parcel of land on which is kept, stored, bought or sold, articles commonly known as junk, including scrap paper, scrap metal, and used automobile bodies and parts. 
Lot. A piece, parcel, or plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one (1) main building, accessory buildings, uses customarily incidental to such main building and such open spaces as are provided in this ordinance, or as are intended to be used with such piece, parcel or plot of land. 
Motor court. A building or group of buildings containing one (1) or more guest rooms having separate outside entrances for each such room or suite of rooms and for each of which rooms or suites of rooms automobile parking space is provided. 
Nonconforming use. A use of any structure or land which, though originally lawful, does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance or any subsequent amendments thereto for the district in which it is located. 
Offices. Space or rooms used for professional, administrative, clerical and similar uses. 
Public land uses. Any land use operated by or through a unit or level of government, either through lease or ownership, such as municipal administration and operation, county buildings and activities, state highway offices and similar land uses; and federal uses such as post offices, bureau of public roads and internal revenue offices, military installations, etc. 
Recyclable material. Reusable material including but not limited to, metal cans, glass, plastic, and paper which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include: inoperative trucks, automobiles or other vehicles, and chassis or parts of the same; household appliances, white metals, used heating or refrigerating equipment, farm implements, machinery, scrap metal, etc. 
Rooming house. Any building or portion thereof which contains not less than three (3) or more than nine (9) guest rooms which are designed or intended to be used, let, or hired out for occupancy by individuals for compensation whether paid directly or indirectly. 
Satellite dish or disc. As used in this ordinance, satellite dish or disc is defined and shall mean the following: A structure designed for residential or commercial use to obtain and receive television and/or radio transmissions, not over fifteen (15) feet above existing grade, permanently ground-mounted, and not over twelve (12) feet in diameter, placed in the rear yard as defined by Article 6, section 68.262 and the requirements of this ordinance as to accessory structures, after having acquired a building permit from the City of Prattville. 
Semipublic land uses. Philanthropic and charitable land uses including: Y.M.C.A.'s, Y.W.C.A.'s, Salvation Army, churches and church related institutions, orphanages, humane societies, private welfare organizations, nonprofit lodges and fraternal orders, hospitals, Red Cross, and other general charitable institutions. 
Shelter, fallout. A structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of danger to human life from nuclear fallout, air raids, storms, or other emergencies. 
Street. Any public or private way set aside for common travel more than twenty-one (21) feet in width if such existed at the time of enactment of this ordinance, or such right-of-way forty (40) feet or more in width if established thereafter. 
Structure. Any combination of materials, including buildings, constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to anything having location on the ground, including among other things, signs, billboards, but not including utility poles and overhead wires. 
Temporary structure. A business structure, not used as a residence or habitation, of one (1) or more of the following types: portable or preassembled metal buildings or storage structures, tents, freestanding awnings, sun screens, sunshades, shelters and other structures composed of flexible materials, and all structures of a temporary character or intended for short-term occupancy. This term shall not include construction trailers, not used for sales or habitation, at the site properly permitted construction during such construction. This term shall not include portable or preassembled metal buildings used as accessory structures to primary, permanent business structures. 
Trailer camp. Any site, lot, field, or tract of land privately or publicly owned or operated, upon which two (2) or more house trailers used for living, eating or sleeping quarters, are, or are intended to be, located; such establishments being open and designated to the public as places where temporary residential accommodations are available whether operated for or without compensation, by whatsoever name or title they are colloquially or commercially termed. 
Use. The purpose for which land or a building or other structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
Yard. An open space, on the lot with the main building, left open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
Yard, front. The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the main building including covered porches, and the front lot line, or if an official future street right-of-way line has been established, between the main building, including covered porches and the right-of-way line. No fallout shelter, even though it does not exceed thirty (30) inches in height, shall be permitted in any front yard. 
Yard, rear. The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the main building, including covered porches, and the rear lot line. 
Yard, side. The yard extending along a side lot line, from the front yard to the rear yard, between the main building, including covered porches and carports, and such lot line. 
(Ord. of 7-2-1968; Ord. of 5-23-1985; Ord. of 3-1-1988; Ord. of 10-15-1991; Ord. No. 95-020, 7-6-1995; Ord. No. 2007-025, 11-6-2007)  
Section 69. - Waste containers. 
All waste containers, dumpsters or used grease storage containers located on in conjunction with multi-family, commercial or industrial uses may be located no closer than twenty (20) feet from any property line. Waste containers may be placed in a screened enclosure. If an enclosure is used, it may be located within on the property line. Such enclosure shall be of wood or masonry construction and shall be at least eight (8) feet in height. Any openings installed for employee access or water collection shall be screened with a metal or wooden gate. If the waste container is located adjacent to a residential zoning district, it shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet from any property line shared with the residential district. In no case shall such waste containers or associated screens be located on a public right-of-way or public or private easement. Waste containers of twenty (20) gallons or less and so located on the site for the convenience of the employees or patrons shall be exempt from this provision. 
(Ord. No. 99-013, 8-3-1999)  
ARTICLE 7. - DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Section 71. - Residential district requirements. 
District 	Use Regulations 	Space and Height 

Regulations 
All "R" Districts 	USES PERMITTED: Accessory structures: gardens, playgrounds and parks; public buildings, including public schools and libraries; satellite dishes or discs as herein defined by that ordinance, and no other; and parking of recreational vehicles, as herein defined subject to the following conditions: a) At no time shall such parked or stored camping and recreational equipment be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes. b) If the camping and recreational equipment is parked or stored outside of a garage, it shall be parked or stored to the rear of the front of the building line of the lot. c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (b), camping and recreational equipment may be parked anywhere on the premises for loading and unloading purposes. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Customary home occupations; public utility structures, such as electric substations, gas metering stations, sewage pumping stations and similar structures; general hospitals for humans, except primarily for mental cases; churches; cemeteries; semi-public buildings; golf courses; municipal, county, state or federal use; kindergartens, nurseries, nursery schools, day care centers, private schools; and satellite dishes or discs, not defined herein. 
USES PROHIBITED: Mobile homes, house trailers, trailer courts or camps, commercial and industrial uses, including parking lots or parking areas in connection with these uses, not specifically permitted. 	MINIMUM YARD SIZE: For public and semi-public structures: Front Yard: 35 feet; Rear Yard: 35 feet; Side Yard: 35 feet. For accessory structures: Front Yard: 5 feet; Rear Yard: 5 feet. 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE: Width at building line: 45 feet. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 50 feet 2 stories. 

R-1 	USES PERMITTED: Single-family dwellings. (See: regulations common to all "R" Districts, listed above.) 	MINIMUM YARD SIZE: Front Yard: 40 feet; Rear Yard: 45 feet; Side Yard: 15 feet. 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE: Area in Square Feet: 15,000; Width at building line: 100. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 35 Feet; 2½ stories. MAXIMUM BUILDING AREA PERCENT:25% OFF STREET PARKING CAR SPACES: One. 

R-2 	USES PERMITTED: Single-family dwellings. (See: regulations common to all "R" Districts, listed above.) 	MINIMUM YARD SIZE: Front Yard: 35 feet; Rear Yard: 40 feet; Side Yard: 10 feet. 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE: Area in Square Feet: 10,500; Width at building line: 75 feet. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 35 feet; 2½ stories. 
MAXIMUM BUILDING AREA PERCENT: 25% 
OFF STREET PARKING CAR SPACES: One. 

R-3 	USES PERMITTED: Single-family dwellings. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Duplexes and other apartments, Clubs not conducted for profit; rooming and boarding houses. (See: regulations common to all "R" Districts, listed above.) 	MINIMUM YARD SIZE: Front Yard: 25 feet; Rear Yard: 30 feet; Side Yard: 8 feet one side; 6 feet the other side. 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE: Area in Square Feet: One or two family dwellings: 7,500; For each additional family unit, add: 2,000. Width at Building Line: One or two family dwellings 60 feet; For each additional family unit, add: 6 feet. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 35 feet 3 stories. 
MAXIMUM BUILDING AREA PERCENT: 35% 

R-4 	USES PERMITTED: Dwellings and apartments for any number of families. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Clubs, not conducted for profit; rooming and boarding houses. (See: regulations common to all "R" Districts, listed above.) 	MINIMUM YARD SIZE: Front Yard: 25 feet; Rear Yard: 30 feet; Side Yard: 8 feet on one side; 6 feet on the other side. 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE: Area in Square Feet: One or two family dwellings 6,000; For each additional family unit, add: 5 feet. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 35 feet; 3 stories. 
MAXIMUM BUILDING AREA PERCENT: 40% 
 
Note "A": A carport, porte-cochere, porch or structure or part thereof as defined in Section 68 hereof, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall be subject to the setback and side yard requirements for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 7-2-1968; Ord. of 3-15-1983(2); Ord. of 5-23-1985; Ord. No. 98-021, 9-1-1998)  
Section 72. - Business district requirements. 
District 	Use Regulations 	Space and Height 

Regulations 
B-1 
(Local Shopping District) 	USES PERMITTED: Neighborhood retail stores and markets, including the following types of stores: food, general merchandise; apparel, furniture; household and hardware; radio and television; drug and sundries; jewelry and gifts; florist; sporting goods; pet shops and similar types; and business recycling facilities. Neighborhood services including the following types: dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations; barber and beauty shops; shoe repair; offices, hotels, banks, post offices, theaters and similar services. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Filling stations where no major repair work is done; restaurants; community recycling. Any use permitted or permitted on appeal in the R-4 Residential District, and subject to all district requirements of an R-4 District as specified in Section 71, hereof. 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: Where such structures shall be used for a period of not to exceed 18 months prior to construction of a permanent structure, which will replace the temporary structure. The owner must give evidence, satisfactory to the Board of Zoning Adjustment, of such owner's good faith and intent to construct or have constructed, a permanent structure. Under no circumstances shall such structures be authorized as a residence or habitation. 
USES PROHIBITED: Major auto repair; filling stations with gasoline storage above the ground in excess of five hundred (500) gallons; laundry and dry cleaning plants; funeral homes, mobile homes, house trailers, trailer courts or camps, manufacturing; any use prohibited in a B-2 Business District. 	MINIMUM LOT SIZE: It is the intent of the ordinance that lots of sufficient size be used for any business or service use to provide adequate parking and loading space in addition to the space required for the other operations of the business or service. 
MINIMUM YARD SIZE: Front, 25 feet; rear, 20 feet; side, not specified, except on a lot adjoining along its side lot line a lot which is in a residential district, there shall be a side yard not less than eight (8) feet wide. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 45 feet or 3 stories. 
OFF-STREET PARKING AND UN LOADING: Shall use required rear or side yard for loading and unloading. 

B-2 
(General Business) 	USES PERMITTED: Any retail or wholesale business or service not specifically restricted or prohibited. Major auto repair; funeral homes; places of amusement and assembly; business recycling facilities, community recycling facilities and community recycling receptacles; any use permitted in a B-1 Local Shopping District. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Animal clinics, hospitals or kennels, dry cleaners and laundries. Manufacturing incidental to a retail business where articles are sold at retail on the premises, not specifically prohibited herein. Any use permitted or permitted on appeal in the R-4 Residential District, and subject to all district requirements of an R-4 District as specified in Section 71, hereof. 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: Where such structures shall be used for a period of not to exceed 18 months prior to construction of a permanent structure, which will replace the temporary structure. The owner must give evidence, satisfactory to the Board of Zoning Adjustment, of such owner's good faith and intent to construct or have constructed, a permanent structure. Under no circumstances shall such structures be authorized as a residence or habitation. 
USES PROHIBITED: Stockyard; live animal or poultry sales; coal yard; lumber yard or mill; auto wrecking; gasoline, oil or alcohol storage above the ground in excess of five hundred (500) gallons; grist or flour mill; ice plant; junk, scrap paper, rag storage or baling; stone or monument works; mobile homes, house trailers, trailer courts or camps. 	MINIMUM LOT SIZE: It is the intent of the ordinance that lots of sufficient size be used for any business or service use to provide adequate parking and loading space in addition to the space required for the other operations of the business or service. 
MINIMUM YARD SIZE: None specified. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 65 feet or 5 stories. 
OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING: Shall provide space for loading and unloading for structures hereafter erected or altered when same is on lot adjoining a public or private alley. 

B-3 
(Community Shopping) 	USES PERMITTED: Any community type re tail stores and markets including the following types of retail business: supermarkets, general merchandise, apparel, furniture, household and hardware, radio and television, drug and sundries, jewelry and gifts, florist, sporting goods, pet shops, banks, theaters, dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations, barber and beauty shops, shoe repair, delicatessen and variety (5 and 10), business recycling facilities. Must have access to major artery. The plat and/or plan of the proposed subdivision shall have the approval of the Planning Commission and be filed for record before any commercial structures are built in these proposed districts. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Community recycling facilities and community recycling receptacles. 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: Where such structures shall be used for a period of not to exceed 18 months prior to construction of a permanent structure, which will replace the temporary structure. The owner must give evidence, satisfactory to the Board of Zoning Adjustment, of such owner's good faith and intent to construct or have constructed, a permanent structure. Under no circumstances shall such structures be authorized as a residence or habitation. 
USES PROHIBITED: Any use prohibited in the B-2 (General Business) District. 	MINIMUM LOT SIZE: It is the intent of the ordinance that lots of sufficient size be used for any business or service use to provide adequate parking and loading space in addition to the space required for the other operations of the business or service. 
MINIMUM YARD SIZE: At least 35 feet from all property lines. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 35 feet or 2 stories. 
MAXIMUM BUILDING AREA: 20% of total lot area. 

B-4 
(Highway Commercial) 	USES PERMITTED: Filling and service stations; automobile repair; truck stops; eating establishments; convenience stores; automobile, boat, mobile home, and heavy equipment sales; automobile parts stores; hotels and motels; gift and souvenir shops; recycling facilities and off-site signs. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Motor freight terminals and express companies; shopping centers built to the standards of District B-3; individual stores and offices as allowed in District B-1, funeral homes which are adequately buffered for other uses, and single-family housing, community recycling facilities and community recycling receptacles. All uses on appeal must be accompanied by a site plan which must be approved by the board of zoning adjustment. Such approved site plan may not be modified or changed without the permission of the board of zoning adjustment. 
USES PROHIBITED: All uses prohibited in both Districts B-1 and B-2. 	MINIMUM SETBACKS AND YARD SIZES: Front—Fifty (50) feet, unless the publicly owned right-of-way upon which the property fronts and from which at least one entrance is available [and] is greater than one hundred twenty (120) feet, in which case, twenty-five (25) feet shall be required. (Greater setbacks can be required as part of subdivision review; See subdivision regulations, Appendix B.) If the highway right-of-way is two hundred (200) feet or greater, the front setback may be reduced to zero (0) feet. Rear—Twenty (20) feet. Sides—Twenty (20) feet. 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE: Minimum Area—Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Lots or areas leased or sold for off-site signs, of lesser area may be allowed provided that the deed or lease for such property restricts the use of the land to signs only. All sign lots shall have the smallest dimension greater than or equal to twice the height of the sign. Minimum Width at Building Line—One hundred (100) feet. Maximum Lot Coverage—Fifty (50) percent. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: Seventy-five (75) feet or five (5) stories; which ever is less. 
MAXIMUM SIGN HEIGHT: Fifty (50) feet (greater heights may be approved by the board of zoning adjustment where, in the board's judgment, such additional height is required by topographic conditions). 
PARKING REQUIREMENTS: All parking areas shall be paved with an impervious surface approved by the city's engineer; the number of required spaces to be as provided in Article 1. 
 
(Ord. of 9-19-1989; Ord. of 4-17-1990; Ord. of 10-15-1991; Ord. No. 95-033, 10-3-1995)  
Section 73. - Industrial business requirements. 
District 	Use Regulations 	Space and Height 

Regulations 
M-1 
(Light Industry) 	USES PERMITTED: Light industrial operations not obnoxious, offensive or detrimental to neighboring property by reason of dust, smoke, vibration, noise, odor, or effluents, and including the following types of business or industry: ice cream plants and creameries; cold storage plants; ice plants; bottling and central distribution plants; baking plants; textile mills, dyeing plants; warehouses; dry cleaners and laundries; trailer camps; and similar types of industries or businesses. All business, service and manufacturing uses permitted in a B-2 Business District. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Any manufacturing or business use not specifically prohibited herein, including metal fabrications. Any use permitted or permitted on appeal in an R-4 Residential District, and subject to all district requirements of said district as specified in Section 71 hereof. 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: Where such structures shall be used for a period of not to exceed 18 months prior to construction of a permanent structure, which will replace the temporary structure. The owner must give evidence, satisfactory to the Board of Zoning Adjustment, of such owner's good faith and intent to construct, or have constructed, a permanent structure. Under no circumstances shall such structures be authorized as a residence or habitation. 
USES PROHIBITED: Abattoir; slaughterhouse; stockyard; bag cleaning; boiler and tank works; central mixing plant for cement, mortar, plater, or paving materials; curing, tanning or storage of hides; distillation of bones, coal, tar, or wood; fat rendering; forge plant; gasoline storage aboveground in excess of five hundred (500) gallons; manufacture of acetylene, acid, alcohol, ammonia, bleaching powder, brick, pottery, terra cotta or tile, concrete blocks, candles, disinfectants, dye-stuffs, fertilizers, illuminating or heating gas including storage of same; paint, turpentine, varnish, soap, and tar products; wool pulling or scouring; junkyards; cotton waste reclaiming; and similar types of plants or operations. 	MINIMUM LOT SIZE: It is the intent of the ordinance that the lots of sufficient size be used for any industrial service or business use to provide adequate parking and loading space in addition to the space required for the other normal operations of the enterprise. 
MINIMUM YARD SIZE: Front Yard: None specified, except where existing establishments (other than residential) are set back, any new structure shall be set back not less than the average of the setbacks of the existing establishments within one hundred (100) feet each side thereof. Side Yards: None specified, except a lot adjoining along its side lot line another lot which is in a residential district, there shall be a side yard not less than eight (8) feed wide. Rear Yard: None specified. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 50 feet or 4 stories. 
OFF-STREET PARKING: Space necessary to store accommodate the cars of all workers in the industry or use. Also, space necessary to store overnight all vehicles incidental to the operation of the industry or use. 
OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING: Shall provide adequate space for loading or unloading all vehicles or trucks incidental to the operation of the industry or use. 

M-2 
(General Industry) 	USES PERMITTED: Any industrial, service or commercial use, except those which in the opinion of the Building Inspector would cause noise, smoke, gas, vibration, fumes, dust, or other objectionable conditions, which would affect a considerable portion of the city. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Any industrial, service or commercial use, and subject to such conditions and safeguards as the Board of Zoning Adjustment may require to preserve and protect any portions of the city which otherwise could be adversely affected. 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: Where such structures shall be used for a period of not to exceed 18 months prior to construction of a permanent structure, which will replace the temporary structure. The owner must give evidence, satisfactory to the Board of Zoning Adjustment, of such owner's good faith and intent to construct or have constructed, a permanent structure. Under no circumstances shall such structures be authorized as a residence or habitation. 
USES PROHIBITED: Residences and apartments, excepting quarters for a watchman or custodian and his family. 	MINIMUM LOT SIZE: Same as for M-1 Indus trial District. 
MINIMUM YARD SIZE: None specified. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: 50 feet or 4 stories. 
OFF-STREET LOADING AND UN LOADING: Same as for M-1 Industrial District. 
  
Section 74. - Forest, agricultural, recreation. 
District 	Use Regulations 	Space and Height 

Regulations 
FAR 
(Forest, Agricultural, Recreation) 	USES PERMITTED: General and specialized farming, forestry and agricultural uses, except commercial feed lots; roadside stands for the sale of produce raised on the farm premises. Conservation areas and structures for the development, protection, preservation and conservation of open space, watersheds, water, soil, forest and wildlife resources. Parks, playgrounds, play fields, general recreation facilities, golf courses and clubhouses. Single-family detached dwellings. Accessory structures or use customarily incidental to any of the aforementioned permitted uses. Home occupations only in accordance with the provisions specified in Article 6. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Churches and other places of worship, schools offering general education courses, clubs not conducted for profit, outdoor advertising signs and structures, plant nurseries and greenhouses, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes and orphanages, resorts, campgrounds, riding academies and stables, airports, sanitary landfills, quarries, railroad rights-of-way, cemeteries, and essential community facilities. Accessory structures or uses customarily incidental in any of the aforementioned conditional uses. 
USES PROHIBITED: All uses not permitted or permitted on appeal are prohibited. 	MINIMUM LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH, YARDS AND BUILDING AREA: Buildings and other structures shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: Minimum required lot area, 40,000 square feet. Minimum required corner lot width at building line, 200 feet. Minimum required inside lot width at building line, 150 feet. Minimum required corner lot yard width from all streets, 35 feet. Minimum required depth of front yard, 50 feet. Minimum required width of each side yard, 20 feet. Minimum required rear yard, 40 feet. Minimum total building area of total lot, 20 percent. 
HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS: No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except in the case of towers, spires, domes or other such structures not designed for human occupancy may exceed this height, provided such structures comply with the provisions of all other pertinent codes and ordinances, and provided further, that such structures are located no closer to the nearest property line than the distance equal to their height plus ten (10) feet. No accessory structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
 
(Ord. of 4-16-1975)  
Section 75. - Office district. 
District 	Use Regulations 	Space and Height 

Regulations 
O-1 (Office District) 	USES PERMITTED: Business or professional offices; office buildings in which chattels, goods, wares or merchandise are not manufactured, stored, exchanged or sold. Offices which include, but not necessarily limited to, professional offices, medical offices (doctors and dentists), attorneys, accountants, architects, engineers, real estate. Parking lots. Municipal, county, state or federal buildings, state or federal buildings, including schools and libraries. Customary accessory structures or uses. 
USES [PERMITTED] ON APPEAL: Offices including not more than ten (10) percent of the total floor area involved in storage and sale of goods or merchandise, provided they meet all other requirements and any other restrictions imposed by the board of adjustment to preserve the character of the neighborhood. Public utility structures. Hospitals. Churches. Customary, accessory structures and uses. 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: Where such structures shall be used for a period of not to exceed 18 months prior to construction of a permanent structure, which will replace the temporary structure. The owner must give evidence, satisfactory to the Board of Zoning Adjustment, of such owner's good faith and intent to construct or have constructed, a permanent structure. Under no circumstances shall such structures be authorized as a residence or habitation. 
USES PROHIBITED: All uses prohibited in a B-1 District. 	MINIMUM LOT SIZE: It is the intent of the ordinance that lots of sufficient size be used for any business or service use to provide adequate parking and loading space in addition to the space required for the normal operations of the business or service. 
MINIMUM YARD SIZE: Front, twenty-five (25) feet; rear, twenty (20) feet; side, not specified, except on a lot adjoining along its side lot line a lot which [is] in a residential district, there shall be a side yard not less than eight (8) feet wide. 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT: Forty-five (45) feet or three (3) stories. 
OFF-STREET PARKING: Two hundred (200) square feet of parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of interior space for one story buildings, or per each sixty (60) square feet interior space for two (2) or three (3) story buildings. 
OFF-STREET LOADING AND UN LOADING: Shall use required rear and side yards for loading and unloading. 
 
(Ord. of 5-6-1975)  
Section 76. - Mobile home district requirements. 
	Minimum Yard Size 	Minimum Lot Size 	Maximum Height 	
	Front 

Yard 

Feet 	Rear 

Yard 

Feet 	Side 

Yard Feet 	Area in 
Sq. Ft. 	Width Ft. 
at 
Building 
Line 	Feet 	Stories 	Maximum 
Building 
Area 
Percent 	Off Street 
Parking 
Car 
Spaces 	Permit 
District 	Use 
Regulations 	(See Note "A" below) 						
T-1 Mobile Home (Designed in accordance with City of Prattville Subdivision Regulations) 	USES PERMITTED: Mobile home for single-family dwelling, accessory structures, additions. (See Note "B" below.) 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Customary home occupations; public utility structures, such as electric substations, gas metering stations, sewage pumping stations and similar structures; general hospitals for humans, except primarily for mental cases; churches; cemeteries; semipublic buildings, golf courses; municipal, county, state, or federal use; kindergartens, nurseries, nursery schools, day care centers, and private schools. 	20 	10 	10 one side, 6 other side 	6,500 	60 	15 	1 	40 	1 	No person shall park or place a mobile home on any lot herein provided without first obtaining a permit from the City. The minimum fee for such permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
	ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 		5 	5 							
	USES PROHIBITED: Commercial and industrial uses, including parking lot or parking areas in connection with these uses; double parking or connection of two or more mobile homes except that two mobile homes with totally identical exterior finishes may be connected under one roof. 										
NOTE "A": A carport, porte-cochere, porch or other structure or part thereof as defined in Section 68 hereof, shall be considered as a part of the main building and shall be subject to the setback and side yard requirements for the district in which it is located. 				NOTE "B": Additions and accessory structures shall conform with the requirements of the Southern Building Code Congress as adopted by the City of Prattville. 
T-2 Area for Parking Mobile Homes 	USES PERMITTED: Permanent or temporary parking for mobile homes. Any use permitted or permitted on appeal in the R-4 residential district and subjected to all district requirements of an R-4 district as specified in Section 71 hereof. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Same as T-1 district. 	25 	10 	Same as T-1 	7,500 	60 	15 	1 	40 	1 	
	ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 		5 	5 							
	USES PROHIBITED: Same as T-1 district 										
T-3 Mobile Home Park (Rental) 	USES PERMITTED: Rental spaces for parking mobile homes. 										
	MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS: The lots for house trailers shall be plainly staked off or marked. In addition, at least 30 ft. roadway shall be provided between each block of lots. No two house trailers shall be parked closer than within 15 ft. of each other. A sketch of the park site shall be submitted to the Planning Commission, and must have approval by said Commission before construction is begun. Said sketch shall be drawn to scale showing the arrangements of house trailer lots, roadways, water 	20 	10 		3,150 	35 	15 	1 	30 	1 	
	outlets, location, and type of sewage and liquid waste disposal, and the locations of the buildings for toilets, baths, laundries, and other facilities concerning the general appearance of the area. The minimum requirements governing the construction, equipment, and operation of trailer courts set forth under law by the Alabama State Health Department must be met. 										
	ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 		5 	5 							
  
Section 77. - Redevelopment district. 
District 	Use Regulations 	Space and Height 

Regulations 
RD-1 	USES PERMITTED: Single and multifamily dwelling units not to exceed four (4) units per lot or parcel. Manufactured homes including modular homes, mobile homes, or house trailers not to exceed four (4) units per lot. Public facilities including parks. Customary accessory structures. 
USES PERMITTED ON APPEAL: Neighborhood and convenience stores selling food products and small household goods and items. Restaurants, cafes, or eating establishments, excluding private clubs. Stores selling gasoline, oil, or other minor automotive products, but not providing automotive repair services. Day care centers and churches as defined. 	MINIMUM LOT AREA, YARDS AND BUILDING AREA: Lot size for all uses [shall be a minimum of 7,500 square feet. For each additional mobile home or other unit on a lot, an additional 2,000 square feet of lot area shall be required. Larger lot area may be imposed by board of zoning adjustment for a use permitted on appeal. Front: 20 feet from front property line Side yard: 6 feet on one side and 8 feet on the other. Rear yard: 25 feet. Maximum lot coverage: 40%. 
HEIGHT LIMITATION: 25 feet or 2 stories. 
SIGNS: Same as for residential zones except that legal business uses are allowed one freestanding sign only. 
 
(Ord. of 3-19-1991)  
ARTICLE 8. - MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Section 81. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide minimum standards to assure the orderly and beneficial development of mobile home subdivisions, parks and parking areas, without interrupting existing development patterns and becoming a detriment to the surrounding area from an aesthetic, topographical, or incompatible point of view. 
(Ord. of 10-21-1969; Ord. of 4-18-1978, § 81)  
Section 82. - Definitions. 
(82.1)  [ Mobile home or trailer. ] "Mobile home" or "trailer" is one that is fully equipped for single family living including a kitchen, a toilet and a bath or shower. 
(82.2)  Dependent trailer. The term "dependent trailer" is a trailer that does not have a toilet and a bath or shower. 
(82.3)  Mobile homes subdivision. The term "mobile homes subdivision" shall be construed to mean a subdivision in which the lot is individually owned, usually by its occupant, subject to the terms of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-21-1969; Ord. of 4-18-1978, § 82)  
Section 83. - Use. 
(83.1)  No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, altered, or enlarged in T-1, T-2 or T-3 districts except for the following uses and in conformance with Article 7 "District Requirements": 
(83.1-1)  Mobile home subdivision, parks and parking areas. 
(83.1-2)  Accessory structure as defined in section 68.1, Article 6 of this ordinance. 
(83.1-3)  Dependent trailers are specifically excluded. 
(Ord. of 10-21-1969; Ord. of 4-18-1978, § 83)  
Section 84. - Requirements for a mobile home subdivision or parking area. 
(84.1)  Water, sewage, garbage and trash disposal shall meet or exceed the standards set forth by the City of Prattville. 
(84.2)  All electric installations shall comply with or exceed minimum standards as set by the City of Prattville. 
(84.3)  All streets and public driveways within subdivisions or parks shall be lighted at night with electric lamps according to plans recommended and approved by the City of Prattville. 
(84.4)  There shall be set aside a recreational area or areas within subdivisions or parks which shall be suitably restricted to such use. The size of the recreational area shall be compatible with the size of the subdivision and shall be subject to the approval of the City of Prattville Planning Commission. 
(84.5)  A green belt strip or other suitable type of buffer may be required by the City Planning Commission if the location of the subdivision is such that a buffer strip would be desirable. 
(Ord. of 10-21-1969; Ord. of 4-18-1978, § 84)  
Section 85. - Space requirements (individual). 
(85.1)  Each mobile home space shall be improved with one (1) patio of concrete or other suitable impervious material, having a minimum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet, and one (1) gravel or better home-pad of size equal to or greater than the dimensions of the trailer located on the pad, but in no case less than ten (10) feet by forty (40) feet. 
(85.2)  Additions to mobile homes shall be limited to pre-manufactured verandas, carports, and patio covers similar in appearance and design to such mobile home. Exceptions: Conventional roof structures of sound structural and architectural design constructed in accordance with the Standard Building Code may be added. 
(Ord. of 10-21-1969; Ord. of 4-18-1978, § 85)  
Section 86. - Construction. 
No mobile home subdivision, park or parking area shall be permitted in the City of Prattville or within its police jurisdiction except upon recommendation and approval of the City Planning Commission. 
(Ord. of 10-21-1969; Ord. of 4-18-1978, § 86)  
Section 87. - Application for zoning. 
Application to the City Planning Commission for the use of land as a mobile home subdivision or park shall be accompanied by a development plan that complies with the requirements of this ordinance and all subdivision regulations. 
The initial application shall be in writing[,] signed by the applicant, and shall include the following: 
(a)  Location and legal description of area, indicating use of surrounding areas. 
(b)  Detailed map of area with dimensions, contours on two-foot intervals and area drainage. 
(c)  Detailed plans showing arrangements of access streets and connection with traffic artery, lot layout, recreation areas and facilities, buffer zone, and proposed green belt planting. 
(d)  Detailed plans for the proposed sewage, drainage, street paving and such other information as may be required by the City of Prattville. 
(e)  Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and facilities to be constructed within the mobile home subdivision or park. 
(f)  The application and all accompanying plans and documents shall be filed in triplicate. 
(Ord. of 10-21-1969; Ord. of 4-18-1978, § 87)  
Section 88. - Fire protection. 
The mobile home area shall be subject to fire regulations of the City of Prattville. 
(88.1)  Conflict with other regulations. Whenever the regulations of the ordinance require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or ordinance, the requirements of the ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute or ordinance shall govern. 
(88.2)  Separability of provisions. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
(88.3)  Adoption. This ordinance shall be effective on and after the eighteenth day of April 1978. 
(88.4)  Permits. No person shall park or place a mobile home on any lot within a subdivision or park without first obtaining a permit from the city. The minimum fee for such permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. of 10-21-1969; Ord. of 4-18-1978, § 88)  
ARTICLE 9. - TOWNHOUSES 
 
Section 91. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to permit within the City of Prattville the construction of townhouses only upon application and on approval of a detailed site plan within an area of suitable location and character for such development as determined by existing land use characteristics, and future land use as defined in the Prattville land use plan. It is the further purpose and intent that the allowance of the construction of townhouses within the City of Prattville be in keeping with this purpose, and will provide present and future residents of the City of Prattville increased alternate housing opportunities and promote the more effective, efficient and economical utilization of current land resources, thereby benefiting the general public. 
(Ord. of 3-16-1976)  
Section 92. - General requirements. 
(92.1)  Not more than ten (10) contiguous townhouses shall be built in a row along the same front line, and not more than twenty (20) townhouses shall be contiguous. 
(92.2)  Contiguous townhouses shall be separated by an appropriate fire wall built into [in] conformance with specifications provided by the Standard Building Code and the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(92.3)  Each townhouse unit shall be constructed on its own lot. Townhouses constructed in a condominium development shall be exempt from this requirement only by approval of the Planning Commission. 
(92.4)  No side yard shall be required except at the unattached end of the townhouse complex, in which case the minimum width shall be ten (10) feet. 
(92.5)  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(92.6)  No townhouse unit shall extend more than five (5) feet in front of a building located on an adjoining lot of dissimilar use. 
(92.7)  No portion of a townhouse or accessory structure in, or related to, one (1) townhouse complex, shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to any portion of any townhouse or accessory structure, related to another townhouse complex structure, or to any building outside the townhouse area. 
(92.8)  Each townhouse unit shall have its own yard, containing not less than two hundred (200) square feet, reasonably secluded from view from the streets or from the neighboring property. 
(92.9)  There shall be provided two (2) off-street parking spaces for each townhouse unit. Unless a specific waiver is granted by the Planning Commission, all off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, whether adjacent to streets or in interior blocks. No off-street parking spaces shall be more than one hundred fifty (150) feet by the most direct pedestrian route from the door of the dwelling unit, to which such parking belongs. 
(92.10)  The following is the minimum required area, width and height for each townhouse unit: 
Minimum lot area. One-family townhouse: two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
Minimum lot width at building line: twenty (20) feet. 
Minimum depth at front yard: twenty (20) feet. 
Minimum depth at rear yard: twenty (20) feet. 
Minimum width of one (1) side yard: ten (10) feet. 
(At unattached end of townhouse complex). 
Maximum building height: thirty-five (35) feet. 
Maximum number of stories: two and one-half (2½). 
Off-street parking requirement: two (2) car spaces per family dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 3-16-1976)  
Section 93. - Site requirements. 
Prior to the approval of the construction of a townhouse area, a detailed site plan must be submitted [to] and approved by the Prattville Planning Commission. Such site plan shall meet all the requirements specified in the Prattville Subdivision Regulations for a preliminary plat review, as provided under the experimental subdivision section of the Prattville Subdivision Regulations. The Planning Commission may waive or modify the standards or requirements of the Prattville Subdivision Regulations if the Commission finds the experimental subdivision provides adequate public space and improvement for circulation, recreation, light, air, service needs of the tract of land when fully developed and populated, and also provides such covenants and other legal provisions as will assure conformity to the achievement of the plan. 
(Ord. of 3-16-1976)  
Section 94. - Construction. 
No townhouse within the City of Prattville shall be constructed nor construction commenced until all the requirements of this article have been met and final approval given as required by the City of Prattville. 
(Ord. of 3-16-1976)  
Section 95. - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this article require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or ordinance, the requirements of this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by this article, the provisions of such statute or ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-16-1976)  
Section 96. - Acceptability of provisions. 
Should any section or provision of this article be declared invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-16-1976)  
ARTICLE 10. - PATIO GARDEN HOMES 
 
Section 101. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to permit within the City of Prattville the construction of patio garden homes only upon application of a detailed site plan within an area of suitable location and character for such development as determined by existing land use characteristics, and future land use as defined in the Prattville land use plan. It is the further purpose and intent that the allowance of the construction of patio garden homes within the City of Prattville be in keeping with this purpose, and will provide present and future residents of the City of Prattville increased alternate housing opportunities and promote the more effective, efficient and economical utilization of current land resources, thereby benefiting the general public. It is the further purpose that patio garden homes may be appropriately intermingled with other types of housing, shall constitute groupings making efficient, economical, comfortable, and convenient use of land and open space; and shall serve the public purpose of zoning by means alternative to conventional arrangements of yards and building areas. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1986, § 101; Ord. No. 2001-016, § 101, 7-10-2001)  
Section 102. - General requirements. 
(102.1) Not more than two (2) contiguous patio garden homes shall be connected. 
(102.2) Each patio home shall be constructed on its own lot, and shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet at the building line, minimum lot area shall be four thousand 4,000 square feet. 
(102.3) Each patio home lot shall have one (1) side yard with a minimum depth of five (5) feet. Minimum depth of front yards shall be twenty (20) feet. Minimum depth of rear yards shall be fifteen (15) feet. Fireplace and chimney may be placed in the rear yard setback provided they do not project beyond the thirty-inch permitted roof overhang and provided they do not restrict or obstruct any drainage easement, whether existing or proposed. 
(102.4) The required side yards must be kept perpetually free of permanent obstructions, accessory structures, walls and fences without gates. 
(102.5) Privacy fences or walls may be placed on or along any lot lines provided that such fences or walls are not constructed in such a manner as to block any local lot drainage and provided gates or other openings are provided that will not restrict access for fire protection. An eight-foot-maximum height limit will be permitted for privacy fences or walls located on or along any required side or rear yard. 
(102.6) Each patio garden home shall have on its own lot one (1) yard containing not less than six hundred (600) square feet, reasonably secluded from view of streets or neighboring property. 
(102.7) Maximum lot coverage permitted for the main dwelling shall be one hundred (100) percent of permitted building area not including coverage permitted for accessory buildings or structures. 
(102.8) Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two (2) spaces per dwelling unit and shall be located within the interior of the lot. Garages shall not be credited toward the parking requirements, if said garage is a part of the main dwelling or attached to the main dwelling. 
(102.9) The exterior wall of the patio garden home, or any accessory structures on the zero-foot side yard setback shall not project over the property line. Roof overhang may penetrate maintenance and drainage easement of the adjacent lot a maximum of thirty (30) inches, provided the roof shall be so designed that water runoff shall be restricted to the drainage easement area. 
(102.10) The number of windows, doors or other openings allowed on walls fronting the sidelines shall be governed by the Table 600 of the Southern Building Code (or governed by the adopted building code currently enforced by the City of Prattville or by the most restrictive code.) Where adjacent zero lot line dwellings are not constructed against or along a common lot line, a perpetual wall maintenance easement of three (3) feet in width along and parallel to the adjacent lot shall be provided. 
(102.11) Where adjacent zero lot line dwellings are not constructed against or along a common lot line, a perpetual drainage easement shall be provided, which shall be approved by the Planning Commission. Fences and walls may be located on or along this easement provided gates or other openings that will not block local lot drainage are maintained. A "hold harmless agreement" shall be required. 
(102.12) The lot adjacent to the zero setback side yard must be under the same ownership at the time of initial construction (ensuring that a developer does not infringe on the property rights of adjacent tracts) or a ten-foot side setback shall be required, provided the adjacent property is not zoned for patio garden homes or is not a permitted use in the adjacent zoning district. 
(102.13) No accessory structures shall be erected in a required front, side, street side yard, or open space. Accessory structures shall be permitted in the rear yard and shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) stories in height and shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required rear yard, and shall be permitted a zero-foot setback from the rear yard and side property lines and five (5) feet from any other structure on the same lot. 
(102.14) Unattached garages and carports shall be permitted in addition to the twenty-five-percent coverage for accessory structures, but shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet in area; and shall not be placed in any required front, side, or street side yard or open space; and shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) stories in height; and shall be permitted a zero setback from the rear and side property lines, and five (5) feet from any other structure on the same lot. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1986, § 102; Ord. No. 2001-016, § 102, 7-10-2001)  
Section 103. - Site requirements. 
Prior to the approval of the construction of a patio garden home area, detailed site plan must be submitted and approved by the Prattville Planning Commission. Such site plan shall meet all the requirements specified in the Prattville subdivision regulations for a preliminary plat review, as provided under the experimental subdivision section of the Prattville subdivision regulations. The Planning Commission may waive or modify the standards and requirements of the Prattville subdivision regulations if the Commission finds the experimental subdivision provides adequate public space and improvements for circulation, recreation, light, air, service needs of the tract of land when fully developed and populated, and also provides such covenants and other legal provisions as will assure conformity to the achievement of the plan. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1986, § 103)  
Section 104. - Construction. 
No patio garden home within the City of Prattville shall be constructed, nor construction commenced, until all the requirements of this article have been met and final approval given as required by the City of Prattville. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1986, § 104)  
Section 105. - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this article require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or ordinance, the requirements of this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by this article, the provisions of such statute or ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1986, § 105)  
ARTICLE 11. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The ordinance comprising this article labeled it "Section 10," whereas there already existed Article 10. The editor has redesignated it Article 11, and numbered the sections accordingly. 
 
Section 111. - Purpose. 
The Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is intended to provide flexible land use regulations by using a review and approval process to impose a mixture of standards from other zoning districts or to negotiate specific performance criteria. The overall character of the PUD District shall be compatible to surrounding neighborhoods and preserve valuable natural features while permitting greater variety in the type of design, siting of structures, and combination of uses. 
(Ord. of 7-21-1981, § 1)  
Section 112. - Community objectives. 
PUD Districts shall be reviewed in terms of addressing the following general objectives and specific standards set forth in subsequent sections of this ordinance: 
1.  Promotes choice in housing type, lot size or neighborhood environment available to residents. 
2.  Preserves trees, slopes, geological features or prevents adverse effects such as erosion. 
3.  Attains more efficient use of land resulting in smaller utility networks. 
4.  Achieves a development pattern in harmony with the comprehensive plan with a more desirable environment than would be achieved through the strict application of zoning and subdivision requirements. 
(Ord. of 7-21-1981, § 2)  
Section 113. - Planned unit development (PUD) district application, review and approval procedure. 
Whenever a PUD District is proposed, before any subdivision site improvements are made or building permits are issued, the developer, or his agent, shall apply for and secure approval for a PUD District in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  Sketch plan. In order to allow the City Council, City Planning Commission and the developer to understand and agree on the project and specific design requirements prior to detailed design, the developer shall (mandatory) submit a sketch plan to the City Planning Commission at least fourteen (14) days before the meeting at which it is to be considered. 
2.  Staff review. The staff of the Prattville Planning and Engineering Department shall review and coordinate reviews by other departments and utilities prior to consideration of the proposed [proposal] by the Planning Commission. Staff comments shall be made for the benefit and aid of the Planning Commission. 
3.  Planning Commission review and recommendations to Council. The Planning Commission shall review the proposed planned unit development and take one (1) of the following actions: 
A.  Request the developer to provide additional information and reconsider the proposal at the next regular meeting or at a future regular meeting when the developer can present the data requested. After three (3) requests for data by the Planning Commission, the developer may request the project to be referred to Council. 
B.  Refer the proposal to the City Council with a statement either: 
(1)  Recommending rezoning to PUD. A favorable recommendation shall include a report to the City Council that the applicant may proceed with initiation of the rezoning request and preparation of a preliminary plan. The recommendation shall be based on the following findings, which shall be included as a part of the report: 
(a)  The proposal conforms to the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The proposal meets the intent, objectives and general requirements of the Planned Unit Development District. 
(c)  The proposal is conceptually sound in that it meets a community need and conforms to accepted design principles in the proposed functional roadway system, land use configuration, open space system, and drainage and utility systems. 
(d)  There are adequate services and utilities available in the construction of the development. 
(2)  A conditional recommendation stating objections to the sketch plan and may include an alternate proposal by the Planning Commission for the zoning of the area under consideration. 
(3)  Opposing the rezoning and stating the reasons for opposition. 
4.  Council action. Upon receipt of a PUD proposal and the Planning Commission's review statement, the Council shall schedule a public hearing and publish notices in accordance with the provisions of the Prattville Zoning Ordinance. The Council shall conduct the public hearing and consider the PUD rezoning at the following Council meeting. 
A.  If the Council refuses the PUD zoning, the appeal process applicable to zoning shall be followed. 
B.  If the PUD zoning is granted, it shall become effective upon modification and publication as provided by law and be considered to be valid for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days during which time preliminary plans shall be filed with the Planning Commission. 
Failure to file a preliminary plan shall be cause to consider the project as inactive and the zoning shall revert to the districts applicable prior to the PUD. 
5.  Planning Commission review of preliminary plan. 
A.  After receiving rezoning from the City Council on a sketch plan, the applicant may prepare a preliminary site plan to submit to the City Planning Commission for approval. The preliminary plan shall conform to the sketch plan that has received preliminary approval and was the basis for rezoning. It should incorporate any revisions or other features that may have been required by the City Council. All such compliances shall be clearly indicated by the applicant on the appropriate submission. 
B.  The developer shall submit the preliminary plan to the City Planning Commission at least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposal in conformance with the procedures and notice requirements normally used for subdivision proposals. 
At least five (5) days before the meeting and public hearing, the Department of Planning and Engineering shall notify all adjacent property owners of the hearing by mail. After the Planning Commission conducts the public hearing and reviews the preliminary plan, it may: 
(1)  Request additional information and reconsider the proposal at a later meeting. 
(2)  Grant conditional approval and specify additional changes or design features, which would make the project acceptable. Such conditions shall be consistent with the conditional approval provisions of the zoning ordinance or subdivision regulations. 
(3)  Disapprove the proposal. If disapproved by the Planning Commission, the appeal process applicable to subdivision regulations shall be followed. 
(4)  Approve the proposal. The effect of approval shall be similar to the preliminary plan approval in the subdivision regulations and enable the developer to begin site work or post surety for construction of public facilities. 
C.  The City Planning Commission's review of the preliminary site plan shall consider the following factors. 
(1)  Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and circulation, including intersections, road widths, channelization, traffic controls, and pedestrian movement. 
(2)  Location, arrangement, appearance, and sufficiency of off-street parking. 
(3)  Location, arrangement, size and design of buildings, and lighting. 
(4)  Relationship of the various uses to one another. 
(5)  Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs, and other landscaping constituting a visual and/or a noise deterring buffer between adjacent used [uses] and adjoining lands. 
(6)  In the case of multiple dwellings, the adequacy of usable open space for playgrounds and recreation. 
(7)  Adequacy of storm water and sanitary waste disposal facilities. 
(8)  Adequacy of structures, roadways, and landscaping in areas with moderate to high susceptibility to flooding, ponding and/or erosion. 
(9)  Compliance with all other regulations and the intent of this ordinance. 
D.  Within thirty (30) days of the meeting of which the preliminary plan is submitted, the City Planning Commission shall schedule the public hearing. If no hearing is scheduled within said thirty-day period, the preliminary site plan shall be considered approved. The Planning Commission shall reach a decision on the plan within thirty (30) days after the public hearing. Failure to do so shall also be deemed as approval of the preliminary plan. Notification to the applicant regarding the decision may be in the form of a written statement or by providing a copy of the appropriate section of the minutes. 
6.  Final site plan approval. After installation, inspection and approval of facilities or the posting surety for their construction, the developer may file for final site plan approval. This application shall be filed with the Planning Commission ten (10) days in advance of the meeting at which it is to be considered. The review process and required certificates of approval shall be as set forth in the subdivision regulations. 
7.  Fees. All PUD proposals shall be subject to all fees established in the Prattville Zoning Ordinance and subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-21-1981, § 3)  
Section 114. - General requirements for PUD district. 
1.  Minimum area. The minimum land area required to qualify for PUD District consideration shall be ten (10) acres of contiguous land. 
2.  Ownership. The tract of land for a project must be either in one (1) ownership or the subject of a jointly filed application by the owners of all the properties included. In the case of multiple ownership, the approved site and development shall be binding on all owners. If submitted by someone other than the current owner of the property, the submission must be accompanied by satisfactory evidence of the existence of an option to purchase or other agreement so as to insure that the owner is in agreement with the proposed development. 
3.  Location. The PUD District may be applied to any area within the zoning jurisdiction of Prattville where the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed project meets community objectives, specified requirements and self-imposes sufficient criteria so as to be acceptable to City Council and Planning Commission. 
4.  Conformity to comprehensive plan and other regulations. The PUD District shall conform to the general intent of the comprehensive plan and other development regulations of the City of Prattville. During the course of reviewing the various site plans, the Planning Commission may modify regulations in accordance with applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations, but all other codes of the City of Prattville shall remain in full force and effect. Special requirements imposed by the Planning Commission shall also apply and be noted on the final plat. 
5.  Common property in the PUD District. Common property in the PUD District consists of a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, where the use and enjoyment of which are to be shared by the owners and occupants of the planned residential development. When common property exists, the ownership of such common property may be either public or private. 
A.  When common property exists in private ownership, satisfactory arrangements must be made for the improvement, operation, and maintenance of such common property and facilities, including private streets, drives, service and parking areas, and areas for recreation or open space. 
B.  When common property is to become public property, it shall be dedicated to the city in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision regulations of the City of Prattville. 
(Ord. of 7-21-1981, § 4)  
Section 115. - Design criteria. 
1.  Uses. The following uses shall qualify for inclusion in the PUD District. The uses permitted in a particular PUD District shall be those uses shown upon the sketch plan approved by the City Council at the time of granting PUD zoning or as modified in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
A.  Residences may be of a variety of types, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family, but not including mobile homes. This may include units for owners and renters. In developing a balanced community, the user of a variety of housing types shall be deemed desirable in keeping with the objectives of this district. 
B.  Customary accessory or associated uses, such as private garages, storage spaces, recreational and community activities, churches, and schools shall be permitted as appropriate to support the residential development of the district. 
C.  Commercial uses of the family shopping or convenience type such as those specified as permitted uses in the B-1 zone providing the maximum commercial area does not exceed one (1) acre per one hundred (100) dwelling units and site design stipulations as specified by the Planning Commission are met. 
D.  All industrial and other commercial activities are prohibited and where a PUD District abuts such uses, adequate screening or buffer space shall be provided. 
2.  Density. The City Planning Commission shall determine during preliminary plan review the appropriate land use pattern and dwelling unit density for individual projects. These determinations shall be made in accordance with the following guidelines: 
A.  When prototype development plans are not submitted to determine design requirements, detached homes, duplexes, townhouses, apartments and commercial areas shall be developed in accordance with the design standards and density criteria for such uses as [if] they were being developed under individual district regulations. 
B.  When prototype development plans are submitted, the design criteria shall be negotiated and set by the Planning Commission as a part of the site plan review process. 
3.  Other design standards. All buildings shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories. 
(Ord. of 7-21-1981, § 5)  
Section 116. - Sketch plan requirements. 
The sketch plan drawings shall be approximately to scale[,] although they need not be precision finished engineering plans. The submission shall include the following: 
1.  Vicinity map showing the location of the proposed project. 
2.  Site map showing the project property boundaries, proposed internal and existing external land uses and ownership of abutting property. 
3.  Existing site conditions map: 
A.  Identification of the name, plat book, and page number of any recorded subdivision comprising all or part of the site. 
B.  Identification and location of any existing easements, watercourses, lakes, or other significant natural features upon the site. 
C.  Approximate topography of the site. 
4.  Development plan(s) showing the total project and including: 
A.  The interior roadway system, whether public or private, showing the relation to exterior streets which shall be identified by name and existing right-of-way noted. 
B.  A general drainage plan and preliminary utilities layout showing points of connections to existing utilities such as water and sewer and line sizes of existing services. 
C.  Interior open space plan showing public sites and common areas to remain in private ownership. 
D.  A proposed use plan(s) showing the location of proposed uses with the area stated in acres and designating: 
(1)  Type and number of structures to be built by area (i.e., single family, apartments, townhouses) and the size of units. 
(2)  Density of each area calculated in net acres. 
(3)  Prototype development plans and schedule to show yard sizes, setbacks for primary and accessory buildings, typical structure arrangements, individual access and parking provisions. 
E.  If the development is to be staged, a general indication of how the staging is to proceed. 
5.  Narrative statements or documents to describe the following: 
A.  A general description of the character of the area(s) adjoining the project. 
B.  Evidence that the proposal is compatible with the comprehensive plan. 
C.  A general description of community facilities to be provided, such as school sites or recreation facilities or statements on which existing facilities will be used by the proposed residents of the project. This shall include an assessment of the impact on services such as police and fire. 
D.  A general statement regarding how facilities are to be owned and maintained or dedicated to the city. 
E.  Proposed restrictive covenants. 
F.  The proposed method of financing. 
6.  Additional information may be requested by the Planning Commission or City Council as they [it] deem[s] appropriate to fully understand the proposed project. 
(Ord. of 7-21-1981, § 6)  
Section 117. - Preliminary plan requirements. 
The preliminary plan submission shall include the following: 
1.  Total project plans and conditions: 
A.  The property boundaries, including metes and bounds. 
B.  An area map showing the applicant's entire holding and all properties, subdivisions, streets, and easements within three hundred (300) feet of applicant's property. 
C.  If slopes exceed three (3) percent, or portions of the site have a moderate to high susceptibility to erosion, or a moderate to high susceptibility of flooding and ponding, a topographic map showing contour intervals of not more than two (2) feet of elevation shall be provided along with an overlay outlining the above susceptible soil. 
D.  Staging plan showing areas already developed, areas for which development approval is being requested, and areas for future development with approximate time table for completion. 
2.  Development site plan. A detailed plan for the project area(s) to be developed showing: 
A.  All information required for preliminary plans as required in the subdivision regulations. 
B.  A site plan showing location, proposed use, and size of all buildings, location of all parking areas, with access and egress drives thereto, location of outdoor storage, if any, including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences; description of method of sewage disposal and location of such facilities; location and size of all signs; location and proposed development of buffer areas; location and design of lighting facilities; and the amount of building area proposed for nonresidential uses, if any. 
(Ord. of 7-21-1981, § 7)  
Section 118. - Final site plan approval. 
A final site plan shall be submitted for approval and include the following: 
A.  All information and certificates as required for final plats in the subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-21-1981, § 8)  
ARTICLE 12. - SIGNS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The editor has renumbered the sections in Article 12 to conform with the style of Appendix A. 
 
Section 121. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, certain words and terms are defined as follows: 
Administrator: The Director or Acting Director of the Prattville Planning and Development Department or other person designed [designated] to act as Administrator of this article. 
Setback: Unless otherwise stated, shall mean the minimum distance that any portion of any sign must be set back from the edge of pavement or curb of any public street or road. 
Sign: Any presentation or representation by letter, symbol, number, or combination thereof which is visible from a public right-of-way for the purpose of making something known. 
(1)  Sign categories : 
a.  Business sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached. 
b.  Construction sign: A temporary sign identifying builders, artisans, or mechanics at a site of active construction. 
c.  Directional sign: A sign directing traffic to any public or semi-public facility or use including, but not limited to, schools, parks, churches, airports, shopping or industrial centers, or other public or semi-public uses. 
d.  Home occupation [sign]: A sign advertising a home occupation, as defined in the Prattville Zoning Ordinance, and located upon the same premises or lot of the dwelling unit containing the home occupation. 
e.  Identification sign: A permanent sign announcing the name of a subdivision, manufacturer, mobile home park, group housing project, church, school, park, shopping center, apartment complex, industrial center, or public or semi-public use. Such signs may also include space for public advertisements, and the names or [of] proprietor[s], ministers, managers, etc. 
f.  Off-site sign: Any sign not otherwise defined in this section and not located upon the same premises where any advertised business, commodity, activity, service, or product is conducted, sold, offered, or located. 
g.  Public event sign: A sign of a temporary type announcing or giving direction to a public event sponsored by a civic, fraternal, or not-for-profit organization or public agency for the benefit of any civic or charitable cause. 
h.  Political sign: A sign of any political party or announcing the candidacy of any individual for any nomination or expressing a position on any issue subject to a public or party election. 
i.  Real estate sign: A sign advertising the availability of property for sale or lease or the completion of such sale or lease, which is located on the property advertised. 
(2)  Sign structure: The supports, uprights, bracing, or framework of any structure, be it singled-faced [single-faced], doubled-faced [double-faced], V-type, or otherwise exhibiting a sign. 
(3)  Sign types: 
a.  Attached sign: Any sign attached to the wall, roof, facade, canopy, marquee, porch of any structure. This definition shall not include signs painted directly on a building. 
b.  Freestanding sign: A sign supported by its own structure, which support structure is mounted upon the ground and not attached to another structure. Free-standing signs are of two (2) sub-types: low mounts which are less than seventy-two (72) inches in height and high mounts which are greater than seventy-two (72) inches in height. Sub-type distinctions shall not apply to signs all portions of which are at least fifteen (15) feet from the edge of pavement or curb of any public street. 
c.  Projecting sign: A sign which is attached to a building wall, and which extends more than twelve (12) inches from the face of such wall. 
d.  Suspended sign: A sign suspended from a building by means of brackets, hooks, or chains, etc., and not projecting more than twelve (12) inches in front of the portion of the building from which it is suspended. 
e.  Temporary sign: A sign primarily constructed of paper, cloth, unpainted or untreated wood, or a nondurable substance other than metal or plastic. 
f.  Portable sign: A sign placed upon a support structure, either external to the sign or integral with the sign, which is designed for portability. This definition includes, but is not limited to, signs mounted upon a wheeled chassis. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-02)  
Section 122. - Purpose of article. 
It is the intent of the following requirements to control the use of publicly visible displays, graphics, signs or billboards, in order to safeguard the public use and nature of the city streets and sidewalks, and to enhance the visual environment of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-01)  
Section 123. - Applicability. 
No sign shall hereafter be constructed, erected, or maintained within the corporate limits of the City of Prattville, contrary to the requirements hereinafter set out, and it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, or maintain any sign within the city limits of the City of Prattville except in conformity herewith. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-03)  
Section 124. - Penalty. 
Any violation of the provisions hereinafter set out shall be punishable in the manner and to the extent set forth in the Prattville Zoning Ordinance, as amended, in section 25. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-04)  
Section 125. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this article be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part held to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-05)  
Section 126. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
Whenever the provisions of this article conflict or overlap with another ordinance or another portion of the Prattville Zoning Ordinance, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-06)  
Section 127. - Appeals, variances and uses on appeal. 
Any person requesting a sign listed as a use on appeal for the applicable district, any person requesting a variance on the basis of unnecessary hardship, or any person aggrieved by any order of the administrator may appeal to the Prattville Board of Zoning Adjustment as provided by the Prattville Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-07)  
Section 128. - Permit required. 
(a)  No sign shall hereafter be constructed, erected, replaced, changed in location or character, or altered in any dimension without a valid building permit issued by the Prattville Planning and Development Department, unless such sign category and type is specifically excluded or exempted by this article. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for a sign until a sketch showing the proposed location of the sign, and any pavement, curb, public right-of-way or easement within twenty-five (25) feet of the sign, sign type, size, height, type of foundation, electrical scheme, illumination scheme, and any other information required by the administrator is received; the administrator shall review all such sketches and shall issue permits only upon the determination that such plan is in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-08)  
Section 129. - Excluded signs. 
The following signs are excluded from the definition of "sign" as it is applied in this article: 
a.  Any sign with a total area of one (1) square foot or less on any side; 
b.  Signs of a duly constituted governmental body or authority or public utility including, but not limited to, traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal devices, warnings at railroad crossings, governmental survey or boundary markers, and notices of water lines or buried cables; 
c.  Publicly owned memorial tablets or signs; 
d.  Signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule, or regulation; 
e.  Signs of less than two (2) square feet in total area identifying the residents and/or address of any dwelling; 
f.  Street numbers if placed upon a building; and 
g.  Signs inside a building, but displayed through its windows. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-09)  
Section 130. - Exempt signs. 
The following signs are exempt from the permit procedure but must conform in all other respects to the requirements of this article, provided that they are not illuminated and do not have a total surface area on any one (1) side of greater than six (6) square feet: 
a.  Directional signs 
b.  Political signs 
c.  Real estate signs 
d.  Signs advertising yard sales 
e.  Signs of artisans, mechanics, or builders identifying their connection to active construction projects. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-10)  
Section 131. - Fees. 
Permit fees shall be determined in accordance with the procedures for determining building permit fees for other commercial construction. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-11)  
Section 132. - General sign regulations. 
(a)  No sign shall be constructed or placed in or over a public right-of-way that in any way interferes with normal or emergency use of that public right-of-way; any sign proposed to be placed in a public right-of-way shall be considered a use on appeal and require that the Board of Adjustment find that the proposed location is in the public interest after advertisement and a public hearing as provided by state law. The Board of Adjustment shall require the written opinions of the Chief of Police, the City Engineer, the Fire Chief, and the Administrator prior to making their [its] determination. The foregoing provision shall not apply to public event signs authorized by other procedures contained in this article. 
(b)  No sign shall be attached to utility poles, meter posts, or trees on any street right-of-way within the city. 
(c)  No person shall put up any sign or notice upon any building, wall, fence or other property not in their ownership without having first obtained the consent of the owner of such property. 
(d)  No sign shall be mounted on the roof of any building or painted thereon. 
(e)  No attached sign, projecting sign, suspended sign, or temporary sign shall project above roof line of the structure upon which it is mounted except that on structures possessing a parapet raised above the roof line, a sign may extend to the top of the parapet. 
(f)  One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed for each public street directly bordering any parcel or lot. One (1) additional sign per street is allowed for each five hundred (500) feet of frontage, on that street, in continuous common ownership. Signs allowed by this section may be placed to property corners. 
(g)  No sign shall be erected or constructed at any location, whereby the position, size, shape, color, movement, or illumination would obstruct the view of traffic or cause the sign to be confused with any governmental traffic signal, safety barricade or emergency vehicle. 
(h)  Illuminated signs must conform in all respects to the electrical fire codes of the City of Prattville. In no case shall an electrical cord be permitted to lie upon the ground. Any other provision of this article notwithstanding, the Electrical Inspector, Fire Marshal, or Administrator may order the repair or removal of any sign which does not conform to these codes. 
(i)  Any light mounted on, mounted within, or directed toward any sign shall be so placed or screened that no direct illumination is cast upon any surrounding property or on or toward any public right-of-way. Signs shall not have any continuously flashing or blinking light unless such signs are setback at least fifty (50) feet from the edge of pavement or curb of any public street. 
(j)  On any lot or parcel where the principal building or structure is set back less than the required sign setback, the Administrator, after consultation with the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and City Engineer, may authorize a lesser setback if he/she determines that a public hazard will not be created. 
(k)  Construction signs shall be removed within ten (10) days after the completion of work. 
(l)  Real estate signs must be removed within ten (10) days of the closing of any sale. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-12)  
Section 133. - Special procedure for public event signs. 
Public event signs, as defined in this article, may be authorized by the Mayor of Prattville after consultation with the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, and the Administrator. Application for such signs shall be made in accordance with procedures established by the Mayor and upon forms and with such requirements as the Mayor may determine to be necessary. Signs authorized under this section shall be temporary signs as defined by this article and shall not be displayed for more than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-13)  
Section 134. - District regulations. 
(a)  Determination of heights and areas of signs for all districts: 
(1)  Sign area shall be calculated as follows: 
a.  The area of an attached sign where the sign consists of letter[s], number[s], or symbols painted on or affixed to a wall shall be the entire area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the message delineated by said letters, numerals, or symbols. 
b.  The area of an attached, suspended, or projecting sign, where the letters, numerals, or symbols are on a surface which is hung or affixed to a building shall be the total area of the hung or affixed area. 
c.  All other sign types shall be the sum total of the areas of all surfaces (excluding support structures) visible from the public right-of-way or other areas from which the sign is intended to be viewed. Only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing total sign area where the sign faces are arranged to be viewed one (1) at a time. 
(2)  Sign heights. Attached, suspended and projecting sign heights shall be measured from the uppermost surface of the portion of any walkway, entrance/exit or ground which lies directly beneath the sign. For the purpose of calculating low mount maximum sign heights and high mount minimum sign heights, determination of height shall be made from the point on the edge of any abutting public street or road to the point directly above, which lies on a line, perpendicular to the public street, intersecting the mid point of the highest part of the sign. The height of any other freestanding sign shall be measured from the base of the support structure to the highest point or part. Temporary or portable sign heights shall be calculated or measured in accordance with procedures for comparable permanent sign types. 
(3)  Except as specifically restricted in this article, all sign types permitted in each district may be used for all categories permitted in each district. 
(b)  Residential districts and trailer districts: 
SIGN CATEGORIES 
PERMITTED 	SIGN CATEGORIES 
PERMITTED ON APPEAL 	SIGN CATEGORIES 
PROHIBITED 
Directional signs Home occupation signs Identification signs Political signs Public event signs Real estate signs Construction signs 	Business signs for legal nonconforming uses or uses on appeal approved by the Board of Zoning Adjustment 	All other sign categories 
 
Legal nonconforming uses and uses granted on appeal, other than home occupations, may use sign heights, types, and sizes stated in subsection (c) of this section or as otherwise approved by the Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
SIGN TYPES 
PERMITTED 	SETBACK 	MAX. HEIGHT 	MIN. HEIGHT 	MAX. SIZE 	SPECIAL 
REGULATIONS 
Attached signs and suspended signs 	Must be placed on principal building 	Roof line or top of parapet 	If over any entrance or walkway 8 ft. above highest portion of said entrance or walkway 	6 sq. feet 	None 
Low mount freestanding signs 	10 ft. 	72 in. 	0 	8 sq. feet per side 	Not applicable if all parts of sign are set back at least 15 ft. from curb or pavement of any abutting public street. 
Temporary signs 	10 ft. 	72 in. 	0 	8 sq. feet 	May be used for political, construction, or real estate signs to announce public events. 
 
  
SIGN TYPES PROHIBITED 			
High mount freestanding signs 			
Portable signs 				
Projecting signs 				
 
Signs shall not be placed closer to any side lot line than the distance of the side yard required in the Prattville Zoning Ordinance. 
No sign shall be placed in rear yards except upon double frontage lots. 
(c)  Business districts, office districts, and manufacturing districts: 
SIGN CATEGORIES PERMITTED 	SIGN CATEGORIES 
PERMITTED ON APPEAL 
Business signs 	Public event signs 	Off-site signs 
Directional signs 	Political signs 	
Identification signs 	Real estate signs 	
	Construction signs 	
 
  
SIGN TYPES 
PERMITTED 	SETBACK 	MAX. HEIGHT 	MIN. HEIGHT 	MAX. SIZE 	SPECIAL 
REGULATIONS 
Attached signs 	Must be placed on principal building 	Roof line or parapet of building 	0 	Not 
specified 	None. May be placed on accessory structure with approval of the Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
High mount freestanding signs 	10 ft. 	25 ft. 	8 ft. 	Not 
specified 	Allowed only where existing setback of building is sufficient to accommodate setback. Minimum height not applicable if setback is at least 15 feet. 
Low mount freestanding signs 	10 ft. 	72 in. 	0 	Not 
specified 	Allowed only where building setback is sufficient to accommodate setback. Height restrictions not applicable if sign is set back at least 15 ft. from any public road. 
Projecting signs 	Must be attached to principal building 	Roof line or parapet of building 	8 ft. 	Not 
specified 	May be used only when building setback is not sufficient to allow freestanding sign. May not project more than 40 in. 
Suspended signs 	Must be attached to principal building 	Roof line or parapet of building 	8 ft. 	Not 
specified 	Shall not extend lower than 8 ft. above any entrance way 
Temporary signs and portable signs 	10 ft. unless attached 	See special regulations at right 			Max. and min. heights shall be as for corresponding permanent sign types. 
 
  
SIGN TYPES PROHIBITED 			
None 
 
(d)  Far zone: 
SIGN CATEGORIES PERMITTED 	SIGN CATEGORIES PERMITTED ON APPEAL 
Directional signs Identification signs Home occupation signs Political signs Public event signs Real estate signs Construction signs 	Business signs for legal businesses, legal nonconforming uses, or uses on appeal granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment off-site signs 
 
SIGN TYPES 
PERMITTED 	SETBACK 	MAX. HEIGHT 	MIN. HEIGHT 	MAX. SIZE 	SPECIAL 
REGULATIONS 
Attached signs Suspended signs 	Must be placed on principal building 	Roof line of parapet of building 	0 	Not 
specified 	May be placed on accessory building with permission of the Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
High mount freestanding signs 	10 ft. 	25 ft. 	8 ft. 	Not 
specified 	Greater height may be allowed with permission of the Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
Low mount freestanding signs 	10 ft. 	72 in. 	0 	Not 
specified 	Max. height not applicable to signs all parts of which are set back at least 15 ft. from curb or edge of pavement on any abutting public street. 
Temporary signs 	10 ft. 	Max. and min. heights shall be as for corresponding permanent sign types. 	0 	8 sq. ft. 	May be used for political or real estate categories or to announce public events. 
 
  
SIGN TYPES PROHIBITED 			
Portable signs 			
Projecting signs 			
 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-14)  
Section 135. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  All nonconforming signs on the effective date of this ordinance shall conform on or before October 1, 1993. Temporary and portable signs must conform by October 1, 1988. 
(b)  All nonconforming signs in existence or under construction with a valid building permit upon the effective date of this article may continue through the amortization period provided that: 
(1)  The sign does not become damaged or deteriorated so as to become a public hazard; 
The Administrator may order the removal of any sign which may become a public hazard. Such sign must be removed within thirty (30) consecutive days of the date of the order; 
(2)  Any single repair does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the sign's replacement value; 
(3)  The sign is not extended or maintained in such a way as to extend its nonconformity; and 
(4)  The sign is not expanded or relocated. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, upon vacating any lot or parcel, the tenant or owner shall remove all nonconforming signs, sign supports, and attendant hardware. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-15)  
Section 136. - Special signage districts. 
The City Council may, after a public hearing advertised in the manner of a zoning amendment, and following review by and receipt of a report from the City Planning Commission, establish special signage districts; the boundaries of which overlap, divide, or otherwise deviate from established zoning districts. Such special signage districts may be for the purpose of controlling aesthetics, preserving historic values, or assuring the public health and safety. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1988, § 10-16)  
ARTICLE 13. - SITE AND OFF-STREET PARKING AREA LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of March 16, 1999, has been treated by the editor as superseding the previous site and off-street parking area landscaping requirements enacted by the uncodified Ord. of Dec. 1, 1998. The provisions of the Ord. of March 16, 1999, have been renumbered by the editor to avoid conflicts in section numbering. 
 
Section 141. - Purpose. 
This article is adopted to: 
(a)  Establish criteria for landscaping off-street parking areas in order to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of surrounding properties, and thereby promote the general health, safety and welfare and overall quality of life for the City of Prattville citizens; 
(b)  Require planting and preservation of trees and other landscape elements to improve the appearance of commercial, industrial and multi-family residential off-street parking areas and promote the city as an attractive trade and service center; 
(c)  Preserve private property values through careful public investment in the appearance of rights-of-way and other public properties; 
(d)  Insulate public rights-of-way and adjoining residential properties from noise, glare, overall visual impact and other distractions originating from off-street parking areas; 
(e)  Partition large off-street parking areas with planting islands and peninsulas; 
(f)  Provide safer vehicle and pedestrian circulation within off-street parking areas and along public rights-of-way; 
(g)  Protect streams and watercourses from excessive storm water runoff and soil erosion, and to replenish underground water aquifers by using natural drainage and infiltration systems. 
(Ord. No. 98-027, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-009, § 131, 3-16-1999)  
Section 142. - Scope of application. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all commercial, industrial, multi-family residential and public developments within the corporate limits of the city. 
(a)  General requirements: Any off-street parking area (or system of parking areas) shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of this article. The landscaping criteria shall be as defined in the following table: 
	Type of Landscaping 
Number of Spaces 
in; Parking Lot 	Foundation 	Frontage 	Perimeter 	Interior 
20 or fewer spaces 	X 	X 		
21—39 spaces 	X 	X 	X 	
40 or more spaces 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Site abutting a residential district (in addition to number of spaces) 			X 
(See Section 135.b.) 	
 
It is the policy of the City of Prattville that large shade trees should be planted wherever feasible in or near all off-street parking areas. 
(b)  Tree Replacement: Any heritage tree, as defined in this article, removed shall be replaced with either a Type 1, 2 or 3 tree, as defined in Section 136, Table 1 of this article according to the following schedule. Trees to be replaced may not be removed until after the Administrator approves the proposed landscaping plan. 
Diameter of Trees to be 
Removed 	Minimum Number of 
Replacement Trees 	Height 	Caliper 
48" or greater 	6 	6' 	1" 
37"—47" 	5 	6' 	1" 
24"—36" 	4 	6' 	1" 
 
(c)  Existing off-Street parking areas: An off-street parking area that is in existence at the time this article is adopted and does not conform to the provisions of this article shall be a legal non-conforming use. The parking area may continue as a legal non-conforming use until such time as concrete or asphalt is added to increase its parking capacity to greater than that on the adoption date of this article. At that time, the entire off-street parking area must be brought into conformity with the requirements of this article. However, the requirements of this article shall not be used to reduce the amount of parking required by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Prattville. Where a legal non-conforming use must be brought into compliance with this article and the lot size does not permit the amount of required parking and landscaping, the Administrator shall approve a landscaping plan that as closely as possible meets the requirements of this article. The Administrator may reduce the required landscaping components defined in Section 145 in the following order: interior, foundation, perimeter and frontage. Reductions below fifty (50) percent of required landscaping shall require a variance from the Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
(d)  Parking decks: Only perimeter and frontage landscaping will be required for parking decks. The total number of spaces in the first floor of the lot shall determine the amount of perimeter landscaping required. 
(e)  Minimum compliance: The requirements of this section shall be considered minimum standards. The developer may use higher standards. 
(f)  Single-family dwellings: Single-family dwellings are specifically exempt from the provisions of this article, however, the provisions of this article shall apply to the parking areas for swimming pools, parks, clubhouses and other common areas in single family residential development maintained by a private homeowners association or any public entity. 
(g)  Alternative landscaping standards: It is recognized that some sites and developments may not or should not be landscaped to the exacted provisions of this article due to unique topographic features or in order to preserve unique natural features. In such instances, the Administrator may approve a landscaping plan which differs from the exact provisions of this article as long as the plan provides the same minimum landscaped area and provides the majority of the landscaping in the front and side yards of the site. Alternative plans shall not be used to grant variances from the required amount of landscaping or the total area to be landscaped. 
(Ord. No. 98-027, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-009, § 132, 3-16-1999)  
Section 143. - Definitions. 
[As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meaning ascribed to them:] 
Administrator: The Prattville City Planner or his designee shall be the administrator of the requirements of this article. 
Approving authority: The Prattville City Planner or his designee shall be the approving authority for the requirements of this article. In the case of developments that must receive approval as a use on appeal, the Prattville Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be the approving authority after receiving a recommendation from the City Planner. 
Berm: A planted or landscaped elevated ground area, generally designed to restrict view and to deflect or absorb noise. Berms with ground cover that necessitate mowing shall have a slope not greater than one (1) foot of rise per three (3) feet of run. 
Caliper: Trunk diameter of a tree used in landscaping, measured six (6) inches above ground for trees up to four (4) inch caliper and twelve (12) inches above ground for larger trees. 
Crown: The branches and leaves of a tree or shrub, with the associated upper trunk. 
Deciduous plants: Those plants that shed their leaves during their dormant season and produce new leaves the following growing season. 
Evergreen plants: Those plants that retain their leaves during their dormant season. 
Foundation planting: Treatment of grade, groundcover, vegetation and ornamentation between the front building line of the primary structure and the parking area. 
Frontage landscaping: Treatment of grade, ground cover, vegetation and ornamentation between any off-street parking area and adjacent rights-of-way. 
Ground cover: Plants, mulch, gravel and other landscape elements used to prevent soil ex-erosion, compaction, etc. 
Heritage tree: Any deciduous tree as defined by this article with a twenty-four (24) inches or greater caliper. 
Interior landscaping: Treatment of grade, ground cover, vegetation and ornamentation within an off-street parking area. 
Landscape element: Plant material (living or non-living) or an ornamental material (river rock, brick, tile, statuary, etc.) differentiated from surrounding off-street parking area surfacing materials. 
Landscaping island: An interior landscaping feature surrounded on all sides by driving and/or parking surfaces. 
Mulch: A material (pine straw, bark chips, wood chips, etc.) placed on the ground to anchor soil, protect roots, limit weed growth and otherwise promote tree and shrub growth by simulating the role of natural forest leaf-litter. 
Mulch bed: An area, generally bordered by a retaining device, with a covering of mulch over the soil. 
Multi-family residential: Any residential structure containing two (2) or more housing units, developed for rent or lease, and having a common parking area. 
Off-street parking area: That portion of a site, other than the public right-of-way, designated for the parking and movement of automobiles. 
Organic landscaping materials: Plants or nonliving materials made from plants (pine straw, bark chips, etc.). 
Parking deck: A structure used for parking of vehicles and having two (2) or more parking levels above the grade of the surrounding land. 
Parking space: An area marked for the parking of one (1) vehicle that is nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long. 
Peninsula: An interior landscaping feature attached on only one side to perimeter landscaping, primary building, etc., and surrounded on all other sides by off-street-parking areas. 
Perimeter landscaping: Treatment of grade, ground cover, vegetation and ornamentation between an off-street parking area and adjoining properties and/or rights-of-way, but excluding landscaping between any off-street parking area and the primary building on the site. 
Public development: Any building, facility, structure including parks, swimming polls, schools constructed by a public political or administrative entity including all federal, state and local jurisdictions. 
Shrub: A woody plant, generally multi-stemed, of smaller stature than a tree. 
Tree: A woody plant, generally with no more than one (1) or two (2) principal trunks. 
Trunk: A principal upright supporting structure of a tree or shrub. 
Visibility triangle: An area of critical visibility between the heights of two and one-half (2.5) feet and six (6) feet above the grade of the intersection of two (2) or more streets or the intersection of streets and private driveways in which landscaping and other obstructions are restricted in the interest of traffic safety. The visibility triangle shall be defined as in Section 5.12 of the City of Prattville Public Works Manual, latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 98-027, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-009, § 133, 3-16-1999)  
Section 144. - Procedure. 
(a)  Landscape plan: The developer of a new or expanded parking area shall submit a master site plan in sufficient detail to indicate the number of parking spaces, the overall amount of off-street parking area, frontage landscaping or foundation planting, perimeter landscaping and interior landscaping. The landscaping plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Administrator before issuance of a building permit. Landscape master site plans shall be checked, sealed and signed by an architect registered in the State of Alabama. Landscape plans shall be submitted on forms designated by Administrator. Landscape plans shall be submitted in conjunction with all required site plans as defined in Section 10 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Prattville. The landscape plan shall include information listed below. 
(1)  General information: Date, north arrow and scale of one (1) inch to no more than fifty (50) feet; all property lines, locations of all existing and proposed public and private easements and rights-of-way; existing and finished topography, drawn at a maximum contour interval of five (5) feet and indicating drainage channels; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the property owner and developer, the name, firm, address and telephone number of person(s) preparing the landscape master plan. 
(2)  Construction information: Including the locations of all buildings and off-street parking areas; utility facilities, including light poles, power and service poles, above ground pedestals (low-voltage) and pad-mounted (high-voltage) fixtures, underground electrical, communications and television cables and conduits; hose bibs, sprinkler systems, meters, control boxes, etc.; and the amount, in square feet, of off-street parking area and intended surface treatments and the total amount, in square feet, of interior landscaping in peninsulas and islands. Locations, dimensions and treatments of all new frontage, perimeter and interior landscaping areas (islands and peninsulas). 
(3)  Existing landscaping: Detail showing the locations, caliper, species (common name) and intended treatment (move, remove or save) of existing trees eight (8) inches or larger in caliper. 
(4)  Proposed landscaping: A schedule of all new and existing plants proposed for landscaping, including size (caliper and height, container size, etc.) condition (bare-root, balled-and-burlapped, container-grown or pre-existing), common names and botanical names, (genus, species and variety) of tree shrubs and ground cover, and the type and amount of turf grasses. 
(b)  Review by the Administrator. The Administrator shall review the submitted landscaping master plan for completeness and substance. The Administrator shall have twenty (20) days after receiving a complete landscape plan to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the submitted plan. 
(c)  Permitting. The Administrator shall issue a permit for all approved landscaping plans. Plans approved in conjunction with a site development plan shall covered under the site building permit. Additions or renovation of existing parking areas must also purchase a permit. Fees for the permit shall be set by the City Council of the City of Prattville. 
(d)  Notice of installation. At the beginning of installation of the plant materials required in the approved landscaping plan, the property owner or developer shall notify the Administrator or his designee. The Administrator shall also be notified two (2) days prior to the expected completion such installation. The Administrator shall require correction of all conditions contrary to the requirements of this article and the approved landscaping plan and replacement of all plant materials that are dead, diseased, damaged or installed so as to kill or injure the plants. 
(e)  Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new development that has not met the requirements of this article or an approved landscaping plan. Additions or renovations to existing parking areas shall also receive a certificate of occupancy prior to usage. When circumstances, as listed in Section 147 of this article, preclude immediate planting, the Administrator may release the development for a certificate of occupancy after (1) the owner or developer has completed all curbing, irrigation systems and other non-planting components of the landscaping plan and (2) posted a irrevocable letter of credit or certified check in an amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the total cost, including labor, of the remaining landscaping installation. Required surety shall be made payable to the City of Prattville and submitted to the Administrator. The Administrator shall set the time limit for completion and approval of any guaranteed landscaping, but in no case shall the time period exceed six (6) months after the date the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(f)  Required maintenance. The owner and lessee shall each be responsible for providing, maintaining and protecting all landscaping in a healthy and growing condition, and for keeping it free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead materials shall be replaced during the next appropriate planting period. At no time shall the parking area landscaping be reduced to less than is required by this article or the originally approved landscaping plan. 
(g)  Enforcement. The Administrator shall visit each development once a year to ensure the required landscaping is in accordance with this article and the approved landscaping plan. Failure of the developer or owner to comply with the approved landscaping plan and/or failure to provide necessary maintenance of such shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Prattville and be subject to penalties as outlined in Section 25. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-027, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-009, § 134, 3-16-1999)  
Section 145. - General site and off-street parking area landscaping requirements. 
Landscaping of development sites and off-street parking areas shall be of four (4) types as described below and shall conform to landscape plans submitted and approved in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(a)  Frontage landscaping and foundation planting requirements. Frontage landscaping shall require a landscaped strip with a minimum ten-foot depth along all adjacent public rights-of-way. Frontage landscaping shall include a minimum of one (1) tree and six (6) shrubs per full forty (40) linear feet of the frontage strip; shrubs are optional in areas where a berm at least four (4) feet in height is used, Trees and shrubs shall be well distributed, though not necessarily evenly spaced. 
A lot with less than one hundred fifty (150) feet frontage and adjacent to a right-of-way shall have a frontage strip depth of ten (10) feet; a lot with one hundred fifty (150) feet to two hundred fifty (250) feet frontage shall have a frontage strip depth of twenty (20) feet; a lot with over two hundred fifty (250) feet frontage shall have a frontage strip depth of thirty (30) feet 
For developments of two (2) or more acres with frontage of to two hundred fifty (250) feet or more, the frontage strip shall be bermed in order to minimize the visual impact of the off-street parking area, unless the Administrator determines that the natural topography does not require site to be bermed. The berm shall not have a slope of greater than one (1) foot of rise per three (3) feet of run, and shall not be less than four (4) feet in height at its apex. Landscaping of bermed perimeter strips shall be in accordance with all requirements as outlined in this section 
Frontage landscaping, at driveways and street intersections, shall have an area of visibility between the heights of two and one-half (2.5) feet and 6 feet above the street grade to afford a clear line of sight in the interest of vehicular traffic safety. This area at street intersections is a visibility triangle as defined in this Section 133. 
Foundation planting shall require a landscaped bed with a minimum depth of five (5) feet along the front of the primary structure. The bed shall contain shrubs, or other greenery with a minimum height of twenty-three (23) inches and a maximum spacing of four (4) feet. Greenery shall be planted within a bed of mulch or ground cover other than turf grass, and be protected by some barrier from damage by vehicles and maintenance equipment. Greenery shall be well distributed through not necessarily evenly spaced. 
(b)  Perimeter landscaping requirement. Perimeter landscaping must be provided within the property lines between the off-street parking area, adjoining properties. Planting areas existing in the public rights-of-way or on adjoining property shall not count toward the required perimeter landscaping area. Perimeter landscaping areas adjacent to adjoining properties shall be at least ten (10) feet in depth, excluding walkways, measured perpendicularly from the adjacent property to the back of curb. 
Should the parking area abut any Residential District as defined by Article 7 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Prattville, a higher perimeter landscaping criteria shall apply. The perimeter landscaping area along the common property line shall have a twenty (20) foot landscaped buffer area consisting of a solid unbroken visual screen, eight (8) feet high within two (2) years of planting, and in sufficient density to afford protection to the residential districts from the glare of lights, from blowing paper, dust and debris, from visual encroachment and to effectively reduce the transmission of noise. The perimeter buffer area shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition. 
(c)  Interior landscaping requirements. Planting islands and/or peninsulas shall be provided for any off-street parking area of forty (40) or more parking spaces (not including the area of perimeter landscaping and not including the area of any plantings between the parking lot and buildings) with dimensions and arrangement as given below: 
1.  The required interior landscaping shall be based on the following formula: 
MINIMUM INTERIOR LANDSCAPED AREA 	= 	TOTAL OFF-STREET PARKING AREA (sq. ft.) 	× 	[1.826 + (0.00435 × total # of parking spaces planned)] [/] 100. 
 
1)  Number of required parking spaces × .00435; 
2)  Add this to 1.826; 
3)  Take total and change to % (divide by 100); 
4)  Multiply % × total paved area. 
5)  Yields square feet of interior landscaping required. 
Up to a maximum requirement of five (5) percent of the total off-street parking area's containing five hundred (500) or more parking spaces. 
2.  Each island or peninsula, to count toward the total interior landscape requirements, shall be at least one hundred (100) feet in area; however, the maximum contribution of any individual island or peninsula to the total interior landscaping requirement shall be five hundred (500) square feet. 
3.  Island and peninsulas must be at least six (6) feet in their least dimension, measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
4.  Islands and peninsulas in off-street parking areas shall be as uniformly distributed as practicable, to subdivide large expanses of parking areas, to regulate traffic flow, to protect pedestrians, and to permit access by emergency vehicles. When practicable, islands and/or peninsulas shall be placed at the ends of rows of parking spaces or between the circulation drives and parking rows, to channel traffic safely around the parking areas and to demarcate parking rows. 
5.  The interior landscaped area shall contain at least an average of one (1) tree and four (4) shrubs per one hundred (100) square feet of landscaped area. Each island or peninsula shall contain at least one (1) tree. 
(Ord. No. 98-027, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-009, § 135, 3-16-1999)  
Section 146. - Plant materials and installation requirements. 
(a)  Synthetic or artificial material in imitation of trees, shrubs, turf, ground covers, vines or other plants shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this article. 
(b)  Trees and shrubs. All trees and shrubs planted (in addition to any existing trees allowed under "Existing Plant Materials") in required perimeter and interior landscaped areas shall: 
(1)  For trees: Be of species other than those determined by this section as unacceptable for parking lot landscaping. 
(2)  For trees and shrubs: Conform to the minimum size standards in Table 1, based on the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-1990, published by the American, Association of Nurserymen and approved by the American National Standards Institute on October 27, 1980, as follows: 
TABLE I - MINIMUM SIZE STANDARDS FOR PLANTING STOCK 
	Minimum Size Requirements 
Shade and Flowering Trees 	
Type 1, shade trees (e.g., Red Maple, Tulip Poplar, Oaks) 	1.5' to 2.5' caliper, 12' height range with 16' max. height 
Type 2 shade trees (e.g., Golden rain tree, Southern Magnolia)) 	1.5" caliper, 6'8" to 8' height range, with 9'4" max. height 
Type 3, small upright trees (e.g., Crabapple) 	1" caliper, 6' to 7' height range 
Type 4, small spreading trees, (e.g., Flowering Dogwood, Star Magnolia) 	5' to 6' height range 
	
Coniferous Evergreens 	
Type 5, Pyramidal (e.g., Deodar Cedar, Pine species) 	5' to 6' height range 
	
Shrubs 	
All classes 	Perimeter landscaping: 23" min. height 
	Interior landscaping: 15" min. height or 15" min. spread 
 
(3)  For shrubs: Be planted within a bed of mulch or ground cover other than turf grass, and be protected by some barrier to damage from vehicles and maintenance equipment. 
(4)  For trees: Be spaced no closer than ten (10) feet to count toward the required ratio between perimeter and number of trees; such trees need not be evenly spaced along perimeter landscaping areas, and trees in excess of the minimum requirements may be closer than ten (10) feet apart. 
(c)  Grass or other permanent ground cover shall be installed and maintained on all parts of each landscaped area. 
(1)  Effective measures shall be taken to control erosion and storm water runoff through the use of mulches, ground cover plants, erosion-control netting, etc. 
(2)  Ground cover may include shrubs and low-growing plants such as Liriope, English Ivy (Hedera helix), Periwinkle (Vinca minor) and similar materials. 
Ground cover may also include non-living organic materials such as bark or pine straw and inorganic materials such as pebbles, crushed rock, brick, tile and decorative blocks; however, inorganic materials shall not make up more than ten (10) percent of the landscaped area. 
(Ord. No. 98-027, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-009, § 136, 3-16-1999)  
Section 147. - Installation requirements. 
(a)  Required landscaped areas adjacent to parking areas shall be protected by fixed vertical curbing along all sides exposed to parked or moving vehicles. 
(b)  When possible, trees should be located on extensions of parking stall lines to minimize bumper, exhaust and engine heat damage to trees. 
(c)  The maximum recommended distance from any part of a required landscaped area to the nearest hose bib or other irrigation water supply fixture shall be two hundred (200) feet, except where built-in irrigation systems are provided. 
(d)  Hedges, walls and berms are encouraged to help minimize the visual impact of off-street parking areas. Berms with ground cover that necessitates mowing shall have a slope not greater than one (1) foot of rise per three (3) feet of run. 
(e)  The use of permanent broad-area mulch beds is encouraged to increase absorption of surface water, retard erosion, runoff and stream siltation, protect tree roots and sterns, and foster tree health. 
(f)  Planting dates recommended by the city are shown in Table 2. 
TABLE 2 RECOMMENDED PLANTING DATES 
Type of Plant Materials 	Normal Planting Dates 
Non-Container-grown deciduous 	Oct. 1, April 1 
Non-container-grown, other 	Oct. 1, April 1 
Container-grown, all 	Year-round if suitable precautions are taken to protect the planting stock from extremes of moisture and temperature. If there is doubt, seek a variance or a performance bond 
 
(g)  Landscaping must be designed to be compatible with existing and planned overhead and underground electrical, communications, and television cables and conduits, public water supply lines, and storm and sanitary sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. 98-027, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-009, § 137, 3-16-1999)  
Section 148. - Credit for existing plant materials. 
Each existing tree meeting the following criteria may count, at the option of the owner, for two (2) of the trees in its class (interior of perimeters) required in this section if other landscaping requirements are met, and it: 
(a)  Has a minimum caliper of three (3) inches; 
(b)  Is at least four (4) feet from the nearest planned curb and is within a planned planting of at least one hundred (100) square feet; 
(c)  Has a live crown at least thirty (30) percent of the total tree height and is free from serious root, trunk and crown injury; 
(d)  Is indicated on the landscaping plan as a tree "to be saved"; 
(e)  If situated so that it can be incorporated into a planned perimeter landscaping area, island or peninsula with minimal grade cut or fill; and is protected during all pre-landscaping phases of construction by a durable physical barrier excluding all vehicles, equipment, materials and activities from the area that is to become a part of this landscaped area. Barriers must be installed prior to any site grading; 
(f)  Is not one of the following species hereby determined to be unacceptable for parking lot landscaping: 
Large Trees 	Medium Trees 	Small Trees 
Box elder 	Camphor 	Sumac 
Silver maple 	Cutleaf European birch 	
Tree-of-Heaven 	Silktree (mimosa) 	
Catalpa 	Chinaberry 	
Cottonwood 	Yellowwood 	
True poplars 	Mulberry 	
Native elms (American, winged, 
cedar, slippery and September 	Eastern redbud 	
Colorado Blue Spruce 	Princess tree (Paulownia) 	
Red Spruce 	Slash Pine 	
Live Oak 	Eastern White Pine 	
Laurel 	Oak Willows 	
	Sassafras 	
	Siberian Elm 	
 
(Ord. No. 98-027, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-009, § 138, 3-16-1999)  
Section 149. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance which it and of itself is not held to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
All other items and provisions of the Zoning Ordinance not herein specifically amended shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 98-027, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-009, § 139, 3-16-1999)  
ARTICLE 14. - TEMPORARY USES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-005 has been renumbered in accordance with the numbering scheme in the zoning ordinance. 
 
Section 151. - Authorization. 
Temporary uses are permitted only as expressly provided for by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-005, § I, 3-20-2001)  
Section 152. - Temporary use—Defined. 
A use, involving portable or temporary structures, established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the allowed period. 
(Ord. No. 2001-005, § II, 3-20-2001)  
Section 153. - Permit required. 
All temporary uses shall require a temporary use permit. 
A.  The City Planner shall issue temporary use permits. Applications for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by the City Planner. Applications shall include a site plan showing the following: 
1.  North arrow. 
2.  Scale drawing of not less than one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet. 
3.  All property lines. 
4.  The location with dimensions and use of all proposed and existing buildings. 
5.  The location and dimensions of all parking areas. 
6.  Location of all public streets, driveways, walkways and curb cuts to be used. 
7.  Location and direction of all exterior lighting. 
8.  Location and direction of all exterior signs. 
9.  Location of all water and sewer taps. 
10.  Location and type of all electrical connections. 
11.  Location of nearest fire hydrant. 
12.  Certification by registered traffic engineer than adequate provisions have been made for traffic management on the site. The City Planner may waive the certification if deemed unnecessary due to intensity of use. 
B.  The City Planner shall review the temporary use application and site plan for compliance with this article and other relevant zoning, development and building codes. The City Planner shall submit a copy of the application and site plan to the head of all relevant departments for comment and concurrence. The City Planner shall approve, approve with conditions or deny a temporary use permit with five (5) days of the submission of a complete application. An application shall be considered complete when accompanied by a site plan contains all of the items listed in Section II.A.1-12. 
C.  The City Planner may waive the requirement for a site plan with an application for a seasonal produce sale and public fundraising events by non-profit organizations. 
D.  The City Planner shall charge a fee to cover the cost of reviewing the application, issuing the permit and inspecting the site. The fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25) per permit issued. Permit fees shall be in addition to any required bonds listed below. The City Planner may waive the fee for public fundraising events by non-profit organizations. 
(Ord. No. 2001-005, § III, 3-20-2001)  
Section 154. - Zoning certification required. 
The City Planner, or his/her designee, must provide the revenue officer with a zoning certification indicating that a temporary use permit has been issued in compliance with the provisions of this article. The certification is required before the revenue officer may issue a business license for the temporary use. 
(Ord. No. 2001-005, § IV, 3-20-2001)  
Section 155. - General use limitations. 
A.  Temporary commercial uses shall be permitted only in B-2 zoning districts, unless specified below. 
B.  No sign shall be erected in connection with a temporary use except as specified below and by the signage ordinance. All signs, unless exempted by the sign ordinance, shall require a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 2001-005, § V, 3-20-2001)  
Section 156. - Permitted temporary uses. 
The following temporary uses are permitted subject to the following criteria. 
A.  Carnival or circus. 
1.  Maximum length of zoning permit shall be fifteen (15) days. 
2.  No structure or equipment shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any property whose current use is residential. 
3.  Signs shall be permitted as follows: 
a)  Total area of all signage shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
b)  All signs shall have a minimum setback of at least twenty (20) feet. 
c)  No more than one freestanding sign, as defined by the sign ordinance, shall be permitted. 
4.  The hours of operation shall be limited to between 10 a.m. and 10 p.m. 
B.  Christmas Tree Sales. 
1.  Permitted in FAR districts, as well as, Business districts. 
2.  Maximum length of zoning permit for display and sales shall be forty-five (45) days. 
3.  Signs shall only be permitted as follows: 
a)  Total area of all signage shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
b)  All signs shall have a minimum setback of at least twenty (20) feet. 
c)  No more than one freestanding sign, as defined in the sign ordinance, shall be permitted. 
C.  Contractor's office and construction equipment sheds. 
1.  Permitted in any district where use is incidental to construction project on the same property. 
2.  Maximum length of permit shall be one (1) year. 
3.  Office or shed shall be removed no more than five (5) days after the completion of the construction. 
4.  Signs are permitted in conjunction with construction project as specified in the sign ordinance. 
D.  Events of Public Interest. 
1.  Permitted events: outdoor concerts, auctions, athletic events, street fairs and associated concessions, and other similar events. 
2.  Permitted in all business districts and property owned by the City of Prattville or the Autauga [or Elmore] County Commission 
3.  Signs shall be permitted as follows: 
a)  Directional signs, information signs or signs advertising individual vendors are allowed without a separate permit. 
b)  Total area of all signs advertising a street fair and posted at the entrance shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, with no one sign shall exceeding one hundred (100) square feet. Total area of all signs for all other events of public interest shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
c)  No more than one (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted. 
d)  All signs shall be at least twenty (20) feet from all lot lines. 
E.  Public fundraising events by non-profit organizations. 
1.  Permitted only in B districts, unless activity is located in conjunction with a legal use granted on appeal to the Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
2.  Permitted events: car washes, bake sales, fruit sales, and other such activities used by a church, non-profit organization or charitable organization to raise tax exempt funds. 
3.  No activities or related signs or advertising shall be located in the public right-of-way. 
F.  Real estate sales office. 
1.  Permitted in any district when used in conjunction with a subdivision, residential or commercial, approved in accordance with Prattville Subdivision Regulations. The office may not contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations. A model home may serve as a temporary office, but may not be occupied as a residential structure while being used as an office. 
2.  Permits may be issued for a maximum period of one (1) year or until all lots in the subdivision are developed; which ever expires first. 
3.  Only real estate signs, as permitted by the sign ordinance, may be displayed in conjunction with the office. 
G.  Religious tent meeting. 
1.  Permitted in FAR and business districts. Permitted in Residential districts as use on appeal to the Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
2.  Maximum length of permit shall be fifteen (15) days. 
3.  Signs shall only be permitted as follows: 
a)  Total area of all signage shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
b)  All signs shall have a minimum setback of at least twenty (20) feet. 
c)  No more than one freestanding sign, as defined in the sign ordinance, shall be permitted. 
H.  Seasonal sale of farm produce. 
1.  Permitted in Business and FAR districts. 
2.  One six (6) month permit may be issued during each twelve month period. 
3.  Sales areas, including produce stands, vehicles used as stands, and sheds, shall encompass no more than two hundred (200) square feet. Sales areas shall be set back a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from the nearest property line. Entrances and exits shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the nearest intersection, measured from the intersection of rights of way. This shall not apply to driveways previously approved by the City of Prattville. 
4.  Signs shall only be permitted as follows: 
a)  Total area of all signage shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet. 
b)  No more than one freestanding sign, as defined in Article 12 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Prattville, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2001-005, § VI, 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 2002-018, 8-6-2002)  
Section 157. - General provisions. 
A.  If the temporary use is on property owned by an entity other than the applicant, the applicant must present a notarized letter from the owner granting permission for use of the property. 
B.  The following types of tent or outdoor sales shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance provided that: 
1.  Merchandise for sale occupies a permanent, outdoor display area used in conjunction with a permanent business. 
2.  Merchandise is located in the a temporary display area which does not occupy required parking spaces, driveway aisles or required landscaping areas, and customers must enter a permanent business on the same lot to make a purchase. 
C.  The Prattville Fire Marshall, Building Inspector and Electrical Inspector shall inspect all uses listed under Section VI, A, B, C, D, E and F before occupancy. 
D.  Temporary uses, except religious tent meetings and the seasonal sale of farm produce, shall provide temporary sanitary facilities. Approval of such facilities by the Autauga County or Elmore County Health Department must be presented with the application for permit. 
E.  All permanent or temporary lighting for the temporary use shall require an electrical permit and inspection. 
F.  The applicant shall provide public parking for the patrons of the temporary use. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to guide patrons to the approved parking and to prevent unlawful parking. 
G.  Any traffic control specifically required by the Prattville Police Department, as a condition of permit approval, shall be responsibility of the applicant. 
H.  The site shall be cleared of all debris by the expiration of the permit. Any temporary structures shall be removed within seven (7) days of the expiration of the permit, however, an exception may be grant by the City Planner for produce sales structures. To insure that the site is cleared of all debris during and after the close of the temporary use, a cash bond for no less than $25 nor more than $5,000 shall be posted with City Planner. Instead of a bond, the applicant may present a signed contract with a waste disposal company. Such contract shall be included with the permit application. 
I.  Serving of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted without a permit from the City Council of the City of Prattville. 
(Ord. No. 2001-005, § VII, 3-20-2001)  
Appendix B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the revised division regulations of the city, adopted February 16, 1989. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Subdivision regulations, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-30 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, AND JURISDICTION 
 
Section A. - Findings of fact. 
The planning commission finds that: 
(1)  Land subdivision is the first step in the process of community development. 
(2)  Once land has been subdivided, the correction of defects is costly and difficult. 
(3)  Subdivision of land is a public concern because roads, streets, drainage, sewer, water, and other public services must be provided and maintained. 
(4)  These and other factors relating to subdivision affect the entire community in many important aspects. 
(5)  New development should not become a burden for existing or future residents of the community; therefore, sound subdivision rules and proper standards must be drawn to protect existing and future residents of the community and to assure proper services to all citizens.  
Section B. - Purpose. 
These regulations of the City of Prattville, Alabama, Planning Commission shall have the following purposes: 
(1)  To govern the subdivision of land within the planning commission's jurisdiction. 
(2)  To provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to existing or planned streets and in conformance with the city's master plan. 
(3)  To provide for the grading and improvement of streets including proper drainage therefrom. 
(4)  To provide for the reservation of lands for future acquisition as public streets. 
(5)  To provide adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access for firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air. 
(6)  To avoid the congestion of population, including the regulation of minimum width and area of lots. 
(7)  To provide for the installation and extent of water lines, sewer lines, utility mains, piping (drainage), and other facilities which shall be conditions precedent to the approval of a plat. 
(8)  To provide a mechanism for the temporary reservation of land for necessary public facilities. 
(9)  To provide procedures for the acceptance or rejection of plats including: Public hearings, review by other departments and agencies, alternative procedures, and for the tentative acceptance of plats prior to final acceptance. 
(10)  To provide for the acceptance of a bond with surety in lieu of completion of improvements subsequent to final acceptance of a plat. 
(11)  To provide for remedies and penalties for the transfer or sale of lands prior to final acceptance of a plat by the planning commission.  
Section C. - Authority. 
These regulations of the City of Prattville, Alabama, Planning Commission are adopted and enforced under authority of Title 11, Article 1, Chapter 52, Sections 101 and 116; Title 11, Article 3, Chapter 52, Section 30 through 36; and Title 11, Article 3, Chapter 52, Sections 50 through 54; of the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-1 et seq., 11-52-30 et seq., 11-43-50 et seq.].  
Section D. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of Prattville, Alabama, as now exist or are hereafter established and all land located within three (3) miles of the corporate limits of said city as now exist or are hereafter established; except those area which lie within the subdivision jurisdiction of another municipality; or which are excluded by a city-county agreement authorized under Title 11, Chapter 24, Section 6, of the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-24-6]. 
(Res. of 10-16-2003(2))  
ARTICLE II. - INTERPRETATION, TENSE, NUMBER, AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Section A. - Words. 
(1)  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(2)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  The word "prerogative" as used, is a right of choice to exercise an assigned or implied power.  
Section B. - Tense and number. 
(1)  The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense includes the present tense. 
(2)  The singular number includes the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number.  
Section C. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of these regulations certain words used herein are defined as follows: 
(1)  Building setback line: A line parallel to the front, side and rear property line in front of which no basic or accessory structure shall be erected. 
(2)  City council: Shall mean the governing body of the City of Prattville, Alabama. 
(3)  City: Shall mean the boundaries of the City of Prattville, Alabama, together with its legislated five-mile planning jurisdiction or as modified by agreement under Title 11, Chapter 24, Section 6, or other operation of law. 
(4)  City engineer: Person or firm appointed or selected to provide engineering services, on a one time only or continuing basis to the City of Prattville, and assigned to review subdivision plats. 
(5)  City planner: Shall mean the duly designated director of planning and development of the City of Prattville. 
(6)  Community plan: Shall mean any legally adopted part or element of the general community plan of the City of Prattville or its environs. This may include but is not limited to: The zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, community facilities plan, major street plan, capital improvements program, and the land use plan. Such plan may be referred to or known as the comprehensive plan or master plan. 
(7)  Easement: A grant by the property owner for use, by the public, a corporation or person(s), of a strip of land for specified purposes. 
(8)  Final plat: Shall mean a plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of these regulations and is in the form for recording in the office of the Probate Judge of Autauga County or Elmore County depending on the location of the subdivision. 
(9)  Formal: Shall mean written as in a formal request. 
(10)  Group development: A development comprising two (2) or more structures built on a single lot, tract, or parcel of land and designed for occupancy by separate families, firms, businesses, or other enterprises. 
(11)  Health department: Shall mean the health department of the specific county in which the subdivision is located. 
(12)  Lot: Shall mean a parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. The following are special types of lots: 
a.  Corner lot: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
b.  Single tier lot: A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a railroad, a physical barrier, residential, nonresidential use and to which access from the rear of the lot is usually prohibited. 
c.  Double front lot: A continuous lot of the same depth as the width of a block containing two (2) tiers of lots and which is accessible from both the streets upon which it fronts. 
(13)  Major street plan: Shall mean the major street plan as adopted by the planning commission as an element of the community plan. 
(14)  Master drainage plan: Shall mean any drainage plan or element thereof which has been approved by the city engineer and adopted by the planning commission. 
(15)  Monument: A permanent object serving to indicate a limit or to mark a boundary. 
(16)  Planning commission: Shall mean the City Planning Commission of the City of Prattville, Alabama. 
(17)  Preliminary plan: Shall mean a set of engineering drawings which meet the requirements of these regulations for a proposed subdivision submitted for approval by the planning commission. 
(18)  Probate judge: Shall mean the judge of probate of the county in which the subdivision is to be located. 
(19)  Sketch plan: Shall mean a collection of information pertaining to a proposed subdivision to be submitted for approval by the planning commission. 
(20)  Streets: Shall mean a way for vehicular traffic whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or other name. For the purpose of these regulations the following types of streets are recognized regardless of their name: 
a.  Arterial or major streets: Are those streets which are primarily for fast or heavy traffic. Such streets are often called boulevards, highways, or parkways. 
b.  Collector streets: Are those streets that carry traffic from minor streets to the system of boulevards, avenues, arterial and minor streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such development. 
c.  Minor streets: Are those streets which are used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
1.  Loop streets: Are minor streets, the termini of which are located along a collector level street and which are not intersected by other than alleys and cul-de-sacs. 
2.  Marginal access streets: Are minor streets which are parallel to an adjacent arterial street or boulevard; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
3.  Cul-de-sacs: Are short streets designed to have one end permanently closed; the closed end being terminated by a vehicular turn-a-round. 
4.  Alleys: These are minor streets used primarily for vehicular or service access to the back or side of property abutting on another street. 
(21)  Subdivider: Shall mean the person(s), firm(s), or corporation(s) owning land which is subject to a proposed or accepted subdivision. 
(22)  Subdivider's agent: Shall mean the attorney, civil engineer, architect, registered surveyor, planner or other person who is the agent of the owner(s) of land proposed for subdivision. 
(23)  Subdivision: Shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites, or other division of land, any part of which is less than five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development; or any division of a parcel of land if a new street or road is involved. Such term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdivision or the land or territory subdivided. 
(24)  Subsurface drainage: A drainage system consisting of inlets and piping. 
(25)  Surface drainage: A drainage system consisting of culverts and open ditches. 
(26)  Zoning ordinance: Shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Prattville, Alabama.  
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAT ACCEPTANCE 
 
Section A. - General procedure. 
The procedures for review and approval of a subdivision plat consist of three (3) separate steps. 
(1)  The initial step is the preparation and submission of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision to the planning and development department to coordinate review of the plan. 
(2)  The second step is the preparation and submission of a preliminary plan of the proposed subdivision for planning commission acceptance. 
(3)  The third and final step is the preparation and submission to the planning commission of a final plat together with all required certificates. The final plat becomes the instrument to be recorded in the office of the judge of probate when duly signed by the planning commission secretary.  
Section B. - Sketch plan review. 
(1)  The purpose of this review is to give the subdivider and/or the agent an opportunity to confer with the planning commission and their technical advisors on the subdivision committee prior to drawing up detailed plans of the subdivision. 
(2)  Acceptance of a sketch plan is based upon general information rather than in-depth review; therefore, acceptance of a sketch plan is not binding toward preliminary plan acceptance. 
(3)  However, it is the prerogative of the planning commission to waive the sketch plan procedure should the subdivider and/or the agent formally request such action. 
(4)  Steps in obtaining acceptance: 
a.  Submission of plan: The subdivider or agent shall submit eight (8) copies of the sketch plan to the city planner for coordination of review by the subdivision committee and presentation to the planning commission. The sketch plan must be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission. 
b.  Review for plan: The sketch plan is reviewed for conformance to subdivision regulations, zoning, city departmental regulations, and other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
c.  Subdivision committee: This committee is made up of representatives of pertinent city departments, county agencies, and utilities. Membership is selected by the planning commission and the chairman shall be the city planner. The subdivision committee will review the sketch plan as submitted or as last modified and each member shall recommend acceptance, acceptance with stated conditions or reservations, or rejection with their reasons therefor in writing. It is not necessary for the committee to meet as a group. Each member of the committee may transmit their review directly to the city planner who shall transmit the committee's recommendations to the planning commission at their next regular meeting. 
d.  Action by the planning commission: The planning commission will consider only those sketch plans that have been reviewed by the subdivision committee and shall accept, accept with conditions or reservations or reject the plan. All commission action shall be recorded in the planning commission minutes. At the planning commission's discretion, a public hearing may be held on the sketch plan. The subdivider and/or agent will be notified of the action taken by the planning commission. 
(5)  The following information is required for sketch plan layouts: 
a.  General information: 
1.  Existing covenants, if any. 
2.  Available water and sewer, if public water is available, line size and estimated flow must be stated on the plan. 
3.  Number of residential lots. 
4.  Typical lot width, depth, and area. 
5.  Proposed protective covenants. 
6.  Proposed utilities and street improvements. 
b.  Sketch plan shall show the following: 
1.  Name of subdivision or other identification. 
2.  Topography at intervals of no less than ten (10) feet. 
3.  Boundary lines of the proposed subdivision. 
4.  Location of all proposed and existing streets in the subdivision boundary. 
5.  Adjoining development, property lines, streets, and water courses. 
6.  A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision to the surrounding area. 
7.  A north point. 
(Res. of 3-6-2008)  
Section C. - Preliminary plan acceptance. 
(1)  General procedure: After conclusions have been reached about the sketch plan and acceptance granted, the subdivider must formally make application for preliminary acceptance, which is mandatory before the subdivision can be reviewed for final plat acceptance. Lot layouts may bear the seal of a registered surveyor or engineer; streets, water, and sewer layouts must bear the seal of a registered engineer. 
(2)  Preliminary acceptance tentative: Preliminary acceptance shall be tentative in nature and shall in no way constitute a waiver of the requirements to be met for final plat acceptance. Preliminary acceptance shall lapse if final plat acceptance is not obtained within one (1) year, unless such period is extended by the planning commission. Requests for any such extension shall be made to the commission in writing. 
(3)  Work prior to acceptance not authorized: Any grading or other improvements done prior to preliminary plan acceptance shall be at the risk of the subdivider. The planning commission shall not consider the cost of such unauthorized work as justification for variances of the subdivision regulations. 
(4)  Steps in obtaining preliminary acceptance: 
a.  Submission of preliminary plans: At least thirty (30) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the plan is to be considered, the subdivider or his agent shall submit six (6) copies of the complete engineering plans and an additional six (6) copies of the lot layout to the city planner for distribution and coordination with the subdivision committee and planning commission. Certificates of approval from the various reviewing agencies shown in Appendix A-1 [to this Appendix B] shall be placed on a master file copy of the plat. 
b.  Review of the preliminary plan: The members of the subdivision committee will review the plan for conformance with the specific standards and specifications of their departments. Each reviewer shall recommend acceptance, acceptance with conditions or reservations, or rejection with the reasons therefor in writing. The city planner will review the plan for conformance to the approved sketch plan, the subdivision regulations, zoning ordinance, master plan, and other land use policies and plans of the planning commission. 
c.  Transmission of recommendations: Recommendations must be returned to the city planner by the date specified. After the receipt of recommendations from the subdivision committee, the city planner shall record all recommendations and submit them along with the preliminary plan to the planning commission for review. 
d.  Public hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the proposed subdivision. Public hearings shall not be required for one (1) lot sell-offs, as addressed elsewhere in these regulations, or for replats affecting five (5) lots or less in an existing subdivision. Changes in accepted preliminary plans shall require a new public hearing if the changes affect more than ten (10) lots, create a new entrance onto a public street, create a new drainage outlet, or result in an expected increase in run-off from any proposed outlet by more than ten (10) percent. 
e.  Notice required: The planning commission shall give notice of all public hearings by publication of said notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by sending notice by registered or certified mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five (5) days before the date fixed for the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision, as their names appear upon the tax roles in the county tax assessor's office. 
f.  Action by planning commission: The commission will consider only those preliminary plans which have been reviewed by the subdivision committee or which have been otherwise reviewed in accordance with these regulations. The commission may accept, accept with conditions or reservations, or reject the proposed plan or any parts thereof. The planning commission shall act upon the subdivision within thirty (30) days of the public hearing. 
g.  Manner of action: All planning commission actions concerning the preliminary plan shall be by resolution which shall be recorded in the planning commission minutes. 
(5)  Required information for preliminary plans: 
a.  Name of: 
1.  Subdivision. 
2.  Subdivider. 
3.  Subdivider's agent and engineer. 
4.  Adjacent subdivisions. 
5.  Adjacent land owners and addresses. 
6.  Registered engineer's seal or certification on all engineering drawings including streets, sewer, water, and drainage. 
b.  Business size envelopes addressed to adjoining property owners. 
c.  Date, acreage in subdivision, north point and scale. Scale shall not be less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. 
d.  A vicinity map at a size of not less than one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet to show the relationship of the subdivision to the surrounding area. 
e.  Location, width and purpose of all existing easements. 
f.  Location and dimensions of land to be dedicated or reserved for parks, open space, or other public use. 
g.  Lot and block numbers; dimensions of all lots. 
h.  Building setback lines along all streets. 
i.  Any area within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which lies below the federally determined 100-year floodplain elevation. 
j.  Street plan containing the following information: 
1.  Location of all proposed and existing streets in or adjacent to the subdivision. 
2.  Width of existing and proposed rights-of-way. 
3.  All proposed street names. 
4.  Topography at contour intervals of two (2) feet unless a closer contour interval is required by the city engineer. 
5.  Plan and profile of all streets showing natural and finished grades. 
6.  Typical cross sections of proposed streets. 
7.  Curve data for the centerline of each street; Delta, T, and R. 
8.  Location of all sidewalks and crosswalks. 
k.  Storm drainage plan containing the following: 
1.  Location of existing and proposed streams, ponds, and drainage ways. 
2.  Location, size, and invert elevation of all proposed drainage structures including culverts, bridges, pipes, drop inlets, etc.; and the top elevations of headwalls. 
3.  Area of land contributing run-off to each drainage structure, calculations used to determine run-off, and a map showing drainage area. 
4.  Location of all easements and rights-of-way for drainage ways and maintenance access thereto. 
5.  Typical cross sections of all drainage ways. 
6.  Direction of water flow throughout subdivision. 
7.  Hold harmless and spill agreements as required by city engineer. 
l.  A sanitary sewer plan containing the following: 
1.  Location and size of all existing and proposed sewers in the subdivision, tie-points of the subdivision and the location of each sewer lateral. 
2.  Direction of flow of each sewer line. 
3.  Location of each manhole or other sewer system appurtenance including lift stations, treatment ponds and plants. 
4.  Profile of sewerage system. 
m.  If the use of septic tanks is requested by the subdivider, a certification from the appropriate county health department environmentalist stating that the proposed subdivision meets all health department standards shall be submitted with the required preliminary plan and filed with the Planning Commission Secretary. Such certification shall be made on forms supplied by the City Planner. 
n.  A water distribution plan containing the following: 
1.  Location and size of water distribution system including pipes, valves, fittings, hydrants, high pressure pumping equipment, etc.; or 
2.  If private wells will be used to supply potable water to the subdivision, a certification from the appropriate county health department environmentalist stating that the proposed subdivision meets all health department standards shall be submitted with the required preliminary plan and filed with the Planning Commission Secretary. Such certification shall be made on forms supplied by the City Planner. 
(6)  Register engineer's seal and design certification (see Appendix A-3) on all engineering drawings including streets, sewer, water and drainage. 
(Res. of 7-15-1999)  
Section D. - Final plat acceptance. 
(1)  General regulations: After preliminary acceptance has been obtained, the next step is final plat acceptance. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plan as accepted, and if the subdivider so desires, it may consist of only that portion of the accepted preliminary plan which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at that time, providing that portion conforms to all requirements of the subdivision regulations. 
(2)  Acceptance required prior to sale: Final acceptance of a subdivision by the planning commission is required prior to the recording of the plat in the office of the probate judge. It is not legal to transfer or sell any land in a subdivision until the plat is recorded. 
(3)  Acceptance required prior to building: Final acceptance is also required prior to the construction of any structures and the issuance of building permits. This requirement may be waived by the planning commission upon posting a bond with surety, acceptable to the planning commission of sufficient amount to cover the cost of any remaining public improvements. 
(4)  Steps in obtaining acceptance: 
a.  Submission of final plat: The subdivider or agent shall submit the following items at least thirty (30) days prior to the planning commission of which it is to be considered: 
—  Subdivision application and final plat supplement 
—  Five (5) review copies of final plat 
—  As-built survey of potable water and sanitary sewer systems installed with subdivision 
—  Digital copies of plat and as-built surveys 
—  Estimated amounts of required maintenance of performance guarantees 
b.  Review: The city planner and city engineer, upon receipt of the final plat and relevant fees, will review the plat for substantial completeness, conformance with the approved preliminary plat, these regulations, the zoning ordinance and other land development ordinance and policies of the City of Prattville. The subdivider or his agent will be notified of all deficiencies in writing. Substantial completion is defined as having the following minimum improvements, if required by the preliminary plat, completed and ready for inspection. 
1)  Curb and gutter 
2)  Sewer mains and laterals 
3)  Water mains, hydrants and laterals 
4)  Storm water drainage and detention areas (detention areas must be vegetated and stabilized) 
5)  Sidewalks 
6)  Asphalt base 
c.  Planning Commission Action: Ten days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the plat is to be considered, the city planner and city engineer shall have completed their review. If the review indicates substantial completion, the final plat shall be presented to the secretary of the planning commission for inclusion on the agenda. If the plat is not substantially complete, it shall be moved to the next future agenda. The planning commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, accept substantially complete plat. 
d.  Certificates of Acceptance: Upon approval by the planning commission, and completion of all items required by the preliminary plat, as determined so by the planning and engineering departments, the city planner will obtain the signatures of all required city departments. The subdivider or agent must obtain any signatures required from non-city officials. 
e.  Recording of plat: Within thirty (30) days following a signed final plat being returned from the city planner, the subdivider or his agent shall have the accepted plat recorded in the office of the judge of probate of the appropriate county. The subdivider or agent shall return at least one (1) copy of plat bearing an original stamp of the judge of probate office to the city planner who shall keep a file for use by the city. 
f.  As built plans required: Upon completion of all improvements and prior to final plat acceptance, or if a bond with surety has been posted, prior to release of the bond by the city, the subdivider or agent shall present to the city planner three (3) copies of as-built drawings of the water system and sanitary sewer. 
(5)  Required information for final plats: The final plat as submitted to the city planner shall be drawn in black ink upon tracing cloth, or its equal, at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and shall show: 
a.  The location of all streets, alleys, lot lines, lot numbers in numerical order, block numbers, reservations, easements, street names, and areas to be dedicated to public use with notes stating their purpose and limitations. 
b.  Sufficient data to determine and readily reproduce on the ground the location, and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and building line whether straight or curved. 
c.  The exact position of the permanent monuments shall be indicated on the plat by a small circled (x). The character and description of said monuments shall be identified. 
d.  The names and location of adjoining subdivisions and streets. 
e.  Date, title, including the name of the subdivision, scale, and north point. 
f.  The relation of the land so platted to the government survey. Whenever section corners or half section corners occur along any platted boundary, they shall be clearly marked. 
g.  All curved boundary lines, lot lines, street centerlines, and right-of-way lines, on the plat shall be given a curve number and sufficient data shall be given to enable the re-establishment of the curves. This curve data shall include the following: Point of curve (PC), point of tangency (PT), intersection angle (Delta), length of tangent (T), and length of radius (R). 
h.  All dimensions shall be shown to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and angles to the nearest minute. 
i.  In the case of double frontage lots, the direction that the house or building shall front shall be clearly indicated. 
j.  The following endorsement, dedications and certificates, shown in Appendix A-2 shall be placed on the final plat. 
1.  Surveyor's certificate and description of land platted. 
2.  Dedication. 
3.  A notary's acknowledgment of the dedication certificate referred to in 2 above. 
4.  Certificate of acceptance by the planning commission. 
5.  Certificate of recording by appropriate county judge of probate. 
6.  Certificate of water board (not required if wells are used) (use alternate if public system other than Prattville). 
7.  Certificate of waste water department (not required if septic tanks are used). 
8.  Certificates of county health department. 
9.  Certificates of Prattville Fire Department. 
10.  Certificates of planning and development department. 
11.  Certificate of county engineer. 
12.  Professional Engineer's Construction Certification 
(6)  Development prerequisite to final plat acceptance: A properly proposed and recorded subdivision plat means little to a prospective buyer until the actual physical transformation of raw land into lots suitable for building purposes can be seen. Improvements made by the subdivider spare the community a potential tax liability and ensure that lot buyers get that for which they have paid. The following tangible improvements or security and guarantee provisions shall be required before final plat acceptance can be made: 
a.  Required improvements: Every subdivision developer shall be required to grade and improve streets and alleys, and to install curbs, sidewalks, monuments, sewers, storm water sewers, fire protection systems, and water mains in accordance with engineering specifications established by ordinance, by these regulations, or as approved by the city's engineer and/or director of planning and development. 
1.  Monuments. 
(a)  Concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter four (4) inches square, three (3) feet long, containing iron pipe or pin, and having a flat top, shall be set at all major corners in the exterior boundaries of the subdivision or sections thereof and at all points where the street right-of-way lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision or sections thereof. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade. 
(b)  All other lot corners and points of curve in street rights-of-way shall be marked with an iron pipe not less than three-fourths of an inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long, driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
2.  Grading: All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded so that pavement and sidewalks can be constructed to the required cross section. Fill placed upon building lots shall be properly compacted. A compaction report shall be furnished whenever fill on any portion of the lot exceeds three (3) feet in depth. 
3.  Storm drainage: An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. On-site retention shall be provided for where required. 
4.  Streets, curbs and gutters, and sidewalks: All streets, curbs and gutters, and sidewalks shall be prepared and tested in conformance with any city ordinances or engineering specifications. 
5.  Sanitary sewers: All sewers shall be installed in such a manner as to allow connection of all platted lots. Where public sewerage is not available, a private sewage treatment system is required which shall meet the specifications of the Alabama Department of Environmental Management and/or the appropriate county health department. 
6.  Water Supply System: In subdivisions that connect with a public water system, water mains in the subdivision shall be constructed according to the latest standards adopted by the Prattville Water Works Board. Fire hydrants shall be installed according to Section 10-18 [26-100] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Prattville. The Prattville Water Works Board or the appropriate water authority with jurisdiction over the subdivision shall approve of the completed system before acceptance by the Prattville Planning Commission. Even if the Prattville Water Works Board or the appropriate water authority with jurisdiction over the subdivision cannot provide the fire protection flows and water pressure required under Section 10-18 [26-100] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Prattville to the subdivision on the date of preliminary plat approval by the planning commission, water and fire protection facilities in the subdivision must be constructed according to the above referenced standards 
7.  Street signs: The subdivider shall provide all street and regulatory signs within the subdivision. The signs shall be of the type and number and located according to the submitted and approved preliminary plat. Two (2) street signs are required for each four-way intersection and one (1) street sign is required at each three-way intersection, unless the planning commission sets other requirements. 
8.  Oversized facilities: The City of Prattville may participate in the cost of "oversized" improvements within subdivisions but serving a larger area (i.e. streets, sewer mains, drainage facilities, etc.) if the planning commission recommends such improvements and the city council authorizes them. 
9.  Screening provisions: Decorative walls, fencing, landscape screening, or a combination of these shall be required at the rear of double frontage lots and between properties with dissimilar uses to control access, afford safety, and protect or enhance the affected properties. 
b.  Performance and maintenance guarantee: It shall be a strict requirement of final plat approval that all improvements and utilities required herein or as may have been required at the preliminary plan stage, have been satisfactorily completed and installed in accordance with plans and specifications approved at the preliminary plan stage. Proof of compliance shall be evidenced by the certificate of the city department or other agency having jurisdiction. However, the planning commission may, in its sole discretion, and provided all other requirements of these regulations are met, accept, in lieu of the completion of such improvements and utilities; a performance bond with sufficient surety satisfactory to the city attorney, to secure to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities at a time to be set by the planning commission and according to the plans and specifications approved therefor. 
c.  Maintenance guarantee: The subdivider shall be responsible for materials and workmanship of pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalks, sewer systems, drainage systems in the subdivision for a period of seven hundred thirty (730) days (2 years) following the date of acceptance of improvements for maintenance by the Prattville City Council if the subdivision is inside the city limits, or the Autauga County Commission or Elmore County Commission if the subdivision is outside the city limits. In addition, the subdivider shall be responsible for soil stabilization and maintenance of erosion control devices during the maintenance period. A maintenance bond, in an amount not to exceed ten (10) percent of the contract price of the subdivision and approved by the City Engineer, shall be posted before the final plat is signed by the City Planner. The City Engineer may require a higher bond as needed. If completed structures occupy 80% of the lots in the subdivision before the end of the maintenance period as listed above, the subdivider may request that the Prattville Planning Commission waive the time remaining and close the maintenance period. 
d.  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to assure that the loss of soil cover during construction and the one-year maintenance period does not result in deposition upon other properties, public roads, streams or drainage ways. The developer shall be responsible for cleaning mud, soil, debris, etc., from subdivision roads during the one-year maintenance period. 
(Res. of 5-6-1999; Res. of 7-15-1999; Res. of 10-16-2003(1); Res. of 3-6-2008)  
Section E. - Platting fee schedule. 
The subdivider, at the time of filing a preliminary plan application, shall pay a platting fee to the City of Prattville to defray the cost of processing and reviewing the subdivision plat. The platting fee shall be based on the following schedule: 
Preliminary plan\$50.00 
Plan changes requiring public hearing\25.00  
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCES AND SPECIAL SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Section A. - Subdivision by certificate. 
(1)  Purpose. The procedure for plat approval contained in Articles III and IV may be waived by the planning commission in the case of a property owner who desires to convey a part or parts of a lot or tract of land, if it is the opinion of the planning commission that compliance with the foregoing procedure would cause an unnecessary hardship to the property owner and that by reference to existing maps or plats the planning commission can determine that the conveyance of such part or parts of a lot or tract is in harmony and conformity with the general requirements and minimum standards of design for the subdivision of land by these regulations. 
(2)  Request required: The property owner desiring approval for the conveyance of a part or parts of any lot or tract without complying with the provisions of Articles III and IV hereof may make a formal request to the city planner for such approval by the planning commission. All such requests shall include a survey map or plat. If the property is to be for commercial, industrial or multifamily housing uses, a site plan as required by the zoning ordinance, shall also be included with the request. If the property is to be used for single-family residential use and the property is in an accepted subdivision, a true copy of that plat may be substituted for the required survey. 
(3)  Action by planning commission: The planning commission shall consider such request and shall have authority to require such property owner to furnish such information as the planning commission shall deem necessary in order to pass upon such request. If, upon consideration of such request and evidence or information furnished by the subdivider, the planning commission is of the opinion that the land in the request may be conveyed without destroying the intent of these regulations, it may issue to the property owner a written certificate of acceptance containing any restrictions and conditions that the planning commission attaches. 
(4)  Style of certificates: The certificate of acceptance provided for in the above paragraph shall be executed and acknowledged by the chairman, vice-chairman, or secretary of the planning commission, and may be recorded in the appropriate probate office as evidence of compliance with these subdivision regulations.  
Section B. - Hardship. 
Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from the strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the comprehensive community plan or these regulations.  
Section C. - Conditions. 
In granting variances, modifications, and acceptance for experimental subdivisions, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards or requirements, so varied, modified, or accepted. These may include, without being limited to: Personal security, performance or maintenance bonds, affidavits, covenants, or other legal instruments.  
Section D. - Experimental subdivisions. 
The planning commission may waive, vary, or modify the standards and requirements of these regulations, if in its judgment an unusual or experimental subdivision provides adequate public spaces and improvements for circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the tract when fully developed, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to an achievement of the community plan.  
Section E. - Miscellaneous subdivision or tract development. 
Other types of subdivision or tract developments may be allowed by the planning commission when such subdivisions or developments come under the provisions of these regulations and are in keeping with their purpose and intent, and meet the general requirements specified in Article V, Section A. 
(1)  Large tracts or parcels: When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of streets in the future and for logical future resubdivision. 
(2)  Group housing development: A comprehensive housing development, including the large scale construction of housing units together with necessary drives and access ways, may be approved although the design of the project does not include standard streets, lot and subdivision arrangements, if departure from the foregoing standards of Article V can be made without destroying their intent. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial subdivision: Subdivision of land for commercial or industrial purposes shall conform to the provisions of these regulations and street development shall conform to the major street plan. Lot sizes shall be large enough to provide for necessary off-street parking and loading requirements. All commercial and industrial parking lots fronting on any of the streets in Appendix B shall be paved with a minimum of one (1) inch of asphalt. 
(4)  One lot sell-off provision: When a single residential lot is being subdivided out of a large tract of land, the secretary of the planning commission may approve such subdivision if the following conditions are met: 
a.  Only one (1) lot is being subdivided and no other lots have previously been sold from the tract. 
b.  No conflict exists between the proposed subdivision and the major street plan. 
c.  Two (2) copies of a plat meeting the requirements of Article III.D(5) a through i, and those portions of j as deemed necessary are presented. 
(5)  Mobile home subdivisions: The subdivision of a parcel of land into lots for mobile homes which are intended for sale or transfer shall be subject to the provisions and intent of these regulations, the zoning ordinance, and other regulatory policies or plans. 
(6)  Mobile home court or trailer park development: A parcel of land intended for development as a mobile home court, trailer park, or other similar development, shall be developed in accordance with all applicable zoning laws. Such developments are not considered subdivisions unless lots are sold. 
(7)  Planned unit or open space subdivisions: The regulations of Articles III and V may be modified by the planning commission to allow greater design flexibility in the case of subdivisions being developed pursuant to the planned unit or open space provisions of zoning ordinance.  
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Section A. - Conformity to general community plan. 
(1)  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the city zoning ordinance and the community plan. 
(2)  All off-premises improvements necessary to the development of the subdivision shall be clearly noted in the preliminary plan. These improvements shall relate to such items as drainage, extension of water mains, sewers, street access and other such improvements.  
Section B. - Streets. 
(1)  General regulations: 
a.  Arrangement of streets: The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and locations of all streets shall conform to the community plan and shall be considered in relations to existing and proposed streets, topographical conditions, the public convenience and safety, and their appropriate relation to proposed land uses served by such streets. 
b.  Streets not shown on plan: Where such is not shown in the community plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
1.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing major streets in surrounding area; or 
2.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission. 
c.  Minor streets: Minor streets shall be so laid out so that their use by through traffic is discouraged. 
d.  Buffering along arterials: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service access, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
e.  Access along linear barriers: Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, stream way or drainage way; the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to or on each side of such right-of-way or feature. The location of any such road shall be determined with due regard for the proper use of land and for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
f.  Tangent requirements: A minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets or greater as determined necessary by the city engineer. 
g.  Sight distances: When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten (10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of not less than two hundred (200) feet for minor and collector streets and of such greater radii as the city engineer shall determine for other streets. 
h.  Angle of intersection: All streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. If the angle of intersection is greater than five (5) degrees from the vertical, the intersection must be approved by the city engineer. 
i.  Arterial sight distances: Intersections with an arterial street or boulevard shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart measured from centerline to centerline, and all such intersections shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
j.  Sight lines to be maintained: Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of streets. Measured along the centerline, there shall be a clear sight triangle of seventy-five (75) feet for local and collector streets and one hundred fifty (150) feet for arterial streets; from a point of intersection. This shall be indicated on all plans. No building or obstruction shall be permitted in this area. 
k.  Rounding at street corners: Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of twenty (20) feet, or of greater radius where the planning commission may deem it necessary. Comparable cutoffs or chords may be permitted in place of rounded corners. 
(2)  Unusable reserve strips: Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall not be allowed except where such control is placed with the city under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(3)  Street jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
(4)  Minimum street right-of-way widths: Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the community plan or where not shown they shall not be less than as follows: 
Street Type 	Right-of-Way 
(in feet) 
Arterial boulevard* 	120** 
Arterial street* 	100 
Collector street* 	65 
Minor street 	50 
Marginal access street 	50 
Cul-de-sacs and loops 	50 
Alleys 	24 
 
*Major streets 
**The amount of right-of-way deemed reasonable to be required by dedication shall not exceed 120 feet in width. It is also deemed reasonable that an additional 20-foot setback be required along proposed arterial highways and streets, in addition to the setback required in the zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Minimum roadway widths: 
Pavement Width from Curb Faces 
Street Type 	(in feet) 
Arterial boulevard 	60 
Arterial street 	51 
Collector street 	42 
Minor street 	29 
Marginal access street 	29 
Cul-de-sacs and loops 	29 
Alleys (curb not required) 	20 
 
(6)  Additional width on existing streets: Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street requirements specified above in B(4) and (5). 
a.  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street. 
b.  When the subdivision is located on only one (1) side of the existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the roadway shall be dedicated. 
(7)  Street grades: Street grades shall not exceed the following unless otherwise recommended and approved by the city engineer. 
Street Type 	Percent grade 
Arterial boulevard 	03.0* 
Arterial street 	05.0* 
Collector street 	07.0* 
Minor street 	12.0* 
Marginal access street 	12.0* 
Cul-de-sacs and loops 	12.0* 
Alleys 	12.0* 
 
*Vertical curves shall be such as to prevent abrupt change and shall be as approved by the city engineer. 
(8)  Gutter grades: The minimum grade of any gutter shall not be less than five-tenths (0.5) percent unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Cross drains are not permitted on streets of collector level or above unless recommended by the city engineer. 
(9)  Horizontal curves: Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets sixty-five (65) feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall be not less than three hundred (300) feet; and on other streets, not less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(10)  Vertical curves: Every change in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve constructed so as to afford a minimum sight distance of two hundred (200) feet, said sight distance being measured from the driver's eye, which is assumed to be three and one-half (3½) feet above the pavement surface to an object six (6) inches high on the pavement. Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet vertical, may be required by the planning commission. Delta, T, and R shall be noted on the vertical profiles. On major streets greater sight distance may be required by the city engineer. 
(11)  Cul-de-sacs (dead end streets): 
a.  Turn-arounds required: Minor terminal streets or courts designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no more than one thousand (1000) feet long unless greater length is necessitated by topography. All such streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet and a street right-of-way of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
b.  Temporary turn-arounds: Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of the subdivision. Such streets shall have a right-of-way of at least fifty (50) feet and be provided with a temporary turn-around having a roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet (Not required if stub out is only one (1) lot in depth). 
(12)  Alleys: 
a.  Where required: Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial subdivisions. The planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured access is provided. 
b.  Where optional: Provisions for alleys along the rear of residential lots is optional except where, in the opinion of the planning commission, such alleys are advisable. 
c.  Alignment: At all intersections, changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicle movement. 
d.  Dead ends: Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with an adequate turn-around as required by the city engineer. 
(13)  Alternative street standards: Subdivisions not located within the corporate limits of the City of Prattville, in which public streets shall be accepted and maintained by a county government, may be developed to such standards and using such surfaces as the county shall direct, provided that: 
a.  Right-of-way widths and curb and gutter requirements shall not be less than those required by these regulations for comparable city road types. 
b.  All public roads shall be paved. 
(14)  Curb and gutter requirements: Curbs and gutters shall be required for all streets except those on which no lot is less than one and one-half (1½) acre in size, and no lot dimension fronting on a street is less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. Curb and gutter may still be required if, in the opinion of the city engineer, they are required for proper drainage. 
(Res. of 7-15-1999)  
Section C. - Sidewalks. 
(1)  Sidewalks required: Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of arterial and collector streets. Sidewalks are required on one (1) side of all other streets except alleys, cul-de-sacs upon which twenty (20) or fewer lots front, and loop streets upon which forty (40) or fewer lots front. The planning commission may make exceptions to this requirement in special cases where walks would serve no purpose or where the continuity of walks is not essential. Sidewalks shall not be less than sixty (60) inches in width on arterial and collector streets and forty-eight (48) inches on other streets. 
(2)  Location: Sidewalks shall normally be placed on the public right-of-way one (1) foot in from the property line. Under special conditions of terrain or other factors, the planning commission may approve alternate designs.  
Section D. - Easements. 
(1)  Location: Easements shall be located on rear, front, or side lot lines, as required and to the width specified by their prospective users. Drainage easements shall be as required by the city engineer. 
(2)  Major drainages: Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream or if such a proposed drainage way is shown on an adopted drainage plan, there shall be provided a storm water drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such existing or planned drainage way. The width of such drainage easement shall be sufficient to contain the ultimate channel and maintenance way for the tributary area upstream. 
(3)  Alignment: Lots and easements shall be arranged in such a manner as to eliminate unnecessary easement jogs or offsets and to facilitate the use of easements for power distribution, telephone service, drainage, water, and sewer services.  
Section E. - Blocks. 
(1)  General requirements: The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use intended. 
b.  Zoning ordinance and health department requirements as to lot size and dimensions. 
c.  Need for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(2)  Length: Blocks shall not be less than four hundred (400) feet nor more than twelve hundred (1,200) feet in length, except as the planning commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desirable features of street pattern. 
(3)  Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) rows of lots, except where reverse frontage on a major street is provided or where prevented by topography or size of the property, in which case the planning commission may approve a single row of lots of suitable depth.  
Section F. - Lots. 
(1)  Layout: Lot sizes, width, depth, shape, and orientations, together with minimum building setback lines, shall be appropriate to the location of the subdivision, the zoning, and to the type of development or use intended. 
(2)  Size: Minimum lot dimensions must meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance and the health department. In such cases where requirements conflict, the larger requirement shall govern. 
(3)  Depth and width: Depth and width of properties laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate for off-street parking and loading. All lot depths shall be adequate for the use intended. 
(4)  Corner lots: Corner lots for residential use shall have sufficient width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
(5)  Connection to public street required: Each new lot shall front upon a street whose right-of-way is not less than fifty (50) feet in width and which is connected with the public street system. 
(6)  Double frontage lots: Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries, or so as to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. The subdivider shall put in a planting screen easement of not less than ten (10) feet in width, and across which there shall be no right of access, along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other linear feature. 
(7)  Side lot lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to streets except on curves where they shall be radial.  
Section G. - Preservation of natural features. 
In all subdivisions, due regard shall be given to the preservation of all natural features such as tree cover, natural groves, watercourses, scenic points, historic points, and similar community assets which will add attractiveness and value to the property.  
Section H. - Names. 
(1)  Street names not to be duplicated: No street names shall be used which will duplicate by spelling or sound or otherwise be confused with the names of existing streets, except where a proposed street is an extension of an existing street, in which case the proposed street shall bear the name of the existing street. Street names are subject to the approval of the fire department and the planning commission. 
(2)  Subdivision and development names not to be duplicated: Subdivision names and development names shall not be duplicated or be confusing with existing names. Such names are subject to the approval of the fire department and the planning commission.  
Section I. - Public sites and open spaces. 
Where a proposed park, playground, school, or other public use shown in the community plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the planning commission shall request that an option to buy such land be extended to the appropriate public agency or body and that such land be reserved from development pending the action of the appropriate public agency or body. Failure of a public body or agency to exercise such option within sixty (60) days of notification shall be deemed nonacceptance.  
Section J. - Drainage and inundation. 
(1)  Plan required: A drainage plan shall be made for each subdivision by a registered engineer which shall take into account the ultimate or saturated development of the tributary area in which the proposed subdivision is located. Adequate provision shall be made within each subdivision to provide drainage facilities needed within the subdivision taking into account the saturated development of the tributary area. The storm and sanitary sewer plan shall be made prior to other utility plans. Engineering considerations in subdivisions and other development shall give preferential treatment to storm sewer improvements over other utilities and improvements. 
(2)  On-site retention: Where development will materially increase downstream flows, on-site retention of water may be required. 
(3)  Spillage agreements required: Off-premises drainage easements and improvements may be required by the Planning Commission, after consultation with the City Engineer, to handle the run-off of subdivisions into an appropriate drainage channel. If requested by the city engineer, the Planning Commission shall require that the subdivider provide the City of Prattville with a hold-harmless spillage agreement for all drainage from the subdivision. Such agreement shall be submitted on forms provided by the City Planner. 
(4)  Development restricted in flood areas: Low areas below the federally established 100-year flood level shall not be developed or subdivided unless and until the city planner may establish that the area may be developed in accordance with the city's flood damage prevention ordinance. 
(5)  Other information required: The city planner or the planning commission may require whatever additional engineering information is deemed necessary to make a decision on subdivision and other development in an area of questionable drainage. 
(6)  Conditions of acceptance of water bodies: Lakes, ponds, and similar areas will be accepted for maintenance only if sufficient land is dedicated as a public recreational area or park, or if such area constitutes a necessary part of a surface drainage control system as determined by the city engineer. 
(7)  Design: Storm sewers shall be designed in accordance with good, accepted engineering practice. In the case of questionable practices, the opinion of the city engineer will prevail. 
(Res. of. 7-15-1999)  
Section K. - Sewer and water standards. 
Subdivisions shall be designed to accommodate public water and sewer if it is available. Water and/or sewer will be considered available if lines of the proper size and flow, with pumping not required, are located within twelve hundred (1,200) feet of the property. Installation of all lines shall be the responsibility of the developer. If water and/or sewer is not available, private water supply and sewage disposal may be used subject to the approval of the appropriate county health department, and the Alabama Department of Environmental Management.  
Section L. - Other utilities. 
Subdivisions shall be designed to accommodate electrical, gas, telephone, and if available, cable television utilities. The subdivider shall contact each of these utilities prior to submission of the preliminary plan and obtain necessary standards or other information which will allow service to the subdivision.  
ARTICLE VI. - SEVERABILITY AND SEPARABILITY 
Should any article, section, subsection, or provision of these subdivision regulations be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionally of these subdivision regulations as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.  
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT 
All provisions of this regulation may be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Article II, Title 11, Chapter 52, Section 33 of the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-33].  
ARTICLE VIII. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
These subdivision regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of publication in a newspaper of general circulation. Subdivision regulations heretofore adopted are hereby repealed. 
APPENDIX A-1 TO APPENDIX B 
CERTIFICATES REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY PLANS 
WELLS 
Wells developed according to requirements of the County Health Department are acceptable until an approved public water supply is available. 
____________ 
DATE 	

____________ 
HEALTH OFFICER 	

____________ 
COUNTY 	
 
  
SEPTIC TANKS 
Septic tanks installed according to the requirements of the County Health Department are acceptable until a public sanitary sewer system is available. 
____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
DATE 	

____________ 
HEALTH OFFICER 	

____________ 
COUNTY 	
 
APPENDIX A-2 TO APPENDIX B 
CERTIFICATES REQUIRED FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL 
1.  Surveyor's Certificate and Description of Land Platted. 
2.  Dedication. 
3.  A Notary's Acknowledgment of the Dedication Certificate. 
4.  Certificate of Approval by the Water Board. 
5.  Certificate of Approval by the Wastewater Department. 
6.  Certificate of Approval by the Director of Planning and Development. 
7.  Certificate of Approval by the County Health Department. 
8.  Certificate of Approval by the Planning Commission. 
9.  Certificate of Approval by the County Engineer. 
10.  Certificate of Approval by the Fire Department. 
11.  Certificate For Recording by the County Judge of Probate. 
12.  Professional Engineer's Construction Certification. 
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE AND DESCRIPTION OF LAND PLATTED 
STATE OF ALABAMA 
COUNTY OF ____________ 
I, ____________ , a registered Engineer/Surveyor of Prattville, Alabama hereby certify that I have surveyed the property of ____________ , a corporation or proprietor situated in ____________ , Alabama, and that the plat or map contained hereon is a true and correct map showing the subdivision into which the property described is divided giving the length and/or perimeter bearing boundaries of each lot and its number and showing the streets, alleys, and public grounds and giving the bearings, length, width, and name of the streets. Said map further shows the relation of the land so platted to the Government Survey, and permanent monuments have been placed at points marked thus (X) as hereon shown. 
WITNESS my hand this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
_____
(NAME OF SURVEYOR) 	
 
Registration # ____________ 
DEDICATION 
I/We (Land owner) as proprietor(s) have caused the land embraced in the within plat to be surveyed, laid out and platted to be known as (subdivision name) said subdivision lying in (section called) ____________ County, Alabama, and that the streets, drives, alleys, sewer easements, etc. shown on said plat are hereby dedicated to the use of the Public. 
____________ 
WITNESS 	

____________ 
PROPERTY OWNER 	
 
  
____________ 
WITNESS 	

____________ 
PROPERTY OWNER 	
 
NOTARY 
STATE OF ALABAMA 
COUNTY OF ____________ 
I, ____________ , Notary Public in and for said County, in said State, hereby certify that (Owner's name) whose name is signed to the foregoing instrument, and who is known to me, acknowledged before me on this day that, being informed of the contents of the instrument, executed the same voluntarily. 
GIVEN under may hand and official seal this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
CERTIFICATE OF THE WATER WORKS BOARD 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Water Works Board of the City of Prattville, Alabama, hereby accepts the within plat for the recording of the same in the Probate Office of ____________ County, Alabama, this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
ALTERNATE CERTIFICATION FOR OTHER WATER AUTHORITIES 
The undersigned, as authorized by (water authority) hereby accepts the within plat for the recording of the same in the Probate Office of ____________ County, Alabama, the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
Water Authority 	
 
____________  Alabama 
CERTIFICATE OF THE WASTE WATER DEPARTMENT 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Waste Water Department of the City of Prattville, Alabama hereby accepts the within plat for the recording of the same in the Probate Office of ____________ County, Alabama, this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
WATER DEPARTMENT 	
 
Prattville, Alabama 
CERTIFICATE OF THE DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
The undersigned, as Director of Planning and Development of the City of Prattville, Alabama hereby accepts the within plat for the recording of the same in the Probate Office of ____________ County, Alabama, this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 	
 
Prattville, Alabama 
CERTIFICATE OF COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT 
The undersigned, as authorized by the ____________ County Health Department, Alabama hereby accepts the within plat for the recording of the same in the Probate Office of ____________ County, Alabama, this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
HEALTH OFFICER 	
 
____________  County, Alabama 
CERTIFICATE OF THE COUNTY ENGINEER 
The undersigned, being the County Engineer or Acting County Engineer of ____________ County, Alabama, hereby accepts the within plat for the recording of the same in the Probate Office of ____________ County, Alabama, this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
COUNTY ENGINEER 	
 
Prattville, Alabama 
CERTIFICATE OF THE PRATTVILLE FIRE DEPARTMENT 
The undersigned as authorized by the Fire Department of the City of Prattville, Alabama here by accepts the within plat for the recording of the same in the Probate Office of ____________ County, Alabama, this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ 
FIRE DEPARTMENT 	
 
Prattville, Alabama 
OFFICE OF THE JUDGE OF PROBATE 
STATE OF ALABAMA 
____________  COUNTY 
I hereby certify that this plat or map was filed in this office for record this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ , at ____________ o'clock ____________ m and recorded in book ____________ of plats and maps, page ____________ recording ____________ paid. 
____________ 
JUDGE OF PROBATE 	
 
____________  COUNTY, ALABAMA 
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER'S DESIGN CERTIFICATION (PRELIMINARY PLAT) 
I, ____________ , a professional engineer licensed in the State of Alabama, License Number ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , do hereby certify that all facilities to be dedicated for public maintenance in ____________ (name of subdivision) have been designed under my supervision according to the most recent version of the Prattville Subdivision Regulations. 
I further certify that the owner of this subdivision has obtained all required Federal and State of Alabama permits required for the construction of this plat. 
____________ 
Signature 	

____________ 
Date 	
 
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER'S CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATION (FINAL PLAT) 
I, ____________ , a professional engineer licensed in the State of Alabama, License Number ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , do hereby certify that all facilities to be dedicated for public maintenance in ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (name of subdivision) have been designed under my supervision according to the preliminary plat approved by the Prattville Planning Commission on ____________ . 
I further certify that all required Federal and State of Alabama permits were obtained and complied with during the construction of this plat. 
____________ 
Signature 	

____________ 
Date 	
 
(Res. of 7-15-1999) 
APPENDIX B TO APPENDIX B 
The following streets are considered major streets for the purposes of these regulations. 
1.  Chestnut Street 
2.  Cobb's Ford Road 
3.  County Road 4 
4.  Doster Road 
5.  Durden Road 
6.  Lower Kingston Road 
7.  First Street 
8.  Gin Shop Hill Road 
9.  Main Street 
10.  McQueen Smith Road 
11.  Memorial Drive 
12.  Northington Street 
13.  Sheila Boulevard 
14.  State Highway 14—Fairview Avenue—Selma Highway 
15.  State Highway 206—4th Street 
16.  Sixth Street 
17.  Third Street 
18.  Tichnor Street 
19.  Upper Kingston Road 
20.  US Highway 82 Bypass 
21.  Washington Ferry Road 
22.  Washington Street 
23.  Wetumpka Street 
24.  Wright Street 
