ROANOKE ZONING ORDINANCE
adopted on
May 9, 1994
prepared under the direction of the
ROANOKE PLANNING COMMISSION
by the
EAST ALABAMA REGIONAL PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
for additional information:
City of Roanoke
P.O. Box 432
Roanoke, Alabama 36274
(205) 863 - 4129
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Planning Commission Resolution • • • e t • • I • I • • • • I I I I I 1 I I I I I i
Adopting Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ii
Article ·"
I. In General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
I I . Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
III. Supplemental Regulations ........... . ............. . 15
IV. Zoning District Regulations ; ..................... . 23
Division 1 .
Division 2.
Division 3.
Division 4.
Division 5.
Division 6 .
In General ........ .... ... ....... .. ... 2 3
Agricultural Districts ..... .. . ...... . 25
Residential Districts . ........ .. . .... 27
Business Districts ................... 34
Industrial Districts .. .. ............. 40
·Special Purpose District .. ............ 43
v. Administration and Enforcement ...... . ... .. ........ 49
VI. Board of Adjustment '. ..... ............... .. ........ 55
VI I. Amendments . . ... .... .. ... ... . . ...... ...... .... ..... 59
Appendices
Variance Application
Rezoning Application
Planning Commission Review Application
Zoning Enforcement Forms
RF.SOLlmON N0.--2._
J\ RESOLUTION RECOMMENDING TllAT THE CITY COUNCIL APPROVE AN ORDINANCE OFTllE
CITY OF ROANOl\E, Al . ABAMA. Al>OPT,NG A 1'>94 ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF
ROANOKE. ,\l.AllAl\l,\, IN A<.TORDANCF: WITH TllE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 11, CllAPTER 52,
CODE OF AIAllAl\IA, I 'J75, ,\S Al\lENUED; REPEALIN(; TllE ZONIN(; ORDINANCE OF THE Ctn' OF
ROANOKE. ADOPTED ON MAY i4, 1951 , AS AMENDED; AND PROVIDING FOR A~ EFFECTIVE
DATE OF THIS ORDINANCE.
WHEREAS, Title 11, Chapter 52, Code of Al:1hanrn, 1975, as amended, authorizes the City Council
to cnad a zoning orclinance to goYern all territory within the corporate limits of the City of Roanoke,
Alahama; nnd
WHEREAS, the City Council did ndopt u zoning ordinance on May 14, 1951, suhseljuently umended
such ordinance; :md
WllERF..AS, lhe City Coundl did order the East Alahama Regional Planning and Development
Cummissinn t11 pn:pan under H11: diret·tiun of the Roanuke Planning Co111111issi1111 a new zuning onlinnnce
for the City of Hoanukc, Alahama In rcplan: the llJ51 nrdinanl'c, as :1111c11ded; and
WllERl<:AS, the East Alahamu Regional Planning nml Dcvel11p111cnt Cummission did prepure a new
zoning onlinanl'e lo the salisfadion of the Roanoke Planning Commission.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED BY TIIE PLANNING COMMISSION OF TIIE CITY 01'
ROANOKE, Al.ABAMA:
SECTION I. That !he Roanoke Pl1111nin~ Commission rcl'om111e1Hls thut n 1994 Zoning Ordinance
fo1· the City of lfoanokc, Alahanrn, entitled the Roanoke Zuninl! Onlinant·c, alt11d1ed hereto and made a purl
hcrcof, he :11loptcd 1111rs11ant lo lhe uulhority ~rnnted hy Tille 11, Chapter 52, Code of Alahamn, 1975, :1s
amended.
SECTION 2. Thul the Roanoke PlnnninJ: Commission rer11111111ends that the Roanoke Zoning
Ordi11:111l·c, Roan11kc, Alaha111a, ndupted on May 14, 1951. :is amended, he repealed.
Sl::CTION J . That the H11anoke PlanninJ: Commission rccom111c1uls that this urdinunce ~come
l'ffcrti\'l' upon its due adoption and puhlicalion nnd the due adoption and puhlirntion of the Roanoke Zoning
/\lap, whirh shall hound and define the wnin~ distril"ls established hy this recommended ordinance, :1s
prnYiclt•cl hy law.
ATTEST:
i
ORDINANCE NO. 6 f' ,lj
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A 1994 ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF -ROANOKE,
ALABAMA, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE AUTHORITY GRANTF.D BY TITLE l l '~ CHAPTER
52, CODE OF ALABAMA, 1~75 AS AMENDED; REPEALING THE ROANOKE ZONING ORDINANCE
NUMBER 399 AND ORDINANCE NUMBER 625A, AS AMENDED; AND PROVIDING
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF; AND PROVID:NC FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE OF
TIHS ORDINANCE,
WHEREAS, the Roanoke Planning Commission recommends by resolution
passed at a public hearing held on April 18 , 1994, that the City Council
approve this ordinance .
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL _OF THE CITY OF
ROANOKE, ALABAMA .
Section 1. That tpe ROANOKE ZONING ORDINANCE, attached hereto and
made a part thereof, shall be adopted pursuant to the authority granted
by Title 11, Chapter 52, Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended .
Section 2. That the Roanoke Zoning Ordinance, adopted by Ordinance
~:0. 399 on Hay 14, 1951 and Ordinance No. 625A on March 23, 1992, be re-
·_ ,: .. _-_-_,!d to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and
e:[ i:ec t.
Section 3. That this ordinance shall be effective upon its due adoption
and publication of the ROANOKE ZONING HAP which shall bound and define
the ~ocin o ~i ~ trict s e s tab\te~ o ~ ~q ·~·~ nr~inance , as prov~~ 0 ~ b? ]P~ .
Adopted this the _ 7·2 1._...,..W_..J_c..__• 1994.
Ha* xf4tJ l-~ ATTEST:
ii
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Section 1. Short 'l'itle.
This ordinance shall b°e known as the "Roanoke Zoning Ordipance" and
the map herein referred to, identified by the tit l e "Roanoke
Zoning Map" shall be further identified by the signature of the
Mayor of the ·city of Roanoke- and attested by the City Clerk and
shall show thereon the date of adoption of this ordinance.
Section 2. Interpretation and Purpose.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of hea 1th, safety, morals, convenience, order,
prosperity, and general welfare of the community. Where other
ordinances or regulations which may be adopted hereafter impose
greater restrictions than those specified herein, compliance with
such other ordinances or regulations is mandatory. This Ordinance
shall not lower Uw restrictions of plats, deeds , or private
contracts, if such are greater than the provisions of this
Ordinance, the more restrictive shall apply .
Section 3 . Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Zoning
Ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance,
are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance
full force and effect .
Section 4. Saving Clause.
If any section, clause, provis.ion or portion of this Ordinance
shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutiona l by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other
section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance which is
not in and of itself invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 5. Effective Date .
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its adoption by
the City Council and its posting, as provided by law.
Sections 6-9. Reserved .
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Section 10. Word usage.
For the purposes o f this ordinance, certain terms of words used
herein shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) The word "person" inc ludes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as
well as an individual.
(2) The present t e nse includes the future tense, the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes
t h e singular.
(3) The word "shall" is mandatory , the word "may" is
permissive.
( 4) The word "used" o r "occupied" .include the words i ntended,
designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.
(5) The word "lot" i nc ludes the words "plot" or "parcel".
Section 11. Terms defined.
The following is an alphabetical listing of definitions used herein
and sha ll be interpreted as foll ows:
~fcess~rY_Use or Structure. A use or str ucture on the same
lot with, a nd o f a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use or stru cture .
Acre.
area.
A measure of land containing 43,560 square feet or
Addition. A structure added to the origi na l structure at
some time after completion of or after a cert ificate of
occupancy had been issued for t he or ig i nal structure .
Adult day care center - A facility that provides nonmedical
care t o adults over 18 years of age in need of personal
services, supervision, or assistance fo r sustaining the
ac ti vities of daily living or for the protecti on of the
i ndividua l on less than a 24-hou r basis.
Alley. A public service way whic h affords only a secondary
means of access to the rea r or side of abutting property, and
not i ntended for general traffic circu la tion .
3
Alteration and Altered.
any of the following:
The word alteration shall include
a. Any addition to the height or depth of a building
or structure;
h. Any change in the location of any~of the exterior
walls of a building or structure;
c. Any increase in the interior accommodations of a
building or structure.
In addition to the foregoing, a bui !ding or s true tu re
shall be classified as altered when it is repaired,
renovated, remodeled, or rebuilt at a cost in excess of
fifty percent (50%) .of its value prior to the
commencement of such repairs, renovation, remodeling, or
rebuilding .
Boarding or Rooming House. A building other than a hotel or
motel where for · compensation and by prearrangement for a
long-term period (at least month - to-month), lodging or
lodging and.meals are provided for three (3) or more persons.
Each unit intended to be rented does not constitute a
dwelling unit, as defined herein.
Buffer_ Screen.~ A method
obscuring one use or struc ture
opaque fencing, walls, or
instaJled within a buffer yard.
of visually shielding or
from another. adjacent use by
densely -planted vegetation
A buffer yard shall consist of land not less than fifteen
(15) feet wide, planted and continuously maintained as
follows:
a.
I Evergreen trees with an upright form spaced
less than fifteen ( 15) feet on center within
entire strip of land.
not
the
b. Evergre~n shrubs with an upright to spreading form
spaced not less than seven and o ne - half ( 7 1/2)
feet on center within the entire strip of land.
A fence or wall not less than ten (10) feet may be accepted
with the approval of the Planning Commission.
13ujj_di.r.l.9...:.. Any structure having a roof and intended for the
shelter, housin9, or pro tee ti.on of persons, animals, or
pt:"operty .
Building Area . The portion of the lot occupied by the main
building, includiny porches, carports, accessory buildings,
and other structures .
4
Building Height. The ve_rtical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front
of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat
roofs, Lo the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean
height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel
roof.
"
Duilding Line. A line showing the nearest distance to the
street property line that it is permissible to build, as
measured from the nearest vertical point of the structure.
Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the
main or dominant use of the lot on which said building is
situated .
City Council.
Alabama.
The City Council of .the City of Roanoke,
Child Day Care Center A l~censed public or private
establishment that provides care for children for at least
six hours of the 24-hour day for a prearranged compe nsation,
which include n~rsery schools, kindergartens, or other
facilities of which the purpose is primarily educational,
recreational, or medical treatment.
Density. The minimum required lot area per dwelling unit or
the maximum number of dwelling units per acre of site area.
Dwelling. Any .building ·or portion thereof which is designed
and used for residential occupancy, except that the word
"dwelling" shall not include boarding or rooming house,
ten ts, tourist camps, motels, hotels, travel trailers, or
other structures designed or used primarily for transient
residents.
Dwelling, Single Family. A detached residential dwelling
unit on an individual lot, such as a single family residence,
patio home, or townhouse.
Dwelling, Multi-Family.
t wo or more dwellings on
duplex, multiplex, garden
or upper-s t ory apartment.
A residential building containing
a commonly-shared l o t, such as a
apartment, multi -story apartment,
pwellinq Unit. An enclosure containing sleeping, kitchen,
and bathroorn facilities designed f or and used or held ready
for use by n s ingle family.
family. One (1) or more persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
5
Fence . An artificially constructed barrier of any material
or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen
areas of land.
Gasoline Service Station. Buildings and premises where
gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, apd automobile
accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail,
including incidental vehicle repair and servicing . Gasoline
service stations may also engage in the incidental sale of
food items and beverages.
Home Day Care. l\ .licensed home day care that provides care
for six or fewer children, including children who reside at
the home. This does not include informal arrangements that
pc:irenls make jndependcntJ.y \·d.tli nejghbors, friends or others,
nor does i l: includes nursery schools.
Home Occupation. An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit,
provided that:
~·
a. There shall be a maximum of three (3) persons
involved in such home occupation of which not more
than two (2) are non - members of the household;
b. The use of the dwelling unit for the home
occupation shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for residential purposes by
its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (2~)
percent of the floor area of t he dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home
occupation;
c. There shall be no change in the outside appearance
of the building or premi ses, o r other visible
evidence of the conduct of suc h home occupation
other than one ( 1) sign, not exceeding two ( 2)
square feet in area, non -i lluminated, and mounted
flat against the wall or visible through a window
of the principal building or an accessory
structure.
d. There shall be no public ctispJ ays of goods
connection with s uch home occupation, and
business shall be conducted entirely within
dwelling.
in
all
the
e. Examples of home occupation are: Office of a
doctor, lawyer , or notary ; dressmaking; artistic or
craft pursuits; barber shops; beauty shops; home
day care, · small appliance repai.r services, but
shall exclude clinics, automobile repair or body
6
shops, automobile sales, refrigerator, washer and
dryer repair shops, storage of contractors supplies
or similar activities.
--:;::--::::'"'"~
Hospital. An institution devoted primarily to the Q.iagnosis,
treatment or care of the sick or injured.
Hotel or Mole!. A building i.n which lodging or boarding and
lodging are provided on a daily or weekly basis (short-term)
for more than two (2) persons and offered to the public for
compensation.
Junk Yard . Junk yards shall inclμde any lot or parcels of
land on which is kept, stored, bought, or sold articles
commonly recognized as junk, including scrap paper, scrap
metal, tires, used automobiles, and used automobile bodies
and parts. Junk yards shall be entirely screened from
surrounding views by a fence to a . height of eight (8) or more
feet.
Leasable Area. The total floor of a · building designed for
both tenant occupancy and exclusive use. Leasable area
inc 1 udes both owned and leased areas but does not include
shnred or common areas among tenants. Where floor area of a
building is occupied or where a building has no shared or
common area, leasable area is the gross floor area measured
by taking the outside dimensions of the building at each
floor level intended for occupancy or storage.
Loading Space-'- Off-Street. Space logically and conveniently
located for bulk pick-ups and delivery vehicles expected to
be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required offstreet
parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading
space is not · to be included as off-street parking space in _
computation of required off-street parking space.
Lot. For purposes of this ordinance, a lot is a parcel of
land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such
yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot
shall have frontage on a dedicated street, or on an approved
private street, and may consist of:
a. A single lot of record;
b. I\ portion of a lot of record;
c. A combination of complete lols of record, of
complete lots of record and portions of lots of
record, or of portions of lots of record;
7
cl . A parcel of land described by metes and
bounds,provided that in no case of division or
combination shall any residual lot or parce 1 be
created which does not meet t he requirements of
this ordinance.
'~ Lot Frontage. The front of a lot shal l be construed to be
the portion nearest the street. For the purposes of
determining yard requirements on corner lots and through
lots, all sides of a lot adjacent t o streets shall be
considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated
under "Yards" in this section.
a. Depth of a l o t shall be considered to be the
distance between the midpoints of straight l ines
connecting the foremost points of the side lot
lines in front and the rearmost points of the side
lot lines in the rear;
b. Width of · a lot shall be considered to be the
distance between straight lines connect ing front
and rear lot lines at each side of the lot,
measured across the rear of the required front
yard, provided, however, that width between side
lot lines at their foremost point (where they
intersect with the street line) shall not be less
than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width
except in the case of lots on the turning circle of
cu l-de- sacs, where the eighty (00) percent
requirement s hall not appl y.
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a s ubd ivision recorded
in the off ice of the Probate Judge of Randolph County, or a
lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description
of which has been so recorded.
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, and which .is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a
permanen t founda tion when connected to the required
utilities , and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning , and electric systems contained therein . A
manufactured home shall a l so meet the following requirements:
a . 'I'he manufactured home shall be installed according
to the tie-down requirements of the Sta ndard
Building Code .
b. The manufactured home shall bear a sea l certifying
compliance with the Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards Act promulgated by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
c. The un .it sha.11 b'~ skirl.ed with a wec:ither·~esislant
material which reseml>.).es a permnnent foundation
commonly found on tl singl.e U1mily residence.
Skirting shall be adequately vented.
Mcir1u factured llome Park. A tract of land used or des igned to
nccommodate a manufactured home community of multiple spaces
for lease.
~et Area. The total area of a siie minus the street area.
tlonconforming Building. An otherwise legal building that
does not conform with the yard, height, or other dimensional
1:equ i rements for the district in which it is located or is
Jesigned or intended for a nonco~forming use.
!'-lonconforming Lot'. An otherwise legally platted lot that
does not conform with the dimensional requirement for the
district in which it is located.
~l.Q_r1~.9_QJ~or1J1J_n.9_ll.§~ /\ use of any structure or land lawful at
t.he time o( nnacLmcnl of th.is or:dinance or luwful at the time
'> f a nH~ndmen t thereafter which does no l conform with the
p1·ovisions of this ordinance for the district in which j t is
l ocaled .
OJ !>Premises. Advertising Signs and 13illboards. Advertising
of a business , use, or activity conducted off the premises on
v1hich the sign is loca ted .
~f fice. A place in which business or professional activities
<1 re conducted.
£l.b?_en Air Market. Retail sales of produce, arts, crafts, or
<>ther goods partially or fully outside of an enclosed
l>uilding, such as a produce market, flea market, craft
market, farmer's market, or roadside farm stand.
PQen Space .
~; Lt·ucture.
Space which is not occupied by a building or
l'_1nimeter. The boundaries or borders of a lot, tract or
parcel of land .
. l' .tgnni ng Co.~m.ission. The City Planning Commission of the City
, , C Roanoke.
9
Public Use. Any land us e operated by or through a unit or
level of government, either through lease or ownership , such
as municipal administration and operation ; county buildings,
and activities; state highway offices, and similar land uses;
and federal uses such as post. o ([ices, bu n~au of public
roads, and internal revenue offices, etc. "
Satellite dish antenna. An accessory structure designed to
receive television broadcasts relayed by microwave signals
from earth-orbiting communications satell ites .
Semi-Public Use. A land use maintained as a public service
by a private, non-profit institution, such as , YMCA, YWCA,
Salvation Army, c hurches a0d church related institutions,
orpha nages, humane societies, private welfare organizations,
non-profit welfare lodges and fraternal orders, Red Cross,
etc.
Story . That portion of a building between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if
there is n o. fl oar above it, then the space be tween the floor
and the ceiling next above it.
;;;tr~.?L_. Any public way set aside for common travel.
Street ~ine. The right-of-way line of a street .
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed
location on the ground, or attached to something having
a fixed location on the ground. Among other things,
structures include buildings, manufactured homes, walls,
fences, billboards, and poster panels.
This Ordinance . The Roanoke Zoning Ordinance
•rotal Floor Area. The area of all floors of a building,
including finished attics and basements when considered as a
story under the terms of this ordinance.
•rown House. An attached or semi-detached, sing le f ami 1 y
dwelling within a building of eight or less units.
Trav,c .l Trailer . Any vehicle or similar portable structure
mounted on wheels, designed and intended primarily for shortterm
occupancy, for dwelling or sleeping, or other purposes.
The term does not inc lude manufactured homes as defined
herein.
Use. The purpose for which land or a building or other
structure is designed , arranged, o r i ntended or for which it
is or may be occupied or maintained.
10
' Variance. A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance
where such variance will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the
property and not the result of the actions of the applicant,
a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship. ,
Yard. A required open space other than a court unoccupied
and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure
from thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the
graded lot upward, provided, however, that fences, walls,
poles, posts, and other customary yard. accessories,
ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard sub ject
to height limitations and require~ents limiting obstruction
of visibility. The yard shall be measured as the shortest
distance between the structure and a lot line.
Yard, Front. A yard extending between side lot lines across
the front of a lot adjoining a public street.
In any required front yard, no fence or wal l shall be
permitted which materially impedes vis ion across such
yard above the height of thirty (30) inches, and no hedge
or other vegetation shall be permitted which materially
impedes vision across such ·yard between the heights of
thirty (30) inches and ten (10) feet .
In the case of through l ots , unless the prevailing front
yard pattern on adjoining lots indicates otherwise, front
yards shall be provided on all frontages. Where one of
the front yards that would normally be required on a
through lot is not in keeping with the preva iling yard
pattern, the administrative official may waive the
requirement for the normal front yard and substitute
therefore a ·special yard requirement whi c h shall not
exceed t he average of the yards provided on adjacent
lots.
In the case of corner lols which do not have reversed
frontage, a front yard of the r equired depth shall be
provided in accordance wit h the prevailing yard pattern
and a second front yard of half t he depth required
generally for front yards in the district shal l be
provided on the other frontage.
In t he case of reversed frontage corner lots, a front
yard of the required depth shall be provided on either
frontage and a second front yard of ha 1 f the de pth
required generally fo r front yards in the district shall
be provided on the other frontage.
11
In the case of corner lots with more than two ( 2)
frontages, the administrative official shall determine
the front yard requirements, subject to the following
limitations:
a. At least one (1) front yard sh~ll be provided
having the full depth required generally in the
district;
b. No other front yard on such lot shall have less
than half the full depth required generally.
Depth of required front yards shall be measured at right
angles to a straight line joining the foremost points of
the side lot lines . The foremost point of the side lot
line, in the case of rounded property corners at street
intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at which
the side and front lot lines would have met without such
rounding.
Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the rear of the lot
between inner side yard lines. In the case of through lots
and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front
and s.i.de yards.
Yard, S.ide. A yard extending from the rear line of the
required front yard to the rear lot line, or in the absence
of any clearly defined rear lot line t o the point on
the lot line to the point on the lot farthest from the
intersection of the lot line involved with the public street.
In the case of the through lots, side yards shall extend from
the rear lines of front yards required. In the case of corner
lots, yards remaining after full-and-half-depth front yards
have been established shall be considered side yards.
Yard, Width. The width of a required side yard shall be
measured in such a manner that the yard established is a
str.ip of the minimum width required by district regulations
with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line.
Yard, Special. A yard behind any required yard adjacent to
a public street, required to perform the s ame functions as a
side or rear yard, but adjacent t o a l ot line so placed or
oriented that neither the term "side yard" nor the term
"rear yard" clearly applies. In SL!Ch cases, the
administrative offic ia l shall require a yard with minimum
dimensions as generally required for a side yard or a rear
yard in the district, determining which shall apply by the
relation of the portion of the lot on which the yard is to be
12
located to the adjoining lot or lots, with due regard to the
orientation and location of structures and areas suitable for
building thereon.
Zoning Map. The "Roanoke Zoning Map . "
sections 12-14. Reserved.
13
ARTICLE III. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
section 15. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of thi ~ ordinance shall govern the location and use
of buildings, structures, and land within the incor.porat~d areas of
Roanoke, Alabama.
Section 16. Uses.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or parcel of land shall
hereaf ter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall
be erected, moved, or altered except for a use permitted within the
zonin<J distric t in whi c h it is located ..
Section 17. Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
/\ny use or structure existing at the time of enactment or of
subsequent ame ndment to this ordinance, but not in conformity with
its provisions , may ~e continued with the following limitations:
(a) If any changes in ownership or tenancy occurs , any
nonconformity may be continued by the new owner or tenant under the
provisions of this division.
(b) A nonconformity may continue if it does not cease for any
reason for a period exceeding one (1) year.
---· ... -·- ···------
(1.:) Pl.:ins for. nonconforming construction, site development , site
alteration, use or occupancy for which a valid bu ilding permit,
si.tc· plan, pr.elim.i.nary subdivision plat , or other City license was
appc o ve~d prior to the ef (ective date of this ordina nce or
subsequent amendment may proceed. However, all construction , site
development, or site alteration must be completed within one year
and use or occupancy must be establi'shed within JO days after the
effective completion date .
(d) A lot that was legally platted prior to the effective date of
this ordinance that does not meet the lot area, width, or
dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located my
be developed or used i n conformity with all other provisions of
Lhis ocdinancc.
(e) l\ny use in exi s tence prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or made no nconformity by subsequent amendment may
contint1e in nonconformity with the off-street parking and loading
s Li:1ndards, ·screening or buff er yard standards or any supplemental
s tandards, as set fort h in Article III, so long as the extent of
such nonconformity does not increase or expand.
15
(f) A nonconforming use may occupy any part of a structure or lot
that was arranged or designed f or such use unless occupancy of that
part of the structure or lot has been discontinued for a period
exceeding one (1) year.
Repairs und mainte nance of nonconformit.ies are" subject to the
following requirements:
(a) On any structure, devoted entirely or partly to a nonconforming
use, work may be done on or di nary maintenance or repair and
replacement of walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided the
cubic content of the structure, as it existed at t he effective date
of this ordinance or subsequent amendment, shall not be increased.
(b) On any lot devoted entirely or in part to any nonconforming
use, work may be done on ord i nilry maintenance or repair and
replacement of parking and loading areas, signs, lighting, fences,
wa.lls, and related e xterior amen.iti.es provided t he extent of those
amenities shall not be increas~d or rearranged.
(c) Nothing in this division shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring too a safe condition of any structure or
exlerior amenity declared unsafe by any officia l charged with
protecting the public safety, on order of such offic i al, nor shall
anything in this division be deemed to exempt any s uch structure or
amenity from any requirements of any federaJ., state , or local
government regulation.
Alteration, enlargement, or restoration of no ncon fo r mi ties are
subject to the following requirements:
(a) No nonconforming use shall be enlarged wil hin a structure or
occupy a greater area of land than at the effective date of this
ordinance or s ubseque nt amendment.
(b) No nonconforming use or slructure shall be moved to any por tion
of the l o t o ther than that occupi ed at the effec tive date o f this
ordinance or subsequent ame ndment.
(c) No nonconforming use , structure or c ha raclerjsti c of use may be
a ltered or en larged or intensiflert in any way which increases its
non con ( or rn i l y bu t ma y a l t. c r c d o r. n~ cl u c e ti t o decrease i ts
no nconformity .
( d) If a nonconforming s true lure is removed or damaged in any
munner to the extent that the restor ation costs exceeds fifty
percent of the original value of the struc tu re immediately before
the damaging occurrence, subsequent use of the lot shall be in full
cumpl.iunce with the district in wh.ich it is located.
1 G
Change in nonconforming use is
requirements:
subject to the following
(a) Any nonconforming use which changes to a permitted use within
the district in which it is located, shall not revert to a
nonconforming use.
( b) A no neon forming use may change to a new no neon farming use
provide the new use is more in keeping with the district in which
Lt is located and is less objectionable and measures less ~xternal
impact than the existing nonconforming use. In determining whether
the new use would be in greater conformity with this ordinance,
impact criteria such as, but not limited to, the following shall be
evaluated:
( 1) Traffic generation and congestion, including truck, passenger
car, and pedestrian traffic.
(2) Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare,
or vibration.
Sec·tion 17. Height and bensity.
(a) In each district, each structure hereafter erected or altered
shall not exceed the heights specified in this ordinance. Height
lJmitations shall not apply to church steeples, barns, silos, farm
structures, chimneys, flag poles, public utility poles, radio and
television towers and aerials, cooling towers, water tanks and
similar struclures not intended for human occupancy.
(b) Each building and lot shall not be used or occupied hereafter
by more families than permitted in the zoning district in which it
is located.
Section 18. Building Lots, Yards, and Open Space.
(a) In each district, each structure hereafter erected or altered,
shall be provided with the yards specified and shall be a lot of
the area and width specified in the ordinance . No open space or lot
required for a building or structure shall, during its life, be
occupied by or counted as open space for another building or
structure. Except as hereafter provided, no yard or other open
spa.ce provided, nor the off-street parking and loading spaces
required, about any building for the purpose of complying with the
regulations of this ordinance shall hereafter be included as a part
of a yard or other open space ,or the off-street parking or loading
spaces for any other building.
17
(b) Exceptions Lo the dislrict requirements for building lots and
yord fo.Llow:
(1) Where the owner of property at the time of
adoption of this ordinance has a lot or iots of
official record, which are substandard t~ the
requirements of the district in which located according
to this ordinance, the building and its accessory
structures may be built provided the yard space and
other requirements conform as closely as possible, in
the opinion of Lhe Board of Adjustment to the
requirements of the district in which it is located; as
provided, further that neither side yard shall be
reduced Lo less than five ( 5) feet.
( 2) No building shall be required to set back more
than the average of the setbacks of the existing
residences within 100 feet each site thereof, but in no
case shall the setback of any building hereafter
erected.or altered be less than 20 feet.
Section 19. Yards in Group Developments.
More than one dwelling, institutional, commercial, or industrial
building may be located upon a lot in a zoning district where such
a use would be permitted, but no such building shall encroach upon
L he f rent, side, or rear yards required for any other building
site . For dwellings , the open space between buildings shall not be
less than 20 feet fot one story buildings, JO feet when either
building is a two story building, 40 feet when either building is
a three story building and 40 feet plus · an additional 10 feet for
each story over three stories when eilher building is over three
stories in height. The minimum dimensi on of the yard upon which any
entrance or exit of a dwelling faces shall be 20 feet; such space
sha.l.l not be c ou nted a s a yard for any other building.
Section 20. Structures.
It is the intent of th.is ordinance thaL there shc;ill be but one main
s t r u c tu re pl u s a n y perm i t. u~ d access<> r-y s t. n1 c Lu r: es .
Section 21. Development Plan for Industrial Use.
In al.l proposed new industrial stru c tures , a plan of s uch proposed
development shall show all the details as required in the
T n du s t r i a l Di s t .r i c t reg u l a L ions a n d b E? subj e c t to t he a ppr ova l o f'
the Plannin9 Commission pr.ior. t o the iss uance of a building p e rmit.-
18
Section 22. Reduction in Lot Area .
Unless otherwise provided, no lot shall be reduced in area so that
yards and other open spaces total less than the minimum area
required under this ordinance.
Section 23. Future Street Lines. "
On any lot which, at the time of adoption of this ordinance or at
any time this ordinance is changed by amendment hereafter, may be
reduced in area by widening a public street to a future street line
as reserved under the mapped street provisions of Title 35, Chapte~
2, Article J, Sections 50-62, inclusive, Code of Alabama 1975 (and
as amended), the minimum required yards, . the minimum required lot
area, the minimum required lot width and the maximum building area
shall be measured by considering the future street lines as the l ot
lines of such lots.
Section 24. Frontage on Corner Lots and Double Frontage Lots.
On lots having frontage on more than one street, the minimum front
yard shall be provided for each street i n accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance.
Section 25. Access to Streets.
No building for human occupancy shall be erected without
unrestricted vehicular access to a public street.
Section 26. Accessory Structures .
/\cccssor:y structures in residential districts or any lot used
primarily for residential purposes, shall conform to the following
rcqulations:
( 1) No accessory structure shall be in any required
front yard with the exception of satellite dish antenna.
Accessory structures shall not exceed the height of the
principal structure, and shall not cover more than 30
percent of any required rear yard and shall be at least
five feet from all lot lines and ten feet from any other
structures on the same lot .
(2) On any lot adjoining along its side lot line
another lot which is in a residential district, no part
of any accessory building shall be located closer to the
front yard than the primary structure.
19
Section 27. Fences, Walls and Shrubbery.
{a) fences or walls may be erected, placerl, or maintained along a
lot line to a height not exceeding eight fe e t above the ground .
{b) No fence , wall, tree or shrubbery shall exceed' a height capable
of obstructing driver vision at i ntersection, streets or railroads.
Section 28.
Buildings.
Attachment of Accessory Buildings to Principal
When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by
a breezeway, passageway, or similar means, it shall comply with the
yard requirements of the principal buildi ng to which it is
attached.
Section 29. Distance Between Buildings .
Except as herein provided, no accessory buiJding shall be located
closer than ten feet to a principal buj J di ng or to any other
accessory build~ng.
Section JO. Required Off-Street Parking.
l\ll uses shall conform with the minimum off-street parking space
noted below. In situati.ons where the parking space requirements are
not readily determinable by the below requirements, lhe Zoning
/\dminislrator is authorized to determine minimum requirements using
the below requirements as a gu i.de. Space per employee shall be
determined usj.ng the major shift.
dwellings
boarding and rooming houses
public facilities
church, movie theater , auditorium, or
othei:- p11l>.lic assembJy center
<.lily c c:ire c enter
hospitCll o r nursing home
s c hool, elArnentary or middle
20
Required Spaces
2 per dwelling unit
per bedroom
per JOO square feet
of f l oor area
1 per J persons at
occupancy load
l per employee plus
nrea sufficient for
drop- off and pick-up
o f children
l per two beds plus l
per employee
I per 1.5 employees
schoo J., high school 1 per l. 5 employees
plus 1 per student
sc hoo l, co .1 l ege or commerc ia 1 l per 3 students at
occupanc y load, plus
1 per 1.5 emp loy~ e s
hardware or appliance store 1 per 500 s q . feet
furniture store, home improvement s t o r e l per 1,000 s q . feet
office or bank 1 per 250 sq. feet of
l easable floor area
hotel or mote l l per 1.5 emp loyees
plus 1 per room
general retail business
establi s hmen t
or service 1 per 200 sq . feet o f
leasable f loor area
barber or beauty shop
conveni e nce store
repair service business, warehousing,
distributln<J, or manufacturing
outdoor r ecrea ti on
restaura nt
21
1 per 100 s q. feet o f
leasable floor area
1 per 150 sq. feet o f
leasable fl oor area
1 p e r 1 .5 emp loyees,
plus l per company
ve hicl e
1 per 3 persons at
occupancy l oad
1 per 100 sq. feet of
leasable fl oor area
plus 1 per delivery
ve hicle plus 4
s tac king spaces per
drive - in window
ARTICLE IV. ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
Section 45. Zoning Districts.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Roanoke is hereby
divided into the type of districts designated as follows:
Ag
R-1
R.:._2
H-Mll
n-1
B-2
HC
Ind
Agricultural
Single Family Residential
Multiple and Single Family Residential
Residential-Manufactured Home
General Business
Downtown Commercial
Highway Commercial
Industrial
Special Purpose District
FH Flood Hazard District
Section 46. District Boundaries.
The boundaries of the various zoning districts are hereby
established as shown on the Zoning Map. The Zoning Map and all
explanatory matter thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of
this ordinance. The official copies of the Zoning Map shall be on
file in the office of the City Clerk.
Section 47. Interpretation of District Boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown
on said maps, the following rules shall apply:
(!)Where boundaries are indicated as approximately
following street and alley lines, land lot lines, such
lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
(2) In unsubdivided property or tracts, where a
district boundary divides a lot, the location of such
boundaries, unless same are indicated by dimensions,
shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on
such maps.
(J) Where a public road, street or alley is officially
vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the
property to which it is reverted s ha 11 apply to such
vacated or abandoned road, street or alley.
23
( 4) Where boundaries are so indi.ca ted that they are
approximate~y parallel to the center lines of street
lines of streets or to the center lines or alley lines
of alleys or the center lines of right- of-way lines of
highways, such boundaries shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and of such distarfce therefrom as
indicuted on the Zoni.ny Map. If no djstance is given,
such dimension shall be determined by the use of the
scale shown on said milp.
(5) In case any further un<.;:ertainty exists, the Board
of Adjustment shall determine the location of
boundaries. The Board of Adjustment may also cause to
be prepared sectional ~aps of any part of the city
which will interpret the exact location of the district
boundaries following the guidelines contained in the
preceding paragraphs.
Sections 48-49. Reserved.
24
DIVISION 2. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
Section 50. Ag - Agricultural Distri c t.
(a) District Intent. The provisions of this district are
intended to protect and to preserve the agricultuial lands
within the City Limits of Roanoke and to promote the most
appropriate use of land and buildings in accordance with
Lhe Land Use Plan.
( b) Permitted uses. 'I'he fol lowing id e n ti (i es the uses
permi-Cted . i. n·····/\g -~--Agr icul tural Dis tr ic t.
General farmi ng including: horticulture, dairying,
apiaries, li ves tock and poultry rais"ing, fish hatcheries,
and other similar enterprises or uses.
Single-family dwellings,./.
Manufactured tiomes ,~d only
occupying individual lots.
for residential purposes,
Sal e of products and commodities raised on the premises
o nly, provided that any structure used for such sales
shall not be closer than 30 fe e t to the front o r side
property lines.
Greenhouses.
Temporary or portable sawmills for the cutting of timber
on the surrounding land, provided that machine operations
are not located closer than 200 feet to any property
l .i.ne.
Public or private s chools , including pre-schools, day
nurseries, and kindergartens.
Public and Semi-public uses .
Public utility structures.
H.iding slables and academies, provided that any
structure, pen or corral housing animals (but not
including grazing areas) shall not be c l oser than 100
feet to any property l ine.
Vl?.terinary cl ini cs , commerci a l kenne ls and t he raising of
other s ma .11 an imals for sale, provided that no portion of
a bu.i.ld.i.nci, structure , outdoor r.un or pens used t o house
or exercise s uch animals shall not be located closer than
100 feet Lo any property li ne.
25
Public or private golf course.
Public or private fishing c lubs, gun clubs,
similar recreational enterprises provided
activities are located at least 200 feet
property line. ,
and other
that all
from any
Auditoriums, athletic fields, stadiums, race tracks and
speedways and other recreational enterprises provided
Lhat all activities are located at least 200 feet from
any property line.
Home occupations, subject to § 11, Term defined, Home
occupation.
Cemeteries.
Broadcasting stations.
Aircraft landing fields, hangers, and related structures.
Open air markets
(c) Space and Height Regulations.
Minimum Yard Size:
Front Yard: 40 ft.
Rear Yard: 45 ft.
Side Yard: 15 ft.
Width: 200 ft.
Maximum Height:
Minimum Lot Size: 1 acre

Sections 51 - 54. Reserved.
40 feet
45 feet

l acre
210 feet
26



DIVISION 3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section 55. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
(a) District intent. The R-1 Single Family Residential
District is designed for single family homes o~ single
lots. The R- 1 district also allows for accessory and
institutional uses commonly associated wilh residential
neighborhoods.
(b) Permitted uses. The following identifies the uses
permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
Single-family dwellings, excluding manufacturing homes.
Home occupations , subject to § 11, Term defined, Home
occupation.
Public utility structures and lands provided that there
is no outside storage area and a buffer strip is provided
for the sitje and rear yards.
Accessory structures and uses.
(c) Uses subject to Planning Commission approval. These uses
are permitted in the R-1 Single family Residential District
upon the approval of the Planning Commission. The intended
use for the structure shall be stated in writing and be
submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Commission.
Schools, public or private.
Cemeteries.
Private or public golf courses, country clubs, swim
clubs, tennis c lubs, and the like.
Public or privat~ child cnre centers, day nurseries and
kindergartens.
Public parks,
similar public
areas.
playgrounds, community buildings, and
service (uciliti.es serving residential
Semi-Public uses.
27
(d) Space and Height regulations.
Minimum Yard Size:
front Yard: 40 feet
Side Yard: 15 feet
Rear Yad: 45 feet
Minimum Lot Size: 
Area: 15,000 sq. ft.
Width: 100 feet

Maximum Height:
Feet: 35 feet
stories: 2 1/2 stories
28
,.,
with _public sewer
12' 50·0 sq. feet
100 feet
Section 57. R-2 Residential District.
(a) District intent. The R-2 Multiple-Single Family
Residential District is designed for multi-family
dwellings, c1S well as single family homes. The district
ulso allows institutionul und accessory uses commqil to
residential neighborhoods.
(b) Permitted
permitted in
District.
uses .
t)le R-2
The following identifies the uses
Multiple-Single Family Residential
Single-family dwellings, excluding manufacturing homes.
Multi-family dwellings.
Town Houses.
' Boarding and Rooming Houses.
Home occupations, subject to § 11, Term defined, Home
occupation.
Public utility structures and lands provided that there
is no outside storage area and a buffer strip is provided
for the side and rear yards .
Accessory structures and uses.
(c) Uses subject to Planning Commission approval. These uses
are permitted in the R- 2 Multiple- Single family Residential
D.i.strict upon the approval of the Planning Commission. The
.Lntended use (or the structure shall be sluted in. writing and
be submitted to the Secretury of the Planning Commission.
Schools, public or private.
Cemeteries.
Private or public golf courses, country clubs , swim
clubs, tennis clubs, and the like.
Public or private child care centers, day nurseries and
kindergartens.
Adult day care centers.
Public p<irks,
similar public
areas.
playgrounds, community buildings, and
service facilities serving residential
Semi-Public uses.
29
(d) Space and Height Regulations.
Minimum Yard Size:
Front Yard: 35 feet
Side Yard: 10 feet
Rear Yard: 40 feet
Minimum Lot Size:
Single Family Dwelling:
Area: 15,000 sq. ft.
Width: 100 feet
without public sewer


Multi-Family Dwelling:
with public sewer
12,500 sq. ft.
100 feet
Area: 3,600 square feet for each unit 
Width: 100 feet
'l'own House:
Area: Average 3,600 square feet for each
dwellings within a development, but in no
case less than 2,500 square feet per unit.
Width: 20 feet for interior lots ; 50 feet for
end lots.
Other Uses: Same ns for R-1 Single Family Residential
Maximum He ight:
f eet : 35
Stories: 2 1/2 stories
JO
Section 58. R-MH Residential Manufactured Home Zoning District.
(a) District intent. This District is designated to provide
affordable home ownership options within the City. This
district is suitable for manufactured homes on si~gle lots or
in manufactured home parks. '
( b) Fermi t ted uses. The following identifies the uses
permitted in the R-MH District.
Single-family dwellings.
Horne occupations, subject to § 11, Term defined, Home
occupation.
Public utility structures and lands provided that there
is no outside storage area and a buffer strip is provided
for the side and rear yards.
Accessory structures and uses.
Manufactured home on a single lot.
Manufactured homes in manufactured home parks.
( c) Uses subject to{! lanning Commission approva 1. These uses
are permitted in the R-MH Residential Manufactured Home
District upon the approval of the Planning Commission. The
intended use for the structure shall be stated in writing and
be submitled to the Secretary of the Planning Commission.
Schools, public or private:
Cemeteries.
Private or public golf courses, country clubs, swim
clubs, tennis clubs, and the like.
Public or private pre-schools,
kindergartens.
Adult Day Care Centers.
day nurseries and
Public parks,
similar public
areas .
playgrounds, community buildings, and
service facilities serving residential
Semi-Public uses.
Jl
(d) Space and Density Regulations for Single Family
Dwellings, Manufactured Homes on Single Lots, and uses other
t han Manufactured Home Park.
Minimum Lot Size: 10,000 sq. feet.
Minimum Yard Size:
15 feet.
Front, 25 feet; rear, 20 feet; side,
Maximum Height Requirement: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(e) Uses Permitted in a Manufactured Home Park.
Manufactured homes.
Park office.
Manager's residence:
Service facilities, such as laundromats, refuse
disposa l areas, and similar service facilities for use by
the park's residents only.
Recreational facilities for the use of the park's
residents.
Residential accessory uses and structures.
( f) Space and Density Regulations for .M.~.!lμf.9C.ture.p_ __ !:!.~
Parks.
The park shall be on a minimum of _UY.~ .. (.5) . c.onti. 9_~o~~-a~~
es __ and shall be properly graded to insure rapid
arainage and freedom from standing water.
The park's maximum density shall be eigh.t (8)
manufactu~ed home spaces per acre of site area. If not
served by public water · and sewer, the maximum density
shall be two (2) manufactured home spaces per gross acre
of land or u lower density may be set by the county
health officer.
The manufactured home park shall have perimeter yards . No
manufactured home space shall extend into any of the
perimeter yards, as listed below. The perimeter yards
shall be reserved as buffer strips, or they can be used
for common streets, walkways, and open recreation areas
(fields and yards without buildings) . Front perimeter
yard, 25 feet; side and rear perimeter yard, 15 feet.
(g) Space and Density Regulations for Manufactured Home
Spaces Within Manufactuced llome Parks.
J2
Minimum
Minimum
/\rea Requirements: Each manufactured home space shall
meet the following requirements, and the boundaries of
each space shall be clearly marked on the ground by
permanent flush stakes .
/\rea:
Width
Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
Minimum rear yard selback: 10 feet.
Minimum side yard setback : 5 feet.
with publ..ic sewer without
4,000 squ an~ [ ~? l) t 15,000
at
.~
publ.ic sewer
s_quare feet
front Set.back Line: 40 feet 05 feet
(h) General Requirements for Manufactured Home Parks.
Each manufactured home shall be installed according to
all requirements of the Standard Building Code and be
completely skirted with a weather resistant material.
Skirting shall be properly ventilated. I\ minimum of 240
cubic feet of storage space shall be provided on each
space. The space may be under the manufactured home or
in an accessory building. The accessory buildings may
not be placed in the required front yard or within five
(5) feet of the side or rear. yard boundaries.
Euell 111anu(ucL11red ho11w spac:c.! shall huve Lwo side-·by-side
of[-s\.reet, dust-free par.ki.ng spuces located off the
private st.reel right-of-way. Parking spa~es shall either
b n pc r p e ml .i cu .1 a r Lo L he p r i vu t e s Lr e e L w i th m i n i mum
clinH~ns ions of 9 feel. by 19 feet or parallel t o the
private street with minimum dimensions of 8 feet by 22
feet.
Two ·-way private streets shal l be maintained by the park
mana9e111e11t to furnish convenient access to all
manufactun~d homes .in the par.k . No manufactured home
space s hall have direct access to a public street.
Streets shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet
pavement width.
Sections 59-64. Reserved.
JJ
DIVISION 4. BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Section 65. B-1 General Business District.
(a) District intent. The B-1 General Business District is
designed for general commercial activity. '
{b) Permitted uses. The uses permitted in this district shall
be as fo ll ows :
Retail stores inc luding, but not limited to the followi ng
type stores: food, home improvement, general merchandise,
auto parts, medical suppties, office equipment, apparel,
furniture, radio, television, hardware, drugs and
sundries, jewelry and gifts, florist, sporting goods, pet
shops, dry c leaners and laundries, barber and beauty
s hops, shoe repair, and such uses.
Doctor, dentist, professional, or administrative offices.
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics .
Motels, hotels, restaurants.
Public and semi-public uses.
Child care centers, public and
kindergartens and nursery s c hools
/\dull day car.e centers .
Garden cen Le rs am.I m11:ser i es, ce ta i J .
private schools,
ll ospital, medica l clinics and nursing homes .
/\mbulance services .
Funeral Homes.
(c) Uses Subject to Planning Commission /\pproval. Other uses
may be allowed upon review by the Planning Commission .
(d) Space and Height Regulati ons .
It is the intent of t he ordinance that lots of sufficient
size be us ed for any bu si ness or service use, to provide
adequate parking and loading space in addition t o the
s pace required for the other norma l operations o f the
business or service .
J4
Minimum Yard Size: Frnnt, 25 feet; rear, 20 feet; side,
not specified except when there is a side yard us ed, it
shall not be less than e ight (8) feet and except on a lot
abutting a residential district, there shall be a s ide
yard not less t han fifLeen (15) feet wide.
.;
(e) Buf Eer screening shall be provided in accordance with§
11, 'l'erm Defi.nc~d, .!J~..U:er'. 51~.r~_g_1.J.inq .i.f adjoining property is
zoned for n~s.i. d<2n l.iul. ·
Max.i.11111111 llE-~ .i <Jill : 45 feel - J slories .
Section 66. B-2 Downtown Commercial District.
(a) District intent. This district encompasses the downtown
district along Alabama Highway 22. This District is designed
to enhance the architecturally and histor ically unique
character of the downtown retail core. ,
{b) Permitted uses . The uses permilted in this dist rict are
as follows:
Retail stores and markets, including the following type
stores: general merchandise, apparel, furniture , radio,
television, hardware, drugs and sundries, jewelry and
gifts, florist, sporting goods , pet shops , and such uses.
Neighborhood services including the fo llo~ing
barber and beauty shops, shoe repair, offices,
post offices, theaters, and such uses.
Open air ·markets.
Doctor, dentist, or other professional office .
Adult day care centers.
Churches and other places of worship .
Hestaurunts.
1-lolels.
Public and semi-public uses .
Wacehouses.
types:
banks,
Apartments developed above permitted non-residential use
on the ground story of a building.
(c) Space and Height Regulations . Because of the uniqueness
of the structures in the Downtown Commercial District, uses
must follow these requirements.
Minimum Yard S i ze: none required, unless otherwise
sti pulated by Lhe Planning Commission in the design review
process.
Moximum lleight: Sixty-five (65) feet, unless a l esser
height is stipulated by the Planning Commission in the
design r eview process.
O(f-Street Parking : None requ ired unless stipulated by the
Planning Commission in the design review process.
36
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Of.f-Street Loading and Unloading: None req11 .ir.ed unless
stipulated by Planning Commission in the design review
process. i
/\.l l usP-s shall be conducted w.i thin an· nnclosed building,
except for temporary o utdoor. clispl<lY of sa.les merchandise,
special outdoor events, open air m~rkels, 01· simil~r
approved outdoor activities.
(d) Design Review. Where thon? is a substr1ntial alteration
of iln existing structure or· the dev(~.lopment of a ne\·1
s true tu re, building facade and site development p la ns for
0ach alteration or development shall. be subrnittecJ to thP.
P.lanning Commission for action prior to the bu.ild.ing pernli. t
being issued. The Planning Commission shall act to approve,
approve with conditions, o r disapprove LhA submitted plans
based on it assessment of the plan's contribution to the
design integrity of the downtown area.
(e) Buffer screening shall be provided in CH.:corda nce wi.th ~
Ll, Term Defined, Buffer screening if adjoining property is
zoned for residential..
J7
Section 67. HC Highway Commercial
,
(a) District intent. This district is
accommodate a variety of general commercial
prlmarily to major traffic arteries.
designed to
uses oriented
(b) Permitted uses. The uses permitted in this district are
as follows:
Rotail stores incJuding, b~t not limited to the following
type stores: food, home improvement, general mere hand ise,
auto parts, medical supplies, office equipment, apparel,
furniture, radio, television, hardware, drugs and sundries,
jewelry and gifts, florist, sporting goods, and pet shops.
Retail services and entertainment, enclosed, including, but
not limite9 to t.he following types: dry cleaners and
laundries, barber and beauty shops, shoe repair, banks,
indoor theaters, bowling alleys, video game centers, video
tape rentals, photo studios, miniature golf courses, and
roller skating rinks.
Multi-family dw~llings.
Town llouses.
Restaurants, inclucling drive- in esLabJ.ishmPnt.s.
ShoppJ.ng centers and malls .
0 a n ks , f i nan c i a l .i n st i tu t i on s , bus i n t! ~ s <1 n d pro [es s i on a l
off ices.
Churches and other places of worsh.i.p, including educational
buildings related thereto.
Pu bl .i c or pr i vu te pre- schools , k .i nc.ler.cy.u:-te ns, and day ca re
cent:ers.
Mot.els, hotels, an<I restc:n1rants.
Animals hospitals nnd veterinary clinics.
llospitals, · c1J.nics, and nursing homes.
Ambulance services.
Clubs, lodges, social, and fraternal organizations .
Service and repair es tabl .ishments, .incl11dinrJ auto and truck
t·epair garages.
JO
Sales of new and used vehicles, construction equipment,
manufactured homes, boats, campers, tractors, farm
implements, and the like, including accessory uses.
Vehicle repair garages, including painting, body rep~ir, part
fabrication, and engine rebuilding.
Car washes.
Gasoline service stations.
Warehouses.
Public and semi-public uses.
Outside storage of heavy equipment with the approval of the
Planning Commission.
Other uses which upon review by the Planning Commission are
determined to be compatible with the general intent of the
Highway Commercial Zone.
(c) Space and Height Regulations.
The following dimensional standards shall be required in the
llC- Highway Commercial District:
Minimum lot area : none
Minimum lot width: 100 feet
Minimum front yard: 45 feet
Minimum side yard: 10 feet
Minimum rear yard: 20 feet
Maximum Height: 35 feet or two stories
Multi - family residential uses shall follow the same space and
height regulations as commercial uses.
(d) Buffer screening shall be provided in accordance with § 11,
Term Defined, Buffer screening if adjoining property is zoned
for residential .
Sections 60-74. Reserved.
39
DIVISION 5. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Section 75. Ind General Industry.
" (a) District intent. The Ind General Industry Dis trict is
intended for i ndus trial development, but prov ides for
Planning Commission review of certain heavy industrial uses.
(b) Permitted uses. The uses permitted in the Ind district
shall be industrial operations not obnoxious, offensive, or
detrimental to neighboring property by reason of dust, smoke,
vibrations, noise, odor, or· effluence, and including the
following types of industry:
General manufacturing, not involving flammable or
hazardous materials .
Researc~ or scientific labo ratories.
Gasoline service stations .
Public uses.
Vehicle repair garages.
Car washes.
Nu rser.i es.
Office s .
Ware h o using, wholesaling and distribution, e nclosed.
Construction and maintenance services, such as building
contractors, wholesale building supplies, janit orial
services , e'x term.ina ting services, la ndscape servi ces , and the
.l..i ke.
Repair and maintenance of heavy trucks, construction
equipment, farm impleme nts, or painting, body repair,
upholste ry r epair, parts fabrication, and engine
rebuilding.
(c) Uses s ubj ect to the Planning Commiss i on approval . These
uses are permitted in the Ind General Industry District upon
the approval of the Planning Commissi on. The intended use
must be submitted', in writing, to the Secretary of the
Planning Commis s ion.
Wholesaling and distribution, open.
40
Military installations, such as reserve or national
guard centers or armories.
Sanitary landfills .
Junk yards.
Open air markets.
Off-premises advertising signs and billboards.
Quarries , borrow pits, sand . and gravel operations,
gas extraction, and mining.
Residences for watchman, custodian , manager, or
business owner.
Meat or poultry processing and slaught~r houses .
Storage or manufacturing involving flammable or
explosive materials or involving potentially hazardous
or commonly-recognized offensive conditions.
(d) Space and Height Regulations.
Minimum Lot Size: It is the intent of the Ordinance that
lots of sufficient size be used for any industrial, use to
provide adequate parking and loading space in addition to the
space required for the other normal operations of the
enterprise .
Minimum Yard Size:
Front Yard : None specified, except where existing
establishments (other than residential) are
set back; any new structures shall be set back
not less than the a~erage of the set - backs of
the existing establishments within one hundred
(100) feet each side thereof.
Side Yard: None specified, excepting a lot adjoining its
side lot line with another lot, which is in a
residential district, there shall be a side
yard not less than eight (8) feet wide.
Rear Yard : None specified, unless the lot abuts a
residential district, in which case twenty-five
(25) feet is required.
Maximum Height: 50 feet, 4 stories.
41
(e) Buffer screening shall be provided in accordance with §
11, Term Define~, Buffer screening if adjoining property
is zoned for residential.
Sections 76-79. Reserved.
42
DIVISION 6. SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT
Section 80. FH Flood Hazard District
(a) District intent . The FH Flood Hazard Distri~t is
intended to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions.
(b) Overlay district concept. The provisi o ns of this
district shall be overlay provisions to the existing
underlying zoning districts. All properties within the
district shall be designated by an overlay district called
FH-Flood Hazard District. As overlay provisions, the
requirements of this district shall serve as a supplement t o
the underlying zoning district provisions. Where there
happens to be any conflict between the provisions of this
overlay district and the provisions of the underlying
district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
Section 81. Compliance with Flood Hazard District Regulations.
No l.:ind shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be
l oc.:ited, relocated, constructed, enlarged, converted, or
structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms of
this district or other applicable regulations.
Section 82. Flood Hazard District boundaries.
(l) All properties included within the 100-year floodplain
boundary on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps published by the Federa l
Emergency Management Agency, effective date July 5, 1982, or as
later amended, shall be inc . luded within the FH Flood Hazard
District boundaries.
( 2) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the Flood Hazard District or any floodplain areas
within the district( for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field condit ions ) ,
t:he Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of the district,
an administrative appeal may be filed with the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
Section 83. Required Permits and Certifications.
(1) Building Permit Required. 1 Application for a building permit
shall be submitted prior to any development activities within the
Flood Hazard District and shall include the following information
wh i ch shall be maintained as public record by the zoning
Administrator:
43
{a) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (including basement) of new or substantially improved
structures , prepared by a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer. ~
( b) Eleva ti on in relation to mean sea level to which any
structure will be flood-proofed, prepared by a registered
land surveyor or professional engineer.
intended to be flood-proofed below
certi f ica ti on from a professional
that the structural design,
for construction will meet the
this district and the additional
(c) Where a structure is
the base flood level, a
engineer or architect
specifications, and plans
flood-proofing criteria of
provisions of the Standard Building Code.
(d) Description, prepared by a professional engineer, of t he
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated
as a result of proposed development.
(2) Certificate of occupancy. Before the issuance of a
cer tificale of occupancy , during the construction stage o f the
development, the permit holder shall provide the following
certificates which shall be maintained as public record by the
Zoning Administrator:
(u) '!'Ile as-built e l evation of the lowest floor, floodproofed
e l evatio n, or the elevation of the l owest portion of
Lhe horizontal structural members of the lowest f l oor ,
whichever is applicable, certified by a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer .
(b) Evide nce of flood-proofing of a building, where
required, certified by a professional engineer or architect.
(3) Whe re additional federal or state permit requirements apply,
the Zoning Administrator shall r equire that copies of such permits
be provid c~ d and maintained on file with the building permit as
public record.
Section 84. General flood hazard prevention standards.
(a) Gen~ral S tandards
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are
rcqu.irecJ:
(l) New construction a nd s ubstantial improvements shall be
a nc :hored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure;
44
( 2} Manufactured homes · shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, col lapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with
applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces;
(3} New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage;
(4) New construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage;
(5) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing , air
conditioning equipment, and other ser'v ice facilities
shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding .
(6} New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system;
( 7) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems
into flood waters;
( O) On - site waste disposal sys terns sha 11 be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding, and;
( 9) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to
a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of
this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new
construction" as contained in this ordinance .
Section 05. Permitted Uses. The following uses and activities are
permitted provided they are in compliance with the provisions of
the underlying zoning district and do not require structures, fill,
or storage of materials and equipment:
(a) l\gricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, sod
farming, crop farming, and similar uses and activities.
(b) Public and private recreational uses and activities such
as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat
45
launching area, horseback riding trails, hiking trails, game
farms, hunting and fishing areas, and similar uses and
activities.
(c) Accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens,
play areas , and loading areas, and similar accessory uses .
( d) Accessory industrial , commercial, and institutional uses
uses such as yard areas, parking and loading areas, and
similar ciccessor.y uses.
(e) Other uses and activities are permitted if upon the
review of the Planning Commission as determined to bs
compil tible with the general intent of the F load Hazard
District.
Section 86. Variances.
(1) An application for a variance to the standards of this district
may be submitted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance
with the administrative provisions of this zoning ordinance. The
Board shall refer the variance application to a professional
engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical
assistance in evaluating the proposal in relation to flood heights
und velocities and the adequacy of the plans for protection and
other related matters .
(2) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
(J) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not approve a variance
t1nless it finds the criteria variances contained within § 110.
( 4) Any applicant to whom a varianc e i s gra nted shall be given
written notice by the Zoning Administrator that the issuance to
construct a structure below the 100 year flood elevation increases
the risks of life and property and result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(5) The Zoning Administrator shall maintain the records of all
variances and administrative appeal actions .
Section 87. Liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this district is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations . Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions and flood heights may be increased by
manmade or natural causes . Consequently, Lhls d is trict does not
imply that land outside the fl oodplain o r uses per.milted within
such areas w.i.11 be free from flooding or fl.oocJ dumages . Therefo re,
46
I
I
I
'
this disLri c t shall not create liabiliLy on the part of the City of
Roanoke or by any of fleer and employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on the provisions of this
di.strict or any administrative decision lawfully made the;eunder.
Sections 88-89. Reserved
'17
ORDINANCE # 818 .
An Ordinance to amend Ordinance # 682, The Zoning Ordinance of the Ci_!y of
Roanoke, Alabama amending sections 90, 93, 94(b ), 95(b ), and 98 for establtshlng
building permit fees, enforcement compliance an_d violation penalties, approval of plans,
and issuance of certificate of occupancy.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF TIIE CITY
OF ROANOKE, ALABAMA AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 90. Enforcing Officer
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by Zoning Administrator and
enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall be an employee appointed by the
Mayor to fulfill these duties. This official shall have the right to enter upon any premises
at any reasonable time for the purpose of makllig inspections of building or premises
.. necessary in carrying out his duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
SECTION 93. (A) Schedule of Permit Fees.
The City Clerk, Revenue Officer, its Authorized Agent, or Building Official of the
City of Roanoke, Alabama is hereby authorized and directed to charge the following
sums for the issuance of a permit for all construction, on new building and/or addition to
new or existing buildings where the value of such project exceeds.two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) in value. The only exceptions/exemptions to these pennit fees will be for
repairs/remodeling to an existing dwelling including but not limited to painting, window
repair, roofing, and siding. A permit shall be issued for each job/ project performed in
construction of a new structure/and or additions to new/existing structures.
(a) A minimum of sixteen dollars ($16.00) plus a one dollar ($1.00) issuance fee shall
be paid for ·all construction activity, to include building, plumbing, electrical, ·and
mechanical work. in excess of two thousand ($2~000~00) minimum.threshold.
(b) For each building, plumbing, electrical or mechanical permit issued,. the permit
rate will be three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per one-thousand dollars
(1,000.00) where: the calculation of such permit cost meets or exceeds the
minimum ($2,000.00) fee of sixteen dollars ($16.00) as stated above.
( c) For each permit issued for new residential construction where a single permit is
issued covering all aspects of the work to be undertaken, a single comprelie:osive
permit covering all aspects .of construction (building, plunibing, electrical and
mechanical) may be issued to the general contractor. or licensed homebuilder at the
rate of three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per one thousand ($1,000.00) plu,s a one
dollar ($1.00) issuance fee.
'·
( d) For each permit issued for new nonresidential construction where a single permit
is issued covering all aspects of work to be undertaken, a single comprehensive
permit covering all aspects of construction (building, plumbing, electrical and
mechanical) may be issued to the general contractor at the rate oftbree~dollars and
fifty cents ($3.50) per one thousand ($1,000.00) plus a one dollar ($I.C1t>) issuance
fee.
SECTION 94. Approval of Plans and Building Permits.
(b) After the owner or his agent submit their request for a building permit, the City
will have five (5) business days to act upon the application.
SECTION 95. Certificate Of Occupancy Required:
(b) Within five (5) business days after the owner of his agent has notified the Zoning
Administrator that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it
shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator/and or Code Enforcement Officer to make
final inspection thereof, and to issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the bUilding or
. premises or part thereof is found to conform with the provision of this Ordinance and
other city codes or if such Certificate of Occupancy is refused, to state the refusal in
writing with the cause.
SECTION 98. Vio.lati.ons and_ ~eiialti.es . .
(a) Citation for Violations.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Roanoke shall issue a citation upon any
person failing to obtain any or all necessary permits required prior to commencement of
work or construction and as a penalty such person in violation shall as a penalty pay in
accordance with the following schedule: ·
(I) First Violation- Double permit fee
(2) Second Violation within a 24-month period- Double permit fee plus ..... $25.00
(3) Third Violation with.ill a 24-month period- Double permit fee plus ... .... $50.00
(4) Fourth Violation within a 24-month period- Double permit fee plus . .. $100.00
(5) Fifth Violation within a 24-month period- Double permit fee plus . ..... $500.00
(b) For any violations over five (5) .within a twenty-four month period, the Code
Enforcement Officer may recommend suspension or revocation of the alleged
violatbr's license to conduct business activity within the City of Roanoke .. Such
recommendation shall be made to the City Council of the City of Roanoke and
such officials shall notify the alleged violator in writing of the charges made
·.
- .. ~
-- against him and the City Council shall within ten ( 10) days of receiving the
charges against the violator, conduct a hearing upon such charges provided
however; that the person against whom such action is sought shall be given not
less, than five (5) days written notice by the City Council of the date, pl.;ice, and
time of the hearing for alleged charges. After conducting such hearing~e City
Council may refuse action against the individual's license, or may suspend or
revoke the same.
( c) At any hearing before the City Council, the individual charged shall have the right
to be present and to be represented. by counsel or other person of his choice, the right to
cross examine the witnesses, and the right to present witnesses and other evidence on his
behalf.
( d) All citations shall be signed by the Code Enforcement Officer finding such
violations and shall be served in person or sent by certified mail to the responsible
person or to ~e owner of the property on which the violation is foun~.
( e) A warning of violation•may be issued in writing, personal appearance, or
telephone by the Code Enforcement Officer finding such violations. The warning
shall give an opportunity for correction of any violations within 30 days or less
before a citation is issued.
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force 30 days after its passage.
Passed and Approved by the City Council of the City of Roanoke, Alabama this __ _
day of , 2007.
ATTEST:
Ellen Fanner, Cit)' Clerk
Henry V ... Spec" Bonner, Mayor
Council member Mack Bell
Council member Walter Sudduth
Council member Buster Robinson
Council member Tammi Holley
.. ,
Council member Richard Fetner
,,,..
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 90. Enforcing Officer. ,,
'!'he provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and en.forced
by the Zoning Administrator, who shall be an employee appointed by
Lhe Mayor to fulfill these duties. This official shall have the
~ight to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the
purpose of making inspections of building or premises necessary in
carrying o~t h~s duties iri the e nforcement of this Ordinance.
Section 91. Permit Compliance.
No building permit , certificate of occupancy , or business license,
or any other permit or license shall be issued by the City except
j n fu.L l comp liance with this orcHnance.
Section 92. Permits Declared Null and Void.
Any permit or license issued by the City where issued in conflict
with or violation of any terms of this ordinance or other
applicable codes or ordinances s hall hereby be declared null and
void.
Section 93. Building Permit.
lt shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the
construction of any building or other structure, including
accessory structures, or to store building materials or erect
temporary field of fices, or to commence the moving, alteration, or
repair (except repairs, not changing the character of the
structure) of any structure, including accessory structures, until
the Zoning Administrator has issued for such work a building permit
including i1 statement that the plans, specifications and intended
use of such structure in all respects conform with the provisions
of this Ordinance . Application for a building permit shall be made
to the Zoning Administrator on f orms provided for that purpose.
Section 94. Approval of Plans and Issuance of Building Permit.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the Zoning Administrator to approve
any plans or issue a building permit for an excavation or
construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found
them in conformance with this Ordinance. To this end, the Zoning
Administrator shall require that every application for a building
permit for excavation, construction, use of land, moving, or
alteration be a ccompanied by a map or plat drawn to scale and
showing the following in s11fficient detail to enable the Zoning
Administrator to ascertain whether the proposed excavation,
construction, use of land, moving, or alteration is in conformance
with this Ordinance:
" 9
{l) The actual shape, proportion and dimensions of
the lot to be built upon.
(2) The shape, size, and location of alf the buildings,
or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved
and of any buildings or other structures already on the
lot.
(3) The exlsFing and intended use of all such buildings
or other structures.
(4) The setback and side lines of buildings on
adjoining lots and such other information concerning
the lot or adjoining the lots as may be essentia l for
determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance
are being observed.
{b) After the .owner or his agent submit their request for a
building permit, the City will have three (3) working day to act
upon the application.
(c) If the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration
as set forth in the application are in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, and other city codes, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the permit accordingly.
(c) If the application is rejected, the Zoning Administrator will
state in writing on the application the reason for rejection.
Issuance of a building permit shall, in no case, be construed as
waiving any provision of this Ordinance.
Section 95. Certificate of Occupancy Required.
{fl) No land or building or other structure or part thereof
hereafter erected, movod, or altered in its use shall be used until
the Zoning Administrator shall have issued a Certificate of
Occupancy staling that such land or stn1ct1a-e or part thereof is
found to be in conformjty with the pro visions, of this Ordinance.
(h) Within three (J) working days after the owner or his agent has
notified the Zoning Administrator that a bu i lding or premises or
purt thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of
the Zoning Administrator to make fina l inspection thereof, and to
issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the building or premises or
part thereof is found to conform with the provisions of this
Ordinance and other city codes or if such Cer t ific ate of Occupancy
is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause.
50
Section 96. Temporary Uses.
Temporary uses, as set forth below are declared to~ possess
characLer.ist.ics wh.ich require certain controls in order to insure
compatibility witl1 other uses in the districts within which they
are proposed for location.
{a) The Zoning Administrator · is authorized to issue a Temporary
Certificate of Occup~~cy for temporary uses as follows:
( l) Carnival, circus, or fair in any commercial or
industrial district, . for a period not to exceed seven (7)
days, subject to the approval of the City Council.
(2) Religious meeting in
structure in any district,
thirty (JO) days.
a tent or other temporary
for a period not to exceed
(3) Open lot sale of Christmas trees in any district, for
a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days.
(4) Real estate sales office in any district, for a
period not to exceed one (1) year, provided that such
office is to be placed on the property to which it is
appurte nant.
(b) All temporary Certificat~s of OccupDncy may be renewed upon
approval of the Planning Commission pcovided that it is determined
that suid use is clearly of a temporary nature, will cause no
traffic congestion und would not create a nuisance to surrounding
uses.
Section 97 . Uses Subject to Planning Commission Approval.
(a) Application for Planning Commission Review. All uses subject
to Planning Commission approval where listed in the each district
shall require the submission of an application to the Planning
Commission. An application for conditional use shall be filed with
the Secretary of the Planning Commission at least ten (10) working
days before the scheduled hearing date before the Planning
Commission. The application shall be filed by the property owner or
the authorized agent of lhe owner and shall include l11e following
information and materials:
(1) Name, signature, and address of the property owner
and agent of the property owner, if any.
(2) Address of the property under consideration.
(3) Zoning and land use of the property under
consideration.
51
( 4) Proposed use .
(5) A plot plan, drawn t o scale and d~mensional,
showing the property boundaries and proposed
developme nt layo ut.
(6) I\ $100 filing fee .
( bl P l.unning Comm..lssion act ion. The Pla nning Commiss i o n sha 11
review the plot plan and use proposal for compliance with this
ordinance a nd other applicab.le'cod P.s and ordina nces . I f deemed in
compliance, the Planni ng Commission may still deny any proposal if
it cone l udes, based on the inf orma Li on submit teci at the hear i ng,
that t he proposal, more probably than n o t will ad ve rsely affect t h e
public interest and tile intent of I.his ordinance, as contained in
the purposes and consideration of t.his ordi nance and the district
intent where t:.he propos a 1 would be carried o ut. In particular, the
Planning Commission s hall determ.i 11e Lhat satisfacto ry provisions
IH:iv e been made concerning the fol l ov1 i ng, among other cons iderations
ot this ordi nance:
( l) Ingress and egress Lo the p r o perty and proposed
structures or uses , with particu l ar attention Lo
vehicular and pedestrian safety a nd convenience,
traffic flow and cont rol, and emer.gency a c cess .
(2) Off-street par.king ,1nd l oad ing areas, with
parlicu.lar. at t e ntion to the i tems in (l) above.
(3) Refuse a nd service nreas, with reference to
ava il abi l.i ty , location, ancl pote nt ia l. .ly adverse
ef [ccts on surroundin<J 11ropor:t.ies.
(4) Scrr:!e11i ng a nd buffc'r· inq nf polc~nt'.i. nlly adverse
vi ews and act.ivi l:ies fr1>m s11 1:ruunding propert ies .
( S ) Contru l of no ise, 0I. ar~, odor, excess drainage, a 1
olher pot.r.J ntia.lly c!J. st.urbin<J e ffe c t s to s u rrounding
pr:opertio.s:
( G) Uti li ties, with ref erence lo l ocat ion,
availabiJ ity, capac i ty, and potentially adverse effec
Lo surrou nding pr.opert i c~s.
(7) Signs and lig hting, wi lh reference l:o glare,
traffic safet'.y, and vj ~; u al hai:mony v1i.L h adjo ining
pro pert i EJS .
(8) Bui lcl.ing b11.lk, densi.ty, l o l coverage, yards and
o pen arens, with refer:1'!nc0 to the compalibiU.ty and
harmony 1-1ith t he c h ri 1~;l(: t e1· o f t:. he surro11n.ding area .
' i2
(c) Imposition of conditions. 'l'lle Planning Commission may impose
such conditions for approval as it may deem necessary in the
particular case to protect the public interest and the Jntent of
thjs ordinance, jn relation to the items listed in (b) above and as
may otherwise be reasonably necassary. Such conditions shall apply
to the J and, structure or use for which the use w~s granted and not
to a particular person. Violations of conditions lawfully attached
to any use shall be deemed violations of this ordinance.
(d) Appeal of the Planning Commission action. Appeal of the
Planning Commiss .ion's decision may be filed by any party affected
by the decision. Such appeal shull be fiied with the City Council
within thirty (30) days of the Planning Commission decision. Within
thirty (30) days following recejpt of the appeal, the City Council
by majority vote shall decide to affirm, modify, or reverse the
decision of the Planning Commission. I\ timely appeal shall suspend
all action on the use permit.
Section 98. Violations and Penalties.
{a) Citation for violations. The Zoning Administrator of the City
of Roanok~ shall serve upon the responsible person or owner of the
property which in viola ti on of tills ord 1 nance, a c i ta ti on to appear
in the Municipal Court of the City of Roanoke at a time and date
specif Jed thereon to answer the charge of such violation of this
ordinance. Provided however, that prior to 12:00 noon on the date
this matter is to be set before the Municipal Court, such person,
firm, or corporation charged in such ci.tation, if he has not
previously settled or been convic ted of three or more such
violations within twelve months of the date of such citation, may
dispose of the citation in the iollowing manner: pay to the Clerk
of the Municipal Court a fine for the offenses charged in the
amount of $5Q plus any and all charges otherwise payable to the
City pucsuant to the terms and cnnditions of this ocdinance. If the
offense charged is the third such offense by the owner or the
person charged within the twelve mont'hs from the date of such
citations, settlement cannot be voluntarily made to the Clerk of
the Municipal Couct as slated above. If the seltlement of the
charges set out in l.he citution i.s not made pcior to 12:00 noon of
the d a t e the c c:i s e i s se t for Lr i. u l i n the Municipal Co u r- t o f the
City of Roanoke and if the party charged fails t o appear and ans wer
such charge in the Municipol Court at the time and place set out in
such citc1tion or if the citation is not otherwise been disposed of
by such court, a warrant sl1all be .issued charging such party with
the violution set out .i.n the citation, which warrant shall be
obtained, served and ~ried as ~rovided by law for the arrest and
trial of the misdemeanors involving violations of the City
OrdinDnces. If n person recei ving a citation as herein provided _has
within the prescribing twelve months from the date of citation
settled ot- been convicted of three or more violations, he shall not
be permitted to seLLle Lile present alleged offenso, but shall be
required t'.o stand trial in Lhe Munici.pcJl Court.
5J
( b) Penalty for viola ti on. Once the war ran L has been issued and
tried before the Municipal Court, a person found guilty of such
violations. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and ~.hall be punished
as provided by law which shall include the payment of fines levied
by the Court plus any court cost as therein provided and issued by
the Court. Each day such offense continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(c) Issuance of citation.
(1) All citations shall be signed by the Zoning
Administrator finding such violations and shal l be sent
by certified mail to the responsible person or to the
owner of the property on which the violation is found.
(2) A warniny of violation may be issued in writing,
personal appearance, or telephone by the Zoning
Administrator finding such violations. The warning
shall give an opportunity for correction of any
violations within 30 or less days before a citation is
sent as provided in (1) above.
Section 99. Remed i es.
In case any building or other structure is erected,
construe ted, reconstructed, a 1 tered, re pa ired, converted, or
maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation
of thj s ordinance·, the Zoning Administrator- or any other
appropr.i.ute authority or any adjacent or. neighboring property owner
who would be damaged o r caused hardship by such violat i on, in
addiUon to other n~1m~dies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or
ot.hP.r appropriate acU.o n or proceeding to slCly or prevent such
unlawful (~rection, constructi on, reconstruction, alterat ion,
repair, conversion; maintenance or use, to correct or abate such
violation or to prevent occupa ncy of such building, structure or
land.
Sections 100-104 . Reserved.
54
ARTICLE VI. BOAHD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 105 . Creation. ,
The City Counc.il o( Hoanoke hereby appoinLs a Zoning Board of
AdjustmQnt. Th.is IJoard shall in appropriates cases and subject to
npproprjute condit ions and safeguards make special exceptions to
the Lerms of this ordinance in harmony with its general purposes
and interests and i~ accordance with the rules contained in this
Article.
Section 106 . Composition and Appointment . .
The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be
appointed 'for a terms of three years, except that in the first
instance one member shall be appointed for a term of three years,
two for a term of two years and two for · a term of one year, and
thereafter each member appoint shall serve for a term of three
years of until Ids successor .is duly appointed. In addition to the
five regular members provided for in this section two supernumerary
members shall be appointed to serve on such board at the call of
the cllajcman onJy in the absence of regular members and while so
serving shall have and exercise t11c power and authority o f regular
members. Such supernumerary meml>ers shall be appointed to serve
for three year terms and shall be el igible for reappoi ntment.
Appointed me mbers may be removable for cause by the appointing
authority upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies
shall be f .i.J.led for the unexpired term of any member whose term
become vacant.
Section 107 . Meetings.
The Board shall udopt rules of meet ing procedures. Meetings of the
Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other
times as the Board may determine. Such chairman or, in his absence,
the acting cha.irman may administe1· oaths and compel the attendance
of wilnesses . All meetings of tile Board shall be open to the
public. 'L'he Board shull keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vo Le o E each member upon each quest ion or, if ahsen t or failing
to v o t. e , i n rJ i ca L i n CJ s u ch fa c t , iln d s ha 11 keep rec o r. d s o f i ts
examin<1t.i uns and of other official actions, all of which shall
immediate.Ly be filed in the off .ice of the Board and shall be a
puhl ic l:'ec:ord.
Section 100 . Appeals to the Board .
Appeals to the 1Joa1·d of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by Rny officer, department, board or b ureau of the
City affected by a ny decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such
appeal shall be taken within 21 (twenty-one) days in accordance
with the rules of the Board, by fj ling with the Zoning
l\dminislrotor and wj.th the board of adjustment a not i r.e of appeal
55
- ~ - -~ -~ ....... ~
specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall
transmit forthwith to the Board all papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed was taken. An a!i}peal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the
Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him/her that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion
cause imminent peril to life or property. Such proceedings shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on
application on notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due cause
shown . The Board of Adjustment shall within thirty (30) days
schedule a time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest. Upon
the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
Section 109. Powers and Duties.
(a) The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
(J) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order , requirement, rlecision or determination
made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
ordinance or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto ;
( 2) 'l'o hear and decide special exceptions t.o Lhe Lerms of the
ordinance upon which such Board is r.eq11j red Lo pass unde r
such ordinance; and
(3) To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance
from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary t o
the public interest, where , owi ng to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will
result in unnecessary ~ardship and s o that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed and subs tantial justice done.
(b) In exercising the powers ment i oned in this section, such board
may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
dee is ion or deter.mi nil ti on a s o ugh t to be made and, to t ha t end
shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator. The
concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determinatio n of any
such administrative official to decide in favor of the applicant on
uny mutter upon which it is required to pass under any such
or.di nance or to effect any variance in such ordinance .
56
(c) The Doard of Adjustment shall not be required to return the
or.ig.i.nal pnp<H"s acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to
return certi f.i.ed or sworn copies thereof or of such portions
thereo [ as nllly be cal led on by such writ. The return shall
concisoJ.y set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and
material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and
shall be verified.
Section 110. Variance Application.
A written application for a variance shall include all of the
following it.ems:
(a) A detailed statement stating the following:
(1) That special conditions and circumstances exist
which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building
involved and which are not applicable to other lands,
s ·tructures, or buildings in the same district.
(2) '!'hat literal interpretati.on of the provisions of
this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same
distri ct under the terms of this Ordinance.
(3) That Lhe special conditions and circumstances do
not result from the action(s) of the applicant.
(4) That granting the variance requested will not
confer on the applicant any special privilege that is
denied by this Ordinance to other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district.
(b) J\ plot plan with the variance highlighted or noted.
(c) A $50.00 filing charge.
Section 111. Appeal of Board Decision.
Any party aggrieved by any final judgement or decision of such
Lloard of Zoning Adjustment may within 15 days thereafter appeal
therefrom to the circuit court by filing with such Board a written
noti ce of appeal specifying the j udgement or decision from which
the appeal is taken. In case of such appeal such Board shall cause
a transcript of the proceedings in the a ction to be certified to
t he court to which the appeal is taken, and the action in such
court shall be tried de nova.
57
ARTICLE VII. AMENDMENTS
Section 112. Authority to Amend.
Whenever the public necessity , convenience, general welfare or
good zoning practices warrants such action, the City coGncil, by
favorable vote of a majority of the members, may amend the
regulations or zoning district boundaries.
Section 113. Authorized Petitioners.
A petition for amendment of this ordinance or the zoning district
boundaries may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning
Commission, or the owner or his agent of·such property subject to
amendment of zoni~g district boundaries.
Section 114. Petition for Amendment.
(a) A petition for amendment when initiated by the property owner
or authorized agent of such owner sh al 1 meet the appl ica ti on
requirements of this section.
(b) The application for re~oning shall be made on a form available
from the City Clerk and be filed with the City Clerk at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the Planning Commission hearing. The
applicant shall provide the following information and materials:
(l) Name, signature, address of the property owner and
agent of the property owner, if any.
(2) Address and legal description of the property under
consideration, accompanied by a copy of the applicable
tax maps clearly identifying the property subject to
rezoning.
( J) Present and proposed zoning and land use of the
property under consideration.
(4) Reason for rezoning requ~st.
(5) A site plan, drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing
the size and location of the property boundaries, public
right-of-ways, and the proposed use and development
layout.
( 6) The names and addresses of each property owner
adjacent to the property under consideration including
those across the street, as listed in the Rand6lph County
Tax Assessor Office.
(7) A $100 filing fee .
59
Section 115. Planning Commission Action.
(a) In case of a petition by a property owner, at least six ( 6)
days prior to the sch~duled Planning Commission hearing, the City
Clerk shall give written notice of the rezoning ito all adjacent
property owners. Such notice shall be deemed· as given when
deposited by certified letter, addressed to such property owners at
their addresses as submitted with the rezoning application. The
notice shall state the following information :
(1) The name of the petitioner.
(2) The location of the property.
(3) The current and proposed zoning and land use of the
property.
(4) The time, date, and loca ti o n of the Planning
Commission hearing of the proposed zoning ame ndment .
(b) The Planning Commission shall ho ld a public hearing at the
first regularly scheduled meeting after compliance with the
application and notice requirements of this ordinance.
( c) The Planning Commission shall not grant a rezoning request
unless the adoption of such an amendment is in the public interest
and is not solely in the interest of the applicant and that the
change is not inconsistent with the city's land use plan.
(d) The Planning Commission, by majority vote, shall report its
recommendations to the City Council. The Planning Commission report
shall be transmitted to the City Council within thirty (30) days of
the hearing, unless an extension period is granted by the City
Council. Otherwise, the proposed amendment shall be considered to
have been recommended by the Planning Commission .
Section 116. City Council Action.
(a) Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
Llw City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
amendment at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
(b) The City Council shall give public notice of the hearing on the
proposed amendment in accordance with this article.
(c) Following notice and hearing, the City Council shall decide by
majori ty vote of its members to accept or reject the proposed
amendment.
60
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-07-01
An Ordinance amending Section 117 of Ordinance No. 682, the Roanoke Zoning
Ordinance, of the City of Roanoke, Alabama.
WHEREAS, on May 9, 1994, the City Council of the City of Roanoke, Alabama
adopted Ordinance No. 682, the Roanoke Zoning Ordinance;
WHEREAS, the Roanoke Planning Commission recommends that Section 117 of
Ordinance No. 682 be amended by deleting the entirety of Section 117 and replacing it
with the following:
Section 117. Public Notice of a Hearing.
A. At least 15 days in advance of the public hearing before the City
Council, the Council shall post the proposed zoning ordinance in a
synopsis form in some newspaper of general circulation published in the
municipality provided that the synopsis, at a minimum, includes the
following information:
a. A summary of the purpose and effect of the Ordinance.
b. If the Ordinance relates to planning or zoning, a general
description of the property or properties effected by the Ordinance
including the common name by which the property or properties are
known and the substance of the Ordinance.
c. If the Ordinance relates to the licensing of businesses or the
granting of a franchise, the categories of business effected by the
Ordinance and the substan9e of the Ordinance.
d. The date upon which the Ordinance was passed and, if different
from the date of publication, the effective date of the Ordinance.
e. A statement that a copy of the full Ordinance may be obtained
from the office of the City Clerk during normal business hours.
The notice must accompany the posting Ordinance stating the time
and place of the public hearing by the Council and stating that at such
time and place all persons who desire shall have an opportunity to be
heard in opposition to or in favor of the proposed Ordinance. An
amendment shall become effective upon final posting of the adopted
Ordinance, as required by law.
8. At least 15 days in advance of the public hearing before the Planning
Commission, the Commission shall post the proposed zoning ordinance in
including the common name by which the property or properties are
known and the substance of the Ordinance.
c. If the Ordinance relates to the licensing of businesses or the
granting of a franchise, the categories of business effected by the
Ordinance and the substance of the Ordinance.
d. The date upon which the Ordinance was passed and, if different
from the date of publication, the effective date of the Ordinance.
e. A statement that a copy of the full Ordinance may be obtained
from the office of the City Clerk during normal business hours.
The notice must accompany the posting Ordinance stating the time
and place of the public hearing by the Council and stating that at such
time and place all persons who desire shall have an opportunity to be
heard in opposition to or in favor of the proposed Ordinance. An
amendment shall become effective upon final posting of the adopted
Ordinance, as required by law.
8. At least 15 days in advance of the public hearing before the Planning
Commission, the Commission shall post the proposed zoning ordinance in
a synopsis form in some newspaper of general circulation published in the
municipality provided that the synopsis, at a minimum, includes the
following information:
a. A summary of the purpose and effect of the Ordinance
b. If the Ordinance relates to planning or zoning, a general
description of the property or properties effected by the Ordinance
including the common name by which the property or properties are
known and the substance of the Ordinance.
c. If the Ordinance relates to the licensing of businesses or the
grantrng of a franchise, the categories of business effected by the
Ordinance and the substance of the ·ordinance.
d. The date upon which the Ordinance was passed and, if different
from the date of publication, the effective date of the Ordinance.
e. A statement that a copy of the full Ordinance may b.e obtained
from the office of the City Clerk·during normal business hours.
The notice shall accompany the posted amendment stating the time
and place of the Planning Commission meeting and stating that al l
(cl) 11. Lile C.ily Council takes no final. aclion upon the proposed
1.101endmnnt within
recommendation of
shall be deemed to
ninety (90) days ufler rece.ipt. of the
Lhe Planning Commission, the proposed amendment
have been rejected and overruled by the \;ouncil.
Section 117. Public Notice of Hearings.
(a) At least fifteen (15) days in advance of the public hearing
before the City Council, the Council shall post the proposed zoning
ordi nunce amendment in full in the local newspaper of general
ci rculation. A notice must accompany the posted ordinances stating
the time and place of the public hearing by the Council and stating
that at s uch time and place all persons w·ho desire shall have an
opportunity to be heard in opposition to or in favor of the
proposed ordinance. An amendment shall become effective upon final
posting of the adopted ordinance, as required by law.
(b) Al: least six (6) days in advance o( the puhlic hearing before
the PI .1 11nJng Commj ss.i on, the Commission shall post the proposed
zonj11g ordinance amcndmenl in full the local newspaper of general
c irc ul u tion wilhin the City. A notice shall accompany the posted
amendments stating the time and place of the Planning Commission
meeting and sLilting that al.l persons who desire shall have an
opportunity of being heard in opposition to or in favor of the
proposed am~ndment.
Section 110. Time Limit.
ACter the City Council has voted on an application of rezoning or
o ther amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, another application for
rez oning of the same tract or parcel o f land, or change o f the same
portion o f the Zoning Ordinance will nol be considered until a
period of one (1) year has elapsed from the date of such action by
the City Council. Provided however, that the City Council may
ad just. this time period if in the opinion of a majori ty o f the City
Coun c il, an unu s ual situa t ion or c ircumstance exists.
Section 119. Zoning of Annexed Property .
(a) Automuti c AG zoning . All land annexed into t he City of Roanoke
s llall be autornaticnlly zoned AG Agricultural District. All
annexation ord inances shall reflect AG zoni ng for the newly annexed
property; such ordina nces s hall, immediately following annexation,
be transmitted to the Secretary of the Planning Commission for
P.lanninq Comm ission action.
(b) Pla11ning Comm i ssion action. Within sixty (60) duys f ol lowing
a nnexation , the Planning Commi ssion s hall initiate a petition to
rezone the property annexed in to the City from l\G to any other
dist ri c t contained within this ordinance . In determining the mos t
a pproprlate zone, l he Planning Commission shall duly consider the
f o llowing items, amo ng others:
6 1
( 1) The Roanoke Land Use Pla n- Year 2013, as adopted by
the Planning Commission;
If'
( 2) The desires of the pr.opert y owners subject to
r<~zoning;
(3) The purposes and considerations of zoning, as
required by this ordinance and section 11-52-72 of the
Code of Alabama .
(c) City Council act.ion. The Council shall within thirty (30)
days of receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation act to
approve, disapprove, or modify the recommended petition of the
Planning Commission. In deciding their action, the Council shall
follow the public hearing procedures found in this article .
62
CITY OF ROANOKE VARIANCE APPLICATION
=================================================================
Part I. Applicant Data
Name of Applicant:
Mailing Address:
Telephone :
Signature:
=================================================================
Part II . Parcel Data
Owner of record:
Mailing Address:
Tax map I.D. #:
Existing land use: Existing Zoning:
=================================================================
Part III. Request
Nature of variance :
=================================================================
Part IV. Enclosures (Check all required enclosures with this
application)
Written justification for the variance
Plot plan with variance noted or highlighted
Names and addresses for each property owner adjacent to the
property under discussion by this application (i ncluding
those across the street), as listed in the Randolph County Tax
Assessors office.
$50 filing fee
NOTICE: All required attachments, must be filed at least ten (10)
days before the Zoning Board of Adjustment hearing. The applicant
must be present at the hearings.
63
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
Address:
=================================================================
You Are Hereby Notified Of A Public Hearing
Of The Roanoke Zoning Board of Adjustment
To Be Held At P .M. On ----t 19 In The
===============~=================================================
The purpose of the public hearing is to receive comments on an
application submitted by:
for the proposed variance of a parcel land located at
The variance is sought for the following purpose:
===============================================:=================
Information as to the property owners this notice is sent to is
taken from the most recent records of the Randolph County Tax
Assessor.
City Clerk
863 - 4129
Date of Mailing
64
ZONING VIOLATION WARNING
,.,
To:
This notice is to advise you that an inspection of your property
located at on
indicates a violation of. Section
of the Roanoke Zoning Ordinance in the following manner:
Copies of the sections of the zoning ordinance violated are
attached.
You are hereby directed to correct the above mentioned violation
within days from the date of this warning. At the end of
the days listed above, your property will be reinspected. Failure
to comply with the applicable sections of the Roanoke Zoning
Ordinance may result in the issuance of a municipal citation for
this violation.
When yot1 have corrected the above mentioned situation, or believe
you are not in violation, please contact the Zoning Administrator
of the City of Roanoke at 863-4129. If the violation has not been
corrected at the time of reinspection, or arrangements have not
been made for its correction and for an extension, we will initiate
appropriate action for· the issuance of a municipal citation.
This is the only written warning you will receive.
Date
Zoning Administrator
68
APPLICATION FOR PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW
Part I. Applicant Information.
Name of applicant:
Mai ling Address:
Phone Number:
Signature:
Part II. Parcel Information.
Owner of record :
Mai~ing Address of the owner of r ecord:
Signature of authorization:
Date:
Parcel Area :
Zoning of the parcel:
Present Land Use:
Proposed Land Use:
Part III. Enclosure Check List .
Detailed statement describing the intended use of the parce l
and the s ize of any proposed development .
Site Plan
Tax map showing the intended development
Notice: This application must be
least ten (10) days before a
Commission meeting . The applicant
before the Planning Commission.
67
submitted to the City Clerk at
regularly scheduled Planning
must be present at the hearings
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
Notice to:
Address:
=================================================================
You Are Hereby Notifiect 'of A Public Hearing
Of The Roanoke Planning Commission
To Be Held At P.M. On ---I 19 In The
=================================================================
The purpose of the public hearing is to receive comments on an
application submitted by:
for the proposed rezoning of a parcel land located at
The parcel is currently used for the following purpose :
================~================================================
The applicant has requested that the parcel be re zoned from
District to the District for
the purpose of
=================================================================
information as to the property owners this notice is sent to is
taken from the most recent records of the Randolph County Tax
Assessor.
City Clerk
Date of Mailing
66
1
I
I
I
I
APPLICATION FOR REZONING REQUEST
Part I. Applicant Information.
Phone Number:
S ignature: Date:
Part II. Parcel Information.
Owner of Record:
Mailing Address:
Signature of Authorization: Date __ _
Tax Map I. D. # Parcel Area
Present Zonin9 Proposed Zoning
Present Land Use Proposed La nd Use
Part III. Enclosure Check List. ( Please include a ll items listed
below with the application~
Reason for Request - Detailed Statement .
Site Plan
Tax Map
Addresses for each property owner adjacent to the property
under discussion (including those across the street), as
listed in the Randolph County Tax Assessors off ice.
$100 Filing fee
Notice: This application must be submitted to the City
least ten (10) days before a regularly scheduled
Commission meeting. The applicant must be present at the
before the Planning Commission and the City Council.
65
Clerk at
Planning
hearings