
CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF
SOUTHSIDE, ALABAMA
_____________________________
Published in 2020 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
_____________________________
 
 
CITY OFFICIALS
_____________________________
Wally Burns 
Mayor
_____________________________
Danny Garnett 
John Hatley 
Joey Jones 
Don Steward 
Dana Snyder 
City Council
_____________________________
Richard A. Rhea 
City Attorney
_____________________________
Cynthia B. Osborne 
City Clerk
 
CITY OFFICIALS
_____________________________
Dana Snyder 
Mayor
_____________________________
Keith Clay, Place One 
John C. Hatley, Place Two 
Joseph Hutchins, Place Three 
Don Steward, Place Four 
Genny Ball, Place Five 
City Council
_____________________________
Richard A. Rhea 
City Attorney
_____________________________
Cynthia B. Osborne 
City Clerk
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Southside, Alabama. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances and resolutions adopted by the mayor and city council through March 25, 2019. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 

Index
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Andrea Palmieri, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Cheryl Kennedy, Secretary to the Mayor, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Southside, Alabama. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Southside, Alabama. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Southside, Alabama. 2020. 
ORDINANCE NO. 0-004-2020 
CITY OF SOUTHSIDE 
COUNTY OF ETOWAH 
STATE OF ALABAMA 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF SOUTHSIDE PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SOUTHSIDE, ALABAMA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinances of Southside, Alabama," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 30, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 25, 2019, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition thereto, any person so convicted, may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding six (6) months, at the discretion of the court trying the case. Provided, however, that no penalty shall consist of a fine or sentence of imprisonment exceeding the maximum fine or sentence of imprisonment established under state law for the commission of substantially similar offenses. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after March 25, 2019 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon the required posting. 
Passed and adopted by the Southside City Council this 24th day of August, 2020. 
___________ ___________ 
Mayor Wally Burns Councilmember Joey Jones 
___________ ___________ 
Councilmember Danny Garnett Councilmember Don Steward 
___________ ___________ 
Councilmember John Hatley Councilmember Dana Snyder 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
Cynthia B. Osborne, City Clerk 
CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION 
I Cynthia B. Osborne City Clerk hereby certify that the attached ordinance was duly adopted by the Southside City Council in regular session assembled on the 24th day of August, 2020 and is recorded in the official minutes of the Southside City Council. 
___________ 
Cynthia B. Osborne, City Clerk 
CERTIFICATION OF PUBLICATION 
I, Cynthia B. Osborne, City Clerk for the City of Southside, Alabama, do hereby certify that this Ordinance was posted in three public places and those being: Woody's Grocery, Southside Family Pharmacy along with the Southside City Hall, beginning on the 27th day of August, 2020 in accordance with the provisions of Code of Alabama, 1975, Section 11-45-8. 
___________ 
Cynthia B. Osborne, City Clerk 
 
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 1-1. Official designation and citation.
The ordinances included in the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances of Southside, Alabama," and shall be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "Southside City Code." 
 
Sec. 1-2. Rules of construction and definitions.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Generally. All provisions shall be liberally construed to effectuate their purposes. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. Provisions shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. In the event of conflicts between provisions, the more stringent provision controls. It is intended that no provision of this Code conflict with any federal or state law intended to preempt municipal jurisdiction with respect to the subject matter contained in this Code and the provisions of this Code shall be construed, whenever possible, to avoid such conflict. 
Acts. References to acts are to Acts of the Alabama Legislature, as published in the Acts of Alabama. Acts passed after 1978 are referenced to the act number, which number includes the last two digits of the year of enactment. All other acts are referenced to act number and year of enactment. All references to acts are followed by a parenthetical reference to the page number in the Acts of Alabama upon which the act begins. The page number reference is for information purposes only. All references to acts are to such acts as amended. 
Alabama Code, or Code of Alabama. The term "Alabama Code" or " Code of Alabama" shall refer to the Code of Alabama of 1975, as amended or the latest revision thereof. 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Southside, Alabama. 
City council, council. The term "city council" or "council" or "governing body" means the city council of the City of Southside, Alabama. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances of Southside, Alabama. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State law reference(s)—Computation of time, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-1-4, Ala. R. Civ. Procedure § 6(a); legal holidays, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-3-8. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	"And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)	"Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	"Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
Corporate limits, corporation limits, city limits. The term "corporate limits," "corporation limits," or "city limits" means the legal boundary of the city. 
County. The term "county" means either the County of Etowah, Alabama, or the County of Calhoun, Alabama. 
Definitions. The definitions given within a chapter or article shall apply only to words or phrases used in such chapter or article, unless otherwise provided. 
Gender. Words in the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter, firms, partnerships, and corporations. 
Joint authority. The expression "joint authority" means that authority given to several persons or officers also vests in a majority of such persons or officers. 
Law. The term "law" includes any provision of the Constitution of the United States, or the state and any statute of the United States, or of the state, and any ordinance, resolution or order of the mayor and city council. 
May. The term "may" shall be deemed as permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, departments, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made, by title, to officers, departments, boards, commissions or other agencies, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Southside, Alabama," unless otherwise specified. 
Person. The term "person" includes any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined herein. Personal property shall include goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights of action, and written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation or any right, title or interest in any real or personal estate shall be created, acknowledged, transferred, incurred, defeated, discharge or diminished. 
Police jurisdiction. The term "police jurisdiction" means the territorial jurisdiction of the city outside of its corporate limits as defined by state law. 
Premises. The term "premises" means place. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenants, and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city or corporate seal. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Alabama. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant," or "occupant" includes any person holding a written or oral lease, or who occupies the whole or part of a building or land individually with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
 
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections; history notes and references.
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
 
Sec. 1-4. Existing ordinances.
Provisions in this Code of Ordinances, which are the same as those ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. 
 
Sec. 1-5. Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
 
Sec. 1-6. Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance.
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)	When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
 
Sec. 1-7. Amendments to Code and new ordinances.
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and be included herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following manner: "That section _____ of the Code of Southside, Alabama, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full. 
(c)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be repealed specifically by section, article or chapter number as the case may be. 
 
Sec. 1-8. Violation of Code document.
It shall be unlawful for any person to change, tamper, or alter or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city, to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
 
Sec. 1-9. Application of Code to corporate limits and police jurisdiction.
Every section contained in this Code, whether expressed to apply "within the city" or "in the city," or not so expressed, shall apply and have full force and effect within the corporate limits of the city and within the police jurisdiction of the city and within the territorial limits of any property or right-of-way owned by the city, wheresoever situated, provided that any such section shall not apply within the police jurisdiction, if expressed to apply within the corporate limits of the city or if the violation thereof is expressly exempted from the application of this section or if the same cannot legally be made to apply in the police jurisdiction, or if the same cannot physically apply in the police jurisdiction, or if the same, otherwise than by use of such terms as "in the city" or "within the city," contains clear inherent evidence of intent that it shall not apply in the police jurisdiction. 
State law reference(s)—Police jurisdiction, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-40-10, 11-51-91. 
 
Sec. 1-10. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
 
Sec. 1-11. Supplementation of Code.
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
 
Sec. 1-12. Conflicting ordinances.
(a)	If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same chapter of this Code, the provisions of the section which is last adopted shall prevail unless construction is inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter. 
(b)	If conflicting provisions are found in different chapters or parts of this Code, interpretation shall be reconciled by reference to federal statute and case law, state statute and case law, city ordinance or bylaw, department rules and regulations, in descending order. To the extent possible, any such conflict shall be resolved by the city council acting upon the recommendation of the city attorney. 
 
Sec. 1-13. Substantive compliance with Code.
A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
 
Sec. 1-14. Rates, charges, and fees established.
(a)	Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)	Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
 
Sec. 1-15. Penalties.
(a)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)	Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person, firm or corporation committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is in violation of an ordinance of the city now existing or hereafter enacted, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. In addition thereto, any person so convicted, may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding six months, at the discretion of the court trying the case. Provided, however, that no penalty shall consist of a fine or sentence of imprisonment exceeding the maximum fine or sentence of imprisonment established under state law for the commission of substantially similar offenses. 
(d)	Unless otherwise specifically provided, each day on which a violation of this Code or any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense punishable as above provided. 
(Ord. No. 0-57-83, §§ 1—8, 8-22-1983)
 
Sec. 1-16. Certain ordinances not affected by adoption of this Code.
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect any ordinance or resolution: 
(1)	Granting any franchise or special privilege or right; 
(2)	Authorizing the borrowing of money or the issuance of bonds or other evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)	Authorizing or otherwise relating to the purchase, sale or exchange of specific real or personal property; 
(4)	Authorizing, making assessments for or otherwise relating to any specific public improvements or works; 
(5)	Appropriating money, providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget, or prescribing salaries for city officers and employees; 
(6)	Annexing territory to the city; 
(7)	Approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any specific contract or other agreement; 
(8)	Establishing or amending zoning and subdivision regulations or zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(9)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(10)	Establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures; 
(11)	Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(12)	Establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(13)	The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(14)	Adopting and incorporating by reference any maps, plans, diagrams and illustrations which are not published in this Code; 
(15)	Accepting gifts or bequests; 
(16)	Transferring or appropriating funds; 
(17)	Accepting, releasing or abandoning easements; 
(18)	Concerning the form of government elections, districts and polling places in the city; 
(19)	Establishing or relating to any public corporation or board not in this Code; and 
(20)	Establishing any traffic device, signal or marking, parking regulation, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, speed limit or other limitation placed upon the use of any specific street for vehicles or pedestrians. 
(b)	Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
 
Chapter 2 ADMINISTRATION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 2-1. Numbering of council places.
(a)	The city governing body shall consist of a mayor and five council members who shall be elected by a vote of the voters at-large in the city. 
(b)	The places on the city council are and the same are hereby designated as: 
(1)	Council member place number 1. 
(2)	Council member place number 2. 
(3)	Council member place number 3. 
(4)	Council member place number 4. 
(5)	Council member place number 5. 
(c)	Each candidate for a place on the city council shall, in his announcement of his candidacy, designate by number the place for which he is a candidate. No person shall be a candidate for more than one place. 
(Ord. No. 0-37-80, 3-12-1980; Ord. No. 0-63-84, §§ 1—4, 3-12-1984)
 
Sec. 2-2. Establishing poll hours.
Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-28, the city council does hereby ordain that the polls during all future municipal elections shall open at 7:00 a.m. and remain open continuously until 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 0-188-00, §§ 1—3, 5-15-2000)
 
Sec. 2-3. Qualification fees for the municipal elections.
(a)	A qualification fee is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as mayor of the city, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(b)	A qualification fee is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as council members of the city except as hereinafter provided for. 
(c)	Such qualification fee shall be paid to the city clerk and deposited to the general fund of the city at or prior to the time of taking out qualification papers by any such candidates. The qualification fees shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(d)	Any person desiring to qualify who is not financially able to pay the required fee may qualify, provided such prospective candidate furnishes the city clerk with an affidavit stating that he is financially unable to pay the required fee fixed by this section. 
(e)	Once a candidate has paid his qualifying fee and the qualification packet documents have been duly filed with the city clerk there shall be no refund to the candidate if the candidate chooses to withdraw from the election prior to the election date. A formal withdrawal form shall be signed and filed with the city clerk for any candidates that wish to withdraw their candidacy papers for the upcoming municipal election. 
(f)	If a candidate has qualified for a municipal office and withdraws their candidacy from the official ballot, but yet changes his mind and wants to re-enter the election, a new qualification fee will be due from the prospective candidate. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2008, §§ 1—7, 6-9-2008)
 
Sec. 2-4. Use of electronic vote counting devices.
For all elections held subsequent to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that Etowah County supplies the city with voting devices and that the city adopts the DS200 Electronic Vote Counting System that the county will use, or any subsequent model device, which complies with Code of Ala. 1975, § 17-7-21 and also adopts the AutoMARK Voter 87000 System that the county will use, or any subsequent model device, which complies with Code of Ala. 1975, § 17-2-4 and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, is hereby authorized for the reporting, counting, and tabulating of any and all election results. 
(Ord. No. 0-001-2016, §§ 1—5, 1-11-2016)
 
Sec. 2-5. Rules of procedure for council meetings.
(a)	Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the second and fourth Monday of each month for the months of November and December 2020. Thereafter, beginning January 2021, regular meetings will be held on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month. All regular meetings shall convene at 5:30 p.m. in the council chamber at city hall, or at such other place as the council shall designate at least 24 hours prior to the meeting. 
State law reference(s)—Time and place and frequency of meetings, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-43-49, 11-43-50. 
(b)	Special meetings. Special meetings may be held at the call of the mayor by serving notice on each member of the council not less than 24 hours before the time set for such special meetings; or special meeting may be held as provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-50, whenever two council members making the request shall have the right to call such meeting. Notice of all special meetings shall be posted on a bulletin board accessible to the public and on the city website, at least 24 hours prior to such meeting. A special meeting may also be called or scheduled by vote of the council in open session during another duly called meeting. The motion or resolution calling or scheduling the special meeting shall specify its time, place, and purpose. Only those items of business specified in the notice may be discussed or transacted at a special meeting, unless (1) all members are present and (2) the council determines in good faith at the meeting that it is essential to discuss or act on the item immediately. 
State law reference(s)—Calling special meetings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-50. 
(c)	Agenda. All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the council by any council member or the mayor shall be delivered to the city clerk no later than 12:00 noon on the Thursday prior to each council meeting. The city clerk shall arrange a list of matters in the order of receipt under the appropriate category according to the order of business in subsection (g). A copy of all proposed resolutions and ordinances shall be attached to the proposed agenda. An agenda package shall be prepared that includes, for each item of business placed on the proposed agenda, as much background information on the subject as is available and feasible to reproduce. Each council member, the mayor and the city attorney shall receive a copy of the proposed agenda and the agenda package and they shall be available for public inspection and/or distribution when they are distributed to the council members, at least one full business day prior to the meeting, but as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit. None of the foregoing matters shall be presented to the council by any department or other employee of the city except those authorized by the mayor. 
(d)	Open meeting requirements. All meeting notifications shall be in compliance with the Open Meeting Act as described in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 36-25A-1 through 36-25A-11 and a public notification registry shall be kept as in compliance with section 2-6. 
The council shall not deliberate, vote, or otherwise take action on any matter by reference to a letter, number or other designation, or other secret device or method, with the intention of making it impossible for persons attending a meeting of the council to understand what is being deliberated, voted, or acted on. All deliberation shall adhere to the requirements of the Alabama Open Meetings Act, Act. No. 2005-40. 
(e)	Public address to the council. Any individual or group who wishes to address the council shall make a written request to be on the agenda to the city clerk. The request must state the nature of the specific comment, question or concern that will be addressed. The request must be made no later than 12:00 noon on the Thursday prior to the council meeting. With the approval of the mayor, the city clerk shall place each person's name on the agenda. With unanimous consent of the council, a person whose name does not appear on the agenda may be permitted to address the council. 
(1)	A person may speak on any subject regarding the city and municipal government but may not address the same issue more than once every two months. However, the council shall determine at the meeting whether it will hear the individual or group. 
(2)	No person shall address the council without first being recognized by the mayor. 
(3)	Each person addressing the council shall step up to the place provided for use by the public and give their name and address for the record, speak in an audible tone of voice, state the subject he wishes to discuss, state whom he is representing if he represents an organization or other persons, and shall limit his remarks to five minutes unless further time is granted by majority vote of the council. 
(4)	All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a whole and not to any member. No person other than the council members and the person addressing the council shall be permitted to enter into any discussion without the permission of the mayor. No question may be directed to any council member, the mayor or a city employee without the permission of the mayor. 
(5)	Whenever any group or persons wishing to address the council on the same subject, the mayor may request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group or may limit the numbers of persons address the council. 
(6)	Without the necessity of making a prior request, any interested person may address the council in regard to a public hearing on a particular matter, subject to the discretion of the mayor, and so long as the comments are relevant to the subject under consideration. 
(7)	After a motion has been made or a public hearing has been closed, no member of the public shall address the council on the matter under consideration without the approval of a majority of the council. 
(8)	All interested parties, or their authorized representatives, may address the council by written communication regarding matters under consideration. 
(9)	No speaker shall come forward and be heard more than once per meeting per topic. 
(10)	The city clerk shall provide a copy of these rules to each person on the agenda and shall keep a copy posted in the council chambers at the place where the public addresses the council. 
(f)	Decorum. Any person making personal, impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks or who willfully utters loud, threatening or abusive language, or engages in any disorderly conduct which would impede, disrupt or disturb the orderly conduct of any meeting shall be called to order by the mayor. If such conduct continues, the mayor, at her discretion, may order the person barred from further addressing the council for that meeting. 
All persons shall be silent at the request of the mayor. If a person persists in disturbing the meeting after a warning, the mayor may order him to remove himself from the meeting. If the person does not remove himself, the mayor may order the sergeant-at-arms to remove him. 
At least one uniformed officer shall be designated by the police chief to attend each council meeting. Such officer shall act as the sergeant-at-arms and shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the mayor to maintain order and decorum. 
Any council member may move to require the mayor to enforce the rules of decorum. The affirmative vote of a majority shall require him to do so. 
If a meeting is willfully disturbed by a person or group of persons so as to render the orderly conduct of such meeting unfeasible and when order cannot be restored by the removal of individuals who are creating the disturbance, the meeting may be adjourned by the mayor and the remaining business conducted at the next regular meeting. 
(g)	Order of business. Items shall be placed on the agenda according to the order of business. The order of business for each regular meeting shall be as follows: 
(1)	A call to order. 
(2)	Prayer. 
(3)	Pledge. 
(4)	Roll call. 
(5)	Reading and approval of the minutes of the previous meeting. 
(6)	Proclamations. 
(7)	Public comments (agenda items only). 
(8)	Unfinished business. 
(9)	Bid openings and awards. 
(10)	Public hearings and consideration of resolutions and ordinances relating to the hearing (any public comments regarding a hearing will be heard prior to the hearing being conducted). 
(11)	Resolution, ordinances, orders, and other business. 
(12)	Board appointments. 
(13)	New business. 
(14)	Reports of committees, officers, boards, departments. 
(15)	Public comments (non-agenda items). 
(16)	Statements of the mayor and council. 
(17)	Adjournment. 
(h)	Mayor. The mayor shall chair all council meetings if she is present. The mayor may vote in all cases. In order to address the council, a member must be recognized by the mayor. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall preside. 
(i)	Action by the council. The council shall proceed by motion, except as otherwise provided for in these rules. Motions shall be reduced to writing when required by the mayor or any member of the council. All resolutions and ordinances and amendments thereto shall be in writing at the time of introduction. 
(j)	Questions of order. All questions of order shall be decided by the mayor with the right of appeal to the council by any member. 
(k)	Recording the vote. Whenever it shall be required by one or more members, the "yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded and any member may call for a division on any question. 
(l)	Debate. If a question coming before the council initiates a debate among council members, the mayor shall state the question coming before the council and any council member desiring to speak must address the mayor for the purpose of speaking. The mayor and council members have a right to be recognized to speak at any time during the meeting. 
Every speaker shall confine his remarks to the subject under consideration. No speaker shall use indecorous language, impugn the motive of another person or attack the personality of another person. 
Once recognized by the mayor for the purpose of speaking to the council, a speaker shall not be interrupted unless he is called to order or as otherwise provided in these rules of procedure. If a speaker is called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined. A speaker may not recognize a person in the audience to address the council without the unanimous consent of the council. When recognized to speak, a speaker may not yield his time to a person in the audience. 
The councilmember moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing debate. 
A motion to reconsider must be by a member who voted with a majority and at the same or next succeeding meeting of the council. 
Except as otherwise provided by statute, the affirmative vote of the majority of the council present shall be sufficient for the passage of any resolution or ordinance or for the transaction of business by the council. When a vote is called, the city clerk shall call the roll by name, responding with "yes", "no" or "abstain." 
(m)	Consideration of ordinances and resolutions. Each ordinance and resolution of a permanent nature shall be introduced only at a regularly scheduled meeting and may not be considered until the next regularly scheduled meeting, unless unanimous consent is given by all council members present that it may be considered at the meeting at which it is introduced. Such consent shall be shown by a roll call vote entered in the minutes. 
All ordinances and resolutions shall be reviewed as to form and legality by the city attorney. No ordinance or resolution shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless it is requested in writing by a council member or the mayor or is prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
Before being presented to the council, all ordinances and resolutions shall be reviewed for administration by the mayor or his authorized representative. Every ordinance and resolution shall be in writing. Items not appearing on the agenda in a timely manner may be considered with unanimous consent of the council as an item under new business. 
All ordinances, resolutions or propositions submitted to the council which require the expenditure of money shall lie over until the next meeting, provided that such ordinances, resolutions, or propositions may be considered earlier by unanimous consent of the council; and provided, further, that this rule shall not apply to the current expenses of, or contracts previously made with, or regular salaries of officers, or wages of employees of the city. 
Cross reference(s)—Legislative powers, § 2-4. 
State law reference(s)—Enactment of ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-2 et seq. 
(n)	Distribution of information. Any information regarding city business, either requested by or provided to one member of the council shall be provided to all members of the council concurrently. 
(o)	Committees. Each council member shall serve as a member of a committee, subject to the approval of the council, the mayor shall appoint members to the committees and shall name the chair and vice chair of each of the following standing committees: 
Community Development: 
Planning Commission (Keith Clay-Council Place 1) 
Public Works: 
Water Board; Street & Sanitation (John Hatley-Council Place 2) 
Public Safety, Finance & Mayor Pro Tempore: 
Police & Fire (Don Steward-Council Place 4) 
Education and Recreation: 
Parks & Recreation (Genny Ball-Council Place 5) 
Athletic Foundation & Youth Sports (Joseph Hutchins-Council Place 3) 
The chairperson of each respective committee, or the councilmember acting for him, shall submit or make all reports to the council when so requested by the mayor or any member of the council. 
(p)	Attendance at council meetings. The city clerk, city attorney, chief of police, and other such officers or employees of the city shall, when requested, attend all meetings of the council and shall remain in the council room for such length of time as the council may direct. 
(q)	Executive session. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except when the council meets in executive session as authorized by state law. The council may hold an executive session as provided by the Alabama Open Meetings Act referred to in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-25A-1 through 32-25A-11. 
The council shall commence an executive session only after a motion to go into executive session has been made and adopted during an open meeting. The motion shall state the purpose of the executive session. The motion to go into executive session must be approved by the vote of a majority of those present and voting. The vote of each member shall be recorded in the minutes. No action may be taken in an executive session. No minutes shall be taken of the executive session. No recording shall be made of the executive session. Nothing may be considered in an executive session other than the matter(s) disclosed in the open meeting. Prior to calling the executive session to order, the mayor shall state whether the council will reconvene after the executive session and, if so, the approximate time the council expects to reconvene. 
(r)	Quorum. A quorum shall be constituted of a majority of the whole number of council members, including the mayor, to which the city is entitled. This whole number being six, four council members must be present to constitute a quorum and conduct formal city business at a regular or special meeting (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-48). Council members who are present at a council meeting that have a conflict of interest on a particular issue can be counted for purposes of making a quorum even though they cannot vote on a particular issue. 
State law reference(s)—Quorum, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-48. 
(s)	Public hearings. Public hearings required by law or deemed advisable by the council may be organized by a special order that sets forth the subject, date, place, and time of the hearing as well as any rules regarding the length of time allotted for each speaker, and other pertinent matters. A special order is adopted by majority vote. Its specifications may include, but are not limited to, rules fixing the maximum time allotted to each speaker; providing for the designation of spokespersons for groups of person supporting or opposing the same positions; providing for the selection of delegates from groups of persons supporting or opposing the same positions when the number of person wishing to attend the hearing exceeds the capacity of the hall (so long as arrangements are made, in the case of hearings subject to the open meetings law, for those excluded from the hall to listen to the hearing); and providing for the maintenance of order and decorum in the conduct of the hearing. At the time appointed for the hearing, the mayor or his designee shall call the hearing to order and then preside over it. When the allotted time expires, or earlier, if no one wishes to speak who has not done so, the mayor shall declare the hearing ended. 
(t)	Minutes. Full and accurate minutes of the council proceedings, not including executive sessions, shall be kept, so that a person not in attendance would have a reasonable understanding of what transpired. These minutes shall be open to inspection of the public. The exact wording of each motion and the results of each vote shall be recorded in the minutes, and on the request of any member of the council, the entire council shall be polled by name on any vote. Members' and other persons' comments may be included in the minutes if the council approves. 
(u)	Amendment of the rules. The rules of the council may be amended in the same manner as any other ordinance of general and permanent operation. 
(v)	Reference to Robert's Rules of Order. Robert's Rules of Order is hereby adopted as the rules of procedure for this council in those situations which cannot be resolved by the rules set out in this chapter, so long as it does not conflict with Alabama law or with the spirit of these rules. 
State law reference(s)—Authority to determine rules of procedure, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-52. 
(Ord. No. 0-013-2016, §§ 1—27, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 0-005-2020, §§ 1, 2, 11-2-2020)
 
Sec. 2-6. Public notification registry.
(a)	It shall be the policy of the city to transmit all direct meeting notifications by electronic mail via the Internet. This method of public notification shall not incur any additional cost to the city or the registered person receiving the notification. 
(b)	A public notification registry shall be compiled by the city clerk for the city. Persons wishing to sign up for direct public notification of meetings held by the city council, planning commission, zoning board of adjustments and any other sub-committee of the city shall register with the city clerk, for direct public notification. A direct notification form provided by the city clerk must be completed by the applicant and either hand delivered or mailed to the clerk in order for the application to be considered valid. Any public notification request for meetings held by the water and sewer board shall be made to the water and sewer board which is a separate entity. 
(c)	Following application, the applicant's name shall be added to the registry of those who shall receive direct notice of all future meetings, provided that notice may not be given for meetings held within one week of the receipt of the application so that the clerk may have time to update the list. 
(d)	A person's name may be removed from the registry if the city has information that indicates the e-mail address is no longer valid or that the applicant is not checking their messages. If the direct notification e-mail is returned to the clerk more than three times then the applicant's name shall be removed from the direct notification list. Misuse of the e-mail notification in any manner will also result in removal from the list and may constitute grounds to prevent future applicant to receive direct meeting notice by the offending individual. 
(e)	The city is not responsible in the event of any notice failure that is not due to a fault of its own. The city reserves the right to use alternative methods of notification such as fax, telephone and or mail if for technical reasons electronic means are unavailable at the time the notification is needed. Persons wishing to receive public notification via the U.S. Postal Service shall pay in advance the cost of printing and postage of the public notification. Said cost of printing and postage will be determined at the time the notification is compiled. 
(f)	All meeting notifications shall be posted in a timely manner at the city hall on the bulletin board located at the entrance of the city clerk/mayor's office. All notifications shall include the type of meeting to be held, date, time and location of said meeting. 
(Res. No. 0-035-2005, §§ 1—6, 9-26-2005)
 
Secs. 2-7—2-28. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. EMPLOYEES AND OFFICERS
 
Sec. 2-29. City clerk established.
(a)	Duties generally. The council and mayor shall appoint a city clerk, for a term of one year, the first Monday of October, of each year. The city clerk's salary shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. The city clerk shall attend the meetings of the council and keep a record of its proceedings in the minute book, which minute entry, when approved by the council, shall be signed by the mayor as presiding officer, and by the city clerk. The city clerk shall have the custody of the city seal, and of the rules, ordinances and resolutions of the council, and shall keep a record of them when adopted by the council, and shall perform any and all clerical services incident to the proceedings of the city government and act as assessor and collector of all taxes levied by the city, except those assessed and collected by the tax assessor and tax collector of the county. 
(b)	Attestation of documents; when required. All written contracts or city obligations, excluding purchases for ordinary current city needs, shall be attested by the city clerk, to which he shall affix the city seal; however, this section shall not apply to bond issues or attached interest coupons. 
(c)	To keep a record of contracts and obligations. The city clerk shall keep a record of all city obligations, contracts, and evidences of debt, the names of all persons interested, dates of execution and of maturity, amounts involved and any other information pertaining thereto of interest to the city. 
(d)	Record of claims and demands against the city; issuance of warrants. The city clerk shall submit all claims, requisitions and demands against the city for materials and supplies purchased and for services rendered to the council at its next regular meeting for its approval, unless already provided for by ordinance or resolution, ordinances carrying it into effect when necessary, the city clerk shall, as treasurer, issue a warrant on the city for the amount of the claim, requisition, or demand. Before issuing any warrant, the city clerk shall audit the claim, certify to its correctness, and keep a record thereof which shall show to what department it is chargeable. 
(e)	Restrictions on issuance of warrants. Appropriations for specific purposes shall not be paid for any other purpose, and no warrant shall be made unless sufficient funds actually be in the treasury to the credit of the fund upon which the warrant is drawn, unless specifically authorized by ordinance. 
(f)	Issuance of licenses. The city clerk shall issue all licenses, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, receiving the money therefor, and depositing the same in the funds of the city. 
(g)	Inventory of city property. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to prepare and keep on file for the information of city officials and the public, a complete inventory of all the tangible property of the city, real and personal, and to this end, the city clerk shall have the authority to call upon any officer, agent or employee of the city for any desired information; this inventory shall also indicate the approximate valuation of each item of property enumerated therein. 
(h)	Municipal clerk. The city clerk shall serve as the clerk of the municipal court, and attend all of its sessions. The clerk shall keep a docket book of all cases, shall (along with the assistance of the chief of police) prepare the cases for trial at each session, collect all fines, submit all necessary reports and fees to the state, prepare and file with the clerk of the circuit court the necessary transcripts and affidavits for all cases appealed, and perform all other duties required by law, ordinance or resolution. 
(i)	Treasurer; to keep books of account, and to make regular reports. The city clerk shall serve as the city treasurer, and shall give bond in an amount as determined by the council from time to time, for the faithful performance of his duties and the safe custody of the funds. He shall be the custodian of the funds of the city, keeping a set of books in which there shall be kept a separate account of each collecting officer of the city, with each department for which a separate appropriation shall have been made, and such other accounts as may be necessary to show the financial condition of the city and of each department thereof at all times. At the first regular meeting of the council of each month, the treasurer shall submit a financial report, including a list of all checks written since the last report. 
(j)	Payment of warrants. The city clerk shall be authorized to sign checks for the payment of lawful indebtednesses of the city. All checks must be signed by any two of the following three officers: mayor, mayor pro tempore, and city clerk. The city clerk shall pay out money only upon warrants or statements drawn by the officers authorized by the council to draw warrants or issue statements upon the funds of the city, and when paid shall keep safely the warrants so drawn. No expenditure shall be allowed unless the same shall have been authorized by ordinance, or by the mayor, and is carefully itemized and shall have been examined, audited and approved. The clerk shall not make any expenditure unless there are sufficient funds authorized for the department or officers drawing the warrant in the budget or treasury. He shall keep a record of all warrants presented for payment, which are unpaid for want of funds, and shall pay them when funds are available in the order of their presentment. 
(k)	Funds paid to clerk; deposit. All monies due the municipality or any department thereof shall be paid directly to the clerk. The clerk shall deposit the funds at a bank selected by the council. 
(l)	Additional powers and duties generally. The city clerk shall exercise all other powers conferred and discharge all other duties imposed upon the office by statute and other city ordinances and resolutions. 
(Ord. No. 0-4-77, §§ 1—14, 1-10-1977; Ord. No. 0-23-78, 5-22-1978; Ord. of 9-10-1979, § 1)
 
Sec. 2-30. Majority vote required for employment or appointment.
(a)	All officers or employees of the city shall, after the date of passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived, be appointed or employed by a majority vote of the council, unless the vote required for employment or appointment is otherwise provided by law. 
(b)	This section does not apply to, and shall not conflict with, those officers and employees for which the appointment is specifically reserved to the mayor. 
(c)	The council shall provide for the salary and term of office for all persons it appoints or employs. No term of office shall extend beyond the term of the council and mayor making the appointment. 
(Ord. No. 0-22-78, §§ 1—3, 6-12-1978)
 
Sec. 2-31. Superintendent of city services.
All or part of the duties of the license inspector, building inspector and head of zoning shall be combined and shall result in a position which shall be known as superintendent of city services. Any applicant for this new position shall file with the city a statement as to the job experience the person has and also the experience the applicant believes will assist in the performance of the combined job. Applications may be considered by a committee of two or more council members appointed by the mayor, and the mayor may fill the position after considering the application and/or recommendations of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 0-125-92, §§ I—VII, 12-7-1992)
 
Sec. 2-32. Custodian of buildings and parks established.
(a)	The city council has determined that a new position be created for a full-time maintenance/janitorial person, the combined jobs of maintenance and janitorial hereafter known as custodian of buildings and parks. 
(b)	The custodian of buildings and parks shall perform such duties as, but not limited to, all or part of the duties of lawn care maintenance, landscaping, trimming and mowing of all city properties as listed below, but not limited to: 
(1)	City hall; 
(2)	City park; Little League field; 
(3)	Practice ballfields; 
(4)	Parking lot; 
(5)	Leased properties. 
(c)	The custodian of buildings and parks shall perform janitorial duties which would include the cleaning of city hall and all offices thereof. This would include, but not be limited to, the general maintenance of city hall and the daily cleaning of city hall. The city may furnish all cleaning supplies for the janitorial needs. 
(d)	Prospective applicants may obtain an application for this position from the city clerk city located at 2255 Highway 77, Southside, Alabama, Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. The city will consider applicants for this position without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, marital or veteran status, the presence of a non-job-related medical condition or handicap, or any other legally protected status. Applications may be considered by a committee of two or more council members appointed by the mayor, and the mayor may fill the position after considering the application and/or recommendations of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 0-144-94, §§ I—IX, 10-10-1994)
 
Sec. 2-33. County tax assessor and tax collector authorized to assess and collect municipal taxes.
It is hereby further provided that the tax assessor and tax collector of the county are hereby authorized, directed and empowered to assess and collect said municipal taxes as herein provided, and the said tax assessor shall receive as commission the sum of one percent for assessing said taxes and the said tax collector shall receive a sum of one percent for collecting said taxes, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-156-95, 10-23-1995)
 
Secs. 2-34—2-54. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
 
Sec. 2-55. Water works and sewer board composition.
The city water works and sewer board is hereby increased from three to five members. One of the members shall be appointed for a term of four years and the remaining member for a term of six years and thereafter the term of each such member shall be six years. The board shall not consist of more than three officers of the municipality at any time and any officer of the municipality appointed to serve as a member of the water works board and sewer shall serve for the term for which he is appointed or during his tenure as a municipal officer, whichever expires first. 
(Ord. No. 57, §§ 1—4, 5-13-1974)
 
Sec. 2-56. Planning commission.
(a)	Pursuant to Act No. 534, H. 992, approved September 14, 1935, (General Acts 1935, p. 1126, Alabama Code of 1940, § 786 et seq.), there is hereby created a planning commission for the city to consist of nine members, to be appointed for the terms and in the manner set forth in said Act, Code of Alabama, (1940), title 37, sec. 788 (Cumm. Supp. 1973). 
(b)	The planning commission is authorized to elect its chairman from one of the six appointed members, adopt rules for its operation, hire employees, and contract for services as it may require, according to the terms and in the manner set forth in said Act, Code of Alabama, (1940), title 37, secs. 789, 790, Recomp. (1958). 
(c)	The planning commission is authorized and empowered to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the said city including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of such municipality. Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the commission's recommendations for the development of said territory, as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of the buildings and premises. As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, said commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part thereof, any such part to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the municipality, or one or more of the aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the said plan. The plans shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of the municipality and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, according to the powers, duties and purposes as set forth in said Act, Code of Alabama (1940), title 37, secs. 791, 792 (Recomp. 1958). The planning commission is hereby authorized to follow the procedure as set forth in Code of Alabama, sec. 793, and when the master plan has been duly adopted by the planning commission, it shall have the legal status as set out in Code of Alabama, sec. 794. The planning commission is authorized to exert such control as it is authorized under the aforementioned Act with reference to subdivision jurisdiction on all land located in the municipality and all land lying within five miles of the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-7-77, 5-24-1977)
 
Sec. 2-57. Library board.
(a)	The city hereby establishes, pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-90-1, a free public library for the use of the citizens and further provides for appropriations from the municipal treasury in support of the public library in such sums and at such times and from time to time as the city may deem appropriate. 
(b)	The government and supervision of the public library shall be vested in a library board consisting of five members who shall be appointed by the city council. The terms of the membership on the library board, as first appointed, for member number one shall be for one year, for member number two shall be for two years, for member number three shall be for three years, and for members number four and five the terms shall be for four years. Upon the expiration of the first term of each such member, all appointments shall be for four years. The city council shall fill all vacancies including expired and unexpired terms by appointment and the members of this board shall serve without compensation. 
(c)	The library board established by this section shall have full power and authority to: 
(1)	Control the expenditure of all funds received or appropriated for such library; 
(2)	Erect or rent buildings to cost not in excess of the funds available to it; 
(3)	Purchase books and equipment; 
(4)	Provide a system of library services to be made easily available to all citizens of the municipality through central library, branches, stations, book truck service or other appropriate means; 
(5)	Select a librarian and other employees; and 
(6)	Manage and control the library in order to carry out the full intent and purpose of this section. 
(d)	The library board shall keep a careful and complete record and set of books showing the proceeding of their meetings, to include the receipts and disbursements in detail of all funds. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2008, §§ 1—6, 6-9-2008)
 
Secs. 2-58—2-87. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. PERSONNEL 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Secs. 2-88—2-117. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. BENEFITS
 
Sec. 2-118. Social security benefits.
(a)	It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of January 1, 1982, to the employees and officials thereof not excluded by law or by this division, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of Old Age and Survivor's Insurance as authorized by the federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including public law 734 of 81st Congress. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(b)	The mayor, or other chief executive officer, of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state agency authorized to act to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in subsection (a) of this section are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(d)	There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, which shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive same. 
(e)	The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(f)	There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered, or authorized to be covered, by any other ordinance or law creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the said city. 
(g)	The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of title II of the Social Security Act, as amended by public law 734 of 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof, save and except any of such officers and employees now covered or authorized to be covered by any retirement system provided by law, and further excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office, or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 0-53-82, §§ 1—8, 1-25-1982)
 
Chapter 4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall, unless the context plainly shows a different meaning, be given the meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3-1, as amended: "alcoholic beverages," "association," "beer," "board," "carton," "container," "club," "corporation," "fortified wine," "hotel," "importer," "liquor," "liquor store," "manufacturer," "meal," "minor," "person," "restaurant," "retailer," "sale or sell," "table wine," "unopened container," "wine" and "wholesaler." 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 1, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-2. Application.
All original requests for applications for a lounge retail liquor license, club retail liquor license or restaurant retail liquor license shall be submitted to the city clerk or revenue department. The applicant will be directed to go to the alcoholic beverage control board agent located in the county courthouse to fill out a written application in such form and containing such information as is required for a state license. The application, when completed with the findings of the alcoholic beverage control board agent, will be presented to the city council by the agent for approval or disapproval. The application will be considered for action at the next regular council meeting. To effectuate its consent and approval the mayor and city council must adopt a resolution approving the application. In considering an application, the city council shall use the following factors: 
(1)	Character of the applicant. 
(2)	Applicant's record. 
(3)	Location of the place of business. 
(4)	Applicant's compliance with alcoholic beverage laws of the state and city. 
(5)	Applicant's expressed opinion toward the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(6)	Recommendation of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 2, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-3. Fees.
(a)	Upon approval of the application by the city council and by the alcoholic beverage control board, the city clerk or revenue department shall issue the appropriate license based upon the fee schedule listed herein. Licenses shall be renewed annually for the period from October 1 to September 30. Licenses shall be due and payable on October 1 of each year and shall not be prorated. Unrenewed licenses are delinquent after October 30. 
Alcoholic License Fees
License Type	Fee
Manufacturer license fee 	$750.00 
Importer license fee 	$750.00 
Liquor wholesale license 	$750.00 
Beer wholesale license 	$350.00 
Wine wholesale license 	$350.00 
Beer and wine wholesale license 	$375.00 
Warehouse license fee 	$250.00 
Each warehouse in addition to the principal warehouse 	$250.00 
Lounge retail liquor license—Class 1 	$500.00 
Restaurant retail liquor license 	$500.00 
Club class I liquor license 	$750.00 
Club class II liquor license 	$1,000.00 
Retail table wine license for off-premises consumption 	$250.00 
Retail table wine for on-premises consumption 	$250.00 
Retail beer license for on-premises and off-premises consumption 	$250.00 
Retail beer license for off-premises consumption 	$75.00 
Retail common carrier liquor license for each railroad, airline, bus line, ship line, vessel or other common carrier entity with a vehicle passenger capacity of at least ten people 	$300.00 
Special retail license for 30 days or less 	$250.00 
License for more than 30 days 	$400.00 
Special events retail license 	$250.00 

(b)	In addition to the flat privilege license levied upon the establishments and acts described in section 4-1, each retail licensee of liquors and wines shall, on or before the 15th of each month, pay to the city for the privilege of so engaging in such business in the preceding month, an additional license tax of 20 percent of the purchase price of the liquor and wine bought by such retailer in the preceding month. Both the fixed license and the additional license shall be in addition to every other license now imposed. Forms furnished by the city must accompany payment. 
(c)	Each retailer of liquors and wines, or either, prior to engaging in such business outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the police jurisdiction thereof, shall pay to the city both a fixed license and an additional license as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, except that such licenses shall be one-half of the amount provided for in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)	If any amount of the license tax imposed by this section is not paid on or prior to the date thereof, but is paid within 24 hours after the due date thereof, an additional tax equal to ten percent of such amount shall be added thereto and paid by such retailer. If any amount of the license tax imposed by this section is not paid on or prior to the due date thereof or within 24 hours after the due date thereof, and additional tax equal to 20 percent of such amount shall be added thereof and paid by such retailer. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 3, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-4. Distance restrictions.
No original license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived for any proposed location which is within 300 feet of a church building, school grounds subject to the zoning ordinance of the city. The method of measuring the distances from churches and schools shall be from either an entrance or an exit of a church sanctuary and an entrance or an exit of a school building measured by the most direct route (a straight line) to the nearest point of the building occupied by the proposed licensee. If more than one entrance or exit, the measuring point will be the middle of the building front. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 4, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-5. Display.
Every license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be constantly and conspicuously displayed on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 5, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-6. Classes of licenses.
(a)	Club class I. A corporation or association organized or formed in good faith by authority of law and which must have at least 150 paid-up members. It must be the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for the objects of a national, social patriotic, political or athletic nature or the like, but not for pecuniary gain, and the property as well as the advantages of which belong to all the members and which maintains an establishment provided with special space and accommodations where, in consideration of payment, food with or without lodging is habitually served. The club shall hold regular meetings, continue its business through officers regularly elected, admit members by written application, investigation and ballot and charge and collect dues from elected members. 
(b)	Club class II. A corporation or association organized or formed in good faith by authority of law and which must have at least 100 paid-up members. It must be the owner, lesser or occupant of an establishment operated solely for the objects of a national, social, patriotic, political or athletic nature or the like. The club shall hold regular meetings, continue its business through officers regularly elected, admit members by written application, investigation and ballot and charge and collect dues from elected members. 
(1)	In addition, such application shall state the type of license sought; the place where said business is to be conducted; whether the applicant is a person, association, or corporation; the name, address, birth date, place of birth and record of all criminal convictions of applicant and each officer, director, manager or person holding ten percent or more of the stock; and evidence of ownership or lease of real property where the business will be located. 
(2)	Any application for a club retail liquor license shall show the name of the club and its business address; the location where alcoholic beverages will be sold; the names and addresses of the owners of the premises and all lessees and sublessees; a certificate of incorporation, constitution and bylaws of the club; a verified list of the members of the club at the time of application, together with resident addresses; the names and resident addresses of the elected officers and manager of said club. The highest elected official of the club shall certify to the truth of all matters in the application with his signature attested by any other elected officer of the club. 
(3)	Licenses shall be granted only to reputable individuals who are citizens of the U.S., to associations whose members are reputable individuals who are citizens of the U.S., or to reputable corporations organized under the laws of the state or qualified to do business in the state, if it appears that all officers and directors of the corporation are reputable individuals and citizens of the U.S. and that at least 51 percent of the capital stock is actually owned by individuals who are citizens of the U.S. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 6, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-7. Certificates.
Every applicant for an original license shall furnish a certificate by the health officer that the premises of the business are sanitary and comply with city and state sanitary and health laws, rules and regulations and certificates of approval for occupancy by the fire marshal and building official. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 7, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-8. Transferability.
Licenses issued under this chapter may not be assigned, but a license may be transferred to another location, or from one person to another by following the same procedure as if it were an original application. But no transfer shall be made to any person who would not have been eligible to receive the license originally, nor to any place for which the license could not originally have been issued lawfully. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 8, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-9. Hours of sale and operation.
(a)	Retail licensees. It shall be unlawful for any retail licensee, its owner, manager, servant, agent or employee, to sell, offer for sale or to serve, or to dispense for reward, or to allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the city licensed premises on the days and during the hours enumerated as follows: 
(1)	Subject to section 4-19, prohibited hours for on-premises lounge liquor retailers, special retailers, special events and all other on-premises license retailers shall be from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(2)	There shall be no prohibited hours for off-premises retailers. 
(b)	Business hours for on-premises liquor retailers. It shall be unlawful for any class I and class II lounge liquor retailers to remain open to the general public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)	Hours proscribed by zoning ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, where the city's zoning laws, which include variances and special exceptions granted under the authority of the zoning ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours of operation or sales hours for a licensee, such hours shall apply in lieu of the foregoing and it shall be a violation of this section for any licensee to operate or sell during the prohibited hours. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 9, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 0-015-2016, § 1, 11-28-2016)
 
Sec. 4-10. Separate license required.
Any retailer may be granted licenses to maintain, operate or conduct any number of places for the sale of alcoholic beverages, but a separate license must be secured for each place where alcoholic beverages are sold. Where more than one retail operation is located within the same building, each such operation under separate or different ownership is required to obtain a separate retail license. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 10, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-11. Places accessible to the general public.
No retailer shall sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises except in a room or place on the licensed premises at all times accessible to the use and accommodation of the general public; provided, however, a hotel or club licensee may sell alcoholic beverages in any room of such hotel or clubhouse occupied by a bona fide registered guest or member or private party entitled to purchase same. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 11, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-12. Police jurisdiction.
Any business operating outside the corporate limits but inside the police jurisdiction shall pay a license fee and excise tax at the rate of one-half that for businesses operating within the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 12, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-13. Records.
Each licensee shall keep full and complete records of all purchases, sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages, and shall preserve said records for two years. Such records shall be subject to inspection and audit by employees of the revenue department at any and all times of the day or night as may be deemed necessary. Revenue officers and police officers shall have the right without hindrance to enter any place which is subject to inspection hereunder or any place where such records are kept. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 13, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-14. Revenue officer.
The revenue officer is hereby authorized to issue citations to any person for violations of this chapter. Upon expiration of the citation's due date of performance, if the citation has not been adhered to, the revenue officer will issue a memorandum and copy of citation to the city clerk to issue an appearance warrant. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 14, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-15. Revocation.
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by resolution of the city council after notice to the licensee and public hearing for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)	Failure to keep accurate records as required by this chapter. 
(2)	Refusal to allow department of revenue personnel to inspect records, accounts and other documents relating to the sale, purchase, handling or delivery of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)	Failure to pay license fee or gross receipts tax when due. 
(4)	Violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)	Violation of state law regarding the operation of licensee's business. 
(6)	Violation of any ordinance dealing with alcoholic beverages. 
(7)	When the public safety, peace, good order or decency require revocation. 
(8)	When the licensee aids and abets the violation of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 15, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-16. Alcoholic beverages other than those authorized by license.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell liquor, wine or beer to keep, maintain or possess on the premises covered by his license any alcoholic beverages other than those authorized by his license. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 16, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-17. Confiscation and condemnation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, furnish, distribute, manufacture, import, store, sell, offer for sale or have in possession for sale any alcoholic beverages when such person has not been licensed to do so. The possession of five gallons or more of liquor, including wine, and/or two cases or more of beer, by one who is not licensed under this chapter, shall be prima facie evidence that said alcoholic beverages are in possession for sale under the terms of this section. Any such alcoholic beverages are subject to confiscation and condemnation, as set out in section 4-18 or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 17, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-18. Police notice.
In all cases of confiscation of alcoholic beverages which are in violation of this chapter, the officer making the seizure shall prepare a list containing a particular description of the property seized. The chief of police shall post written notices at the city police department, county courthouse and the location from which the property was taken. Said notice shall describe the property seized, the time and place and cause of the seizure, and require any person claiming an interest in said property to make written claim within 30 days of the first posting. Any person claiming the property seized as contraband must file with the chief of police a written claim stating his interest in the property seized, and may execute a bond in a penal sum equal to double the value of said property, but in no case less than $200.00, with sureties approved by the municipal court/judge magistrate, conditioned that in case of condemnation of the property, obligors shall pay to the city the full value of the property and all cost expense of the proceedings to obtain condemnation. Upon filing of the bond, the property shall be returned to the claimant pending outcome of the case. The city attorney may then file a complaint in the county circuit court to secure the forfeiture of said property. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 18, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-19. Hours of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, buy, give away, serve or drink alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:00 a.m. of any Sunday and 6:00 a.m. of the following Monday in any cafe, lunchroom, restaurant, hotel, dining room or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 19, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-20. Service to any intoxicated person.
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, furnished, given or served to any intoxicated person, to any habitual drunkard, or to any person under 19 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 20, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-21. Drinking in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages in any public place, including, but not limited to, public buildings, public parks, streets, sidewalks, alleys, public rights-of-way, parking lots, shopping centers, malls, bus stations, theaters, or service stations except when a special retail or special events retail license has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 21, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-22. Minors.
It shall be unlawful for a minor to purchase, attempt to purchase, consume, possess or transport any alcoholic beverage except when acting within the line and scope of his employment by a licensee. There must be an adult present at all times while a licensee is open for business. It shall be unlawful for a minor to falsely represent that he is not a minor in order to obtain alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 22, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-23. Illegal alcohol beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly sell any alcoholic beverages to any person engaged in the business of illegal alcohol beverages. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 23, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-24. Rolling stores prohibited.
No licenses shall be issued for the sale of any alcoholic beverages by rolling stores. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 24, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-25. Table wine available for purchase.
Any retail off-premises table wine licensee operating a business other than the sale of alcoholic beverages shall place the table wine available for purchase on the premises in such a manner to readily distinguish and separate it from the other goods or merchandise available for purchase. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 25, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-26. Wholesalers.
It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler to sell beer or table wine to any person other than one holding a current city retail license for beer or table wine, provided that wholesalers may sell draft or keg beer for off-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 26, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-27. Compliance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, title 28, as amended, and said violations shall be considered a misdemeanor against the city and punishable the same as any other violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 27, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-28. Changing the character or purity of alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful to fortify, adulterate, contaminate or in any way change the character or purity of any alcoholic beverage from that originally marketed by the manufacturer, except for a retail licensee on order from a customer to prepare a mixed drink for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 28, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-29. Sex acts prohibited.
No licensee shall permit any person upon the licensed premises to perform acts of, or acts which simulate, sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, the touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus, or genitalia or the display of pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitalia, nipples, and areola of the breast. No licensee shall permit the showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproductions depicting such acts or simulations of such acts. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 29, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-30. Alcoholic beverages establishments.
All retail licensees for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages other than beer and table wine must maintain their establishment so that no person is able to see inside such place from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 30, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-31. Club and lounge signs.
All club and lounge retail licensees shall be responsible for an appropriate sign, properly lettered and displayed at the entrance, to be lighted or bear a display of light on the sign stating "Minors Underage—No Admittance." Licensees shall be responsible for determining that no minors enter said establishment and that each customer has legal documentation of age. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 31, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-32. Firearms prohibited.
No retail licensee for on-premises consumption shall allow any person carrying any firearm to enter or remain about the premises except for a law enforcement officer on official duty or an employee of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 32, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-33. Establishment capacity.
No retail licensee for on-premises consumption shall allow more customers on the premises than there are seats available or is allowed by the fire regulations and codes. No person shall stand while consuming alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 33, 3-8-1999)
 
Sec. 4-34. Furnishing containers to customer.
No retail licensee for on-premises consumption shall furnish a customer with any container to take alcoholic beverages outside of the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 0-174-99, § 34, 3-8-1999)
 
Chapter 6 ANIMALS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 6-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means and includes any horse, hog, cow, sheep, goat, rabbit or any other animal of the equine, swine, bovine, ovine, camelid, caprine, porcine or hare type of family. 
Animal shelter means the place designated or used as such by the city for the maintenance and operation of a pound. 
At-large means any animal which is off the property of its owner or person in charge and not carried by said person, kept in an effective closure or under control or restraint by such person by means of a leash in such a way as to prevent its free movement, and so as to prevent said animal from freely charging or attacking persons or animals. 
Bitten means seized with teeth or jaws such that the skin of the person or thing seized has been nipped or gripped or has been wounded or pierced and there has been probable contact of saliva with the break or abrasion of the skin. 
Caged means confinement in a container, which may include a vehicle but not its trunk, in such a way that the free movement of such animal is restrained and so as to prevent the animal caged from biting or attacking a person or animal. 
Cat means all members of the domestic feline family. 
Corral means any uncovered, enclosed parcel of land where large animals are kept. 
Dog means all members of the domestic canine family. 
Dog presumed to be vicious means any dog which is known by the owner or person in charge to habitually chase moving vehicles or charge persons in public. 
Enclosure means the entire housed or fenced area where animals or fowl are confined. 
Food means the food for any animal shall be wholesome, palatable and free from contamination, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain such animals in good health. All food receptacles shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
Fowl means chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas, quail, pheasants, and all other fowl, including pigeons, mynah birds, cockatiels, canaries, parakeets, parrots, or any small bird kept in the house as a pet or for ornamental purposes. 
Health department means the county health department or its successors, and any of its authorized agents or employees. 
Health officer means the county health officer and his authorized agents. 
Humane society means the county humane society or its successor. 
Large animal means livestock, horses, cows, sheep, goats, and swine, or animals of similar size. 
Owner or person in charge means the actual owner of the animal or any person in whose charge such animal is being kept, and all the responsible adult members of the household where an animal is regularly kept or allowed or suffered to remain. 
Shelter means, for any dog or other domestic animal requiring shelter, a structure that shall be at least three-sided, roofed, moisture-proof and made of a durable material, of suitable size to accommodate the animal and retain body heat, with appropriate bedding in cold weather, and shall be cleaned periodically to remove excreta and other waste materials so as to minimize disease and odor. 
Under control or restraint means when off the premises of the owner or person in charge, to be under control or restraint an animal must be carried by such person, caged or kept in the immediate presence of such person and under the actual effective control that its free movement is actually restricted by direct voice command. 
Vicious dog means: 
(1)	Any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
(2)	Any dog which because of its size, physical nature or vicious propensity is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans and which constitutes a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required by this chapter; 
(3)	Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites or has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic animal; 
(4)	Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting; or 
(5)	Any pit bull terrier, which shall be defined as any American Pit Bull Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier breed or dog, or any mixed breed of dog which contains as an element of its breeding the breed of American Pit Bull Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier as to be identified as predominantly of the breed of American Pit Bull Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Bull Terrier. 
Water. All domestic animals shall have access to fresh water at all times, and all water receptacles shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
Wolf hybrid means any combination of domestic canine and wild animal resistant to rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-1, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-2. Wild or vicious animals, snakes, or reptiles to be under restraint.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge thereof to harbor or keep in the city a wild or vicious animal or a poisonous or dangerous snake or reptile unless the same is securely confined or bound in such a manner as to prevent such animal from biting or attacking a person or other animal. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer, allow, or permit any animal which is vicious, or presumed to be vicious, as defined in section 6-1, to be off the premises of the owner or person in charge unless said animal is caged or leashed and muzzled, and under such restraint as will prevent it from attacking or injuring a person or other animal. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to own, maintain, breed, or otherwise have possession of a wolf hybrid. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-2, 7-8-2002)
State law reference(s)—Owner liable for permitting vicious or dangerous animal to be at-large, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-1-3. 
 
Sec. 6-3. Noisy animals.
(a)	It shall be unlawful and a violation for any person to confine, harbor or keep on a residential lot or premises within the city any animal which habitually make or emit sounds or noises of such volume and nature as to unreasonable interfere with or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, and repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities within the neighborhood in the reasonable use and enjoyment of property. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful and a violation for any person to confine, harbor, or keep on any track, lot or premises within the city any animal or group of animals, whether the same is housed in a corral, kennel, building or other structure, under such circumstances that the sounds or noises emitted by said animals are of such volume and nature as to unreasonably interfere with or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, and repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in the reasonable use and enjoyment of any adjacent property used for residential purposes. 
(c)	Any person violating subsections (a) or (b) of this section shall be guilty of a violation; provided, however, no prosecution shall be commenced, and no arrest made pursuant to this section except upon affidavit made before and warrant issued by a magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-3, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-4. Keeping animals; generally.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city any animal unless such is kept in a stable, pen, shed, corral, or other suitable structure, and as otherwise provided in this section, unless such animal is wildlife or habituates a public park. This section is also subject to requirements as set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(b)	No horses, cows, goats, pigs, or sheep shall be kept within 150 feet of any school, church, hospital, public building, public park or playground. Such animals may be kept within 150 feet of the residence of the owner or tenant of the property if kept within a barn, stable, shed, building, or other structure provided with concrete floors and drains connected to the public sewer or other sewage disposal facility satisfactory to the health officer. 
(c)	No rabbits or animals of the hare family and no monkey or animal of the ape family shall be kept within 300 feet of any residence (other than that of the owner or tenant of the property), school, church, hospital, public building, public park or playground, except that same may be kept in a covered and enclosed barn, stable, shed, cage, coop, or other structure. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-4, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-5. Minimum area; animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal in any corral in the city, unless such corral shall have a minimum area 12,000 square feet for one such animal and an additional 10,000 square feet for each additional animal there kept, to every portion of which each and every animal shall have free and unrestricted access. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-5, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-6. Keeping of bees.
(a)	Restriction. It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, or maintain bees within 300 feet of any residence, school, church, hospital, public building, park, playground, or body of water. 
(b)	Declared violation. Any beehive or other device or structure (natural or manmade) used to maintain such bees or occupied by such bees is hereby declared to be a violation. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-6, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-7. Exceptions.
Sections 6-5 and 6-6 shall not apply to: 
(1)	Animals in veterinary hospitals operated by duly licensed veterinarians. 
(2)	Baby fowl such as baby chicks transported into the city for selling purposes or kept within the city for selling purposes. 
(3)	Animals at sale barns kept for a period of no longer than 24 hours. 
(4)	Animals with circuses and carnivals which have been issued a permit by the county health officer and a license by the revenue department of the city to operate within the city. 
(5)	Animals used for promotional or advertising purposes on a temporary basis by merchants, civic groups, clubs, organizations, and individuals, provided that the sponsor has obtained a permit for use of such animal from the health officer and abides by all rules, specifications or conditions on the permit. The sponsor must also obtain a permit from the revenue department of the city. The service charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. Failure of a sponsor to comply with such rules on one occasion may be sufficient reason to deny issuing a permit on any future occasion. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-7, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-8. Sanitation of premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the corporate limits of the city a pen, stable, corral, or enclosure wherein animals are harbored or kept in such an unsanitary condition that the life, health, or comfort of the animal or of the public shall be endangered. The presence in or about such pen, stable, corrals or enclosure of the live larva or flies under conditions which permit or favor growth or development of flies shall be prima facie evidence of keeping or maintaining such pen, stable, corral, or enclosure in violation of the provisions of this section. All such pens, stables, corrals, or enclosures shall comply with all the regulations of the county board of health pertaining to the same and shall be cleaned each day and the residue regularly disposed of in a sanitary manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city any combination of animals upon any premises in such a manner as to constitute a violation. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-8, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-9. Cruelty to animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)	To override, overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, cruelly beat, mutilate or cruelly kill any animal, or knowingly allow any person to do so; 
(2)	Having the charge or custody or an animal, either as owner or otherwise, to fail to provide an animal with proper food, drink, or protection from the weather, or cruelly drive or ride when unfit for labor; 
(3)	Having the charge or custody of any animal known to such person to require medical treatment or care in order to prevent unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death, to fail to provide proper treatment and care or to cause such animal to be humanely disposed of; 
(4)	To unlawfully or maliciously kill, disable, disfigure or injure any animal, or knowingly allow any person to do so, without good excuse; provided, that dehorning of cattle shall not be a violation; 
(5)	To confine any animal within a motor vehicle without reasonably sufficient ventilation, or knowingly allow any person to do so; 
(6)	To confine any animal by chain, leash or other apparatus which is not tangle free and a minimum of eight feet long, or knowingly allow any person to do so; 
(7)	To transport any dog in an open bed truck except when confined in a kennel. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-9, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-10. Duties of animal control officers.
(a)	Any animal control officer shall have the authority to investigate any complaint or situation in which it is believed that any animal is being kept, harbored, or treated in violation of any provisions of this chapter. Said officers shall then prepare a written report of their findings, such report to be kept on file for a period of two years. 
(b)	The report shall include: 
(1)	The nature, extent, and cause of the animal abuse or neglect; 
(2)	The identity and address of the person responsible therefor; and 
(3)	All other data deemed pertinent. 
(c)	In situations where the investigation reveals a violation of this section or section 6-9, the officer shall appear before a magistrate to obtain a warrant for the arrest of the owner or person in charge. 
(d)	Upon determination of guilt of the accused, the court shall cause such animal to be seized and shall be placed in the custody and retained by the animal shelter or, if the animal is in protective custody, the animal shelter shall retain custody of said animal. 
(e)	Any duly authorized officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to investigate any complaint of animal neglect, cruelty, or abuse. 
(f)	Any animal control officer shall have the right to take charge of any animal which is sick or disabled due to neglect or is being cruelly treated or abused and to provide care for such animal until it is deemed to be in a suitable condition to be returned to its owner or the person from whose custody such animal was taken. 
(g)	The officer so taking such animals shall, at the time of taking the animal, give written notice to the owner or person from whose custody it was taken. 
(h)	The necessary expenses incurred for the care and keeping of the animal after such notice by the animal control officer shall be a lien thereon and, if the animal is not reclaimed within ten days from the giving of such notice, the animal control officers may sell the animal to satisfy such lien. If the animal control officers determine that the animal cannot be sold, the officers may cause the animal to be otherwise disposed of in a humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-10, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-11. Temporary protective custody.
Any police officer, animal control officer, or any other employee or officer of an authorized agent of the city may take any animal into protective custody after an investigation, without the prior consent of the owner or person in charge, if the circumstances or conditions of the animal are such that continuing in the place of residence or in the care and custody of the owner or person in charge presents an imminent danger to that animal's life or health. However, such official shall, within 72 hours, seek to procure necessary process for the court having jurisdiction over the person from whose custody the animal was removed. The animal shelter may keep such animal in its custody and control until the trial date of the accused. During such period of temporary custody, the chief of police or his designee may give or cause to be given effective consent for necessary veterinary services for any abused or neglected animal. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-11, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-12. Animal poisoning.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized certified euthanasia technician or licensed veterinarian in the performance of official duties, to administer poison or other lethal doses to any animal. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-12, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-13. Fighting animals.
(a)	Any person who fights, or causes to be fought, any animal, or bets any money or other thing of value on the result of the such fight, shall be found guilty of an offense. 
(b)	No person shall possess or harbor or maintain care or custody of any animal for the purpose of fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait, or use any animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging the animal to attack human beings or domestic animals. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-13, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-14. Stealing animal.
It shall be unlawful for any person to entice or take any animal out of the enclosure of the owner or person in charge except for a police officer, animal control officer or employee or official of the city while in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-14, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-15. Regulations of dealers in, shippers, and carriers of poultry.
Dealers in, shippers, and carriers of poultry for the market shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	The crates in which poultry is to be kept for sale in the market shall be built with solid board bottoms, latticed or wired sides, ends and tops, the slats not being over 1½ inches wide, and shall be so constructed that the heads of the fowl shall not protrude therefrom. 
(2)	For turkeys and geese the inside measurements of such crates shall not be less than 20 inches high. 
(3)	For all small fowl such crates shall not be less than 12 inches high. 
(4)	No crates, coops, or other receptacles in which fowl are carried or shipped or kept shall contain at any time more than 100 pounds of poultry, large or small. 
(5)	All poultry shipped, carried, or kept for the market shall be regularly watered and fed and kept out of rain and the sun and not otherwise injuriously exposed to the weather. 
(6)	Injured, diseased or dead fowl shall, immediately upon discovery of such injury, disease or death, be removed from the crate or coop in which the same are shipped, carried, or kept. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-15, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-16. Grazing animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any horse, mule, cow, or goat to feed upon, graze or pick the grass or abuse any shrubbery upon any public or private yard, lawn, terrace, slope, circle, park, strip, or other place which has been improved or beautified by a private owner or by the city, within the city or along any of the streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-16, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-17. Animals at-large.
(a)	Cats and dogs are specifically excluded from this section since they are regulated in article II of this chapter. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any animal to cause, permit, or allow any such animal to run or to be at-large. It shall be the special duty of the owner or person in charge of all premises where animals are kept to see that no animal kept upon said premises is permitted or allowed to be in violation of this chapter. The fact that a particular animal has been kept on particular premises together with its subsequent appearance at-large shall raise a prima facie presumption that the owner or person in charge of the premises committed or authorized the violation and the burden of proof shall be upon said owner or person in charge to prove otherwise. Any owner or person in charge in violation of this subsection shall be fined as provided by section 6-160. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-17, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-18. Stray animals may be taken up.
Any person within the corporate limits of the city finding any animal running at-large about his residence or the residence of which he is in charge may take custody of said animal and deliver said animal to any police officer or animal control officer as an at-large or stray animal, whether or not the owner or person in charge of said animal is actually known, and whether or not there is any license tag or identification affixed thereto. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-18, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-19. Motor vehicles striking animals; duty of driver to report.
It shall be the duty of any person, who as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal and injures or kills such animal, to promptly report such accident to the police department. It shall be unlawful and a violation for any person to intentionally strike, injure, or kill an animal using a motor vehicle or failure to report same. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-19, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-20. Reclaiming stray animals.
A stray (running at-large) animal may be reclaimed by the owner upon proof of ownership, rabies vaccination, and reimbursement of the costs of shelter, treatment, including veterinarian services, and food. Such fees must be paid within seven days of owner notification. Thereafter, the animal may be placed up for adoption or euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-20, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-21. Burial of animals.
No animal shall be buried sufficiently near a residence or in such a manner as to create a violation. In no case shall a dead horse, mule, bull, cow, or other large animal be buried within 300 feet of a residence, unless the animal cannot reasonably be buried this distance from a residence. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-21, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-22. Protection and regulation of certain animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to trap, shoot, hunt, molest, attempt to shoot, attempt to molest, or have in his possession any wild animal, except those excluded from protection by state law, or to take or willfully destroy the den of any such animal, except as permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-22, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-23. Maintenance and inspection of premises where animals are kept.
(a)	For the protection of the public health, it shall be the duty of every person who keeps any animal or fowl within the city, or within that area of the police jurisdiction within 1,000 feet of the corporate limits of the city, at all times to maintain the premises where any such animal or fowl is kept in a sanitary condition, to prevent the hatching of fly or insect larvae and to prevent offensive odors emanating therefrom. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of every person who keeps any animal or fowl within the city, or within that area of the police jurisdiction within 1,000 feet of the corporate limits, to permit the animal control officer, health officer, police officer, humane society employee, or animal shelter employee to go on to the premises at any reasonable time to inspect such premises and to comply with all reasonable requirements and directions given by the animal control officer, health officer, police officer, humane society employee, or animal shelter employee pertaining to public health, sanitation, fly or insect larvae control, and the prevention of offensive odors. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by section 6-160. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-23, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-24. Disposition of fees.
All monies collected, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, shall be turned over and delivered forthwith to the city revenue department. The city may contract with other parties to perform services regarding animal control and provide in the contract for the compensation of the other party. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-24, 7-8-2002)
 
Secs. 6-25—6-51. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. DOGS AND CATS
 
Sec. 6-52. Owner's duty to remove overturned or scattered garbage.
It shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of any dog or cat which has been allowed or suffered by said person to run at-large to pick up and remove to a secure, authorized container any garbage or refuse which said animal has caused to be overturned, spilled, or scattered upon any residential lot occupied for human habitation, or upon any right-of-way adjacent thereto, upon demand from the owner or occupant thereof or upon demand of any police officer. It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to do so; provided, however, that no prosecution shall be commenced, and no arrest be made pursuant to this section except upon affidavit made before and warrant issued by a duly appointed magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-31, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-53. Duty of owner for removal of feces.
(a)	It shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of any dog or cat which has been allowed by said person to be at-large to remove and dispose of any feces deposited by such animal upon any residential lot of another occupied for human habitation or upon any right-of-way adjacent thereto, upon demand from the owner or occupant thereof or upon demand of any police officer. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove such feces; provided, however, that no prosecution shall be commenced, and no arrest made pursuant to this section except upon affidavit made before and warrant issued by a magistrate. 
(c)	Animal feces shall be cleaned from an area and placed in a bag for collection by the public works department or may be buried in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-32, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-54. Guide dog accompanying blind person.
No owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent, or employee of any place of public accommodation, amusement or recreation, including, but not limited to, any inn, hotel, restaurant, eating establishment, barbershop, billiard parlor, store, public conveyance, theater, motion picture house, public educational institution, or elevator shall refuse to permit a guide dog to accompany a blind person entering such place or making use of the accommodations available when such blind person in being led by the guide dog, provided that such guide dog is wearing a harness and, provided further that such blind person shall present for inspection credentials issued by an accredited school for training guide dogs. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-33, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-55. Dogs and cats at-large; duty to restrain.
(a)	Dogs. It shall be the duty of every owner or person in charge of a dog to keep said animal under control or restraint while the same is within the corporate limits of the city, whether or not said dog is upon or away from the premises of the owner or person in charge. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any dog to cause, permit, or allow the dog to be at-large and to fail to keep the dog under control or restraint. Proof that a dog was not properly restrained, whether on or off the premises of the owner or person in charge, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation. Negligent failure to provide or maintain control or restraint shall not be a defense; however, competent evidence that said failure was occasioned by an unforeseeable and independent act of a third person shall shift the burden on the city to prove otherwise. 
(b)	Cats. It shall be the duty of every owner or person in charge of a cat to keep said animal under control or restraint while the same is within the corporate limits of the city, whether or not said cat is upon or away from the premises of the owner or person in charge. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any cat to cause, permit, or allow the cat to be at-large and to fail to keep the cat under control or restraint. Proof that a cat was not properly restrained, whether on or off the premises of the owner or person in charge, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation. Negligent failure to provide or maintain control or restraint shall not be a defense; however, competent evidence that said failure was occasioned by an unforeseeable and independent act of a third person shall shift the burden on the city to prove otherwise. 
(c)	Dogs or cats in immediate presence of owners in public. A dog or cat which is not vicious or presumed to be vicious, and which is obedient either by training or temperament, shall not be considered at-large while upon a public street or other public place if it is in the immediate presence and under voice control of its owner or person in charge. Any dog or cat not obedient to direct voice command, to be under control or restraint, must be carried by the owner or person in charge, caged or controlled by means of a leash in such a way as to prevent its free movement. A dog or cat which is more than 15 feet from the actual location of its owner or person in charge shall not be considered in the immediate presence of such person and voice control. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-34, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-56. Confinement of dogs or cats in heat.
(a)	Every female dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined by the owner or person in charge. At any time the scent from a female cat or dog in heat is found to be causing a disturbance of cats or dogs on adjoining premises, it shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of such dog or cat to immediately confine said dog or cat. 
(b)	Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in an enclosed structure by the owner or person in charge in such a manner that said female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another dog or cat, and cannot be seen or smelled by another dog or cat, except for planned breeding. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any such cat or dog to fail to comply with this section. Any person in violation of this section shall be punished by a fine as set out in section 6-160. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-35, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-57. Dogs or cats unlawfully at-large to be confined; sale of dogs or cats confined.
(a)	Any dog or cat found unlawfully to be at-large within the city is hereby declared to be a violation and shall be seized by a police officer or animal control officer and confined at the animal shelter and cared for in a humane manner for a period of not less than seven calendar days. In addition to, or in lieu of, confining a dog or cat found unlawfully at-large, when the owner or person in charge of said dog or cat is known to the police officer, the police officer may return the dog or cat to the owner or person in charge and shall issue a warning or citation for violation of this article. 
(b)	Immediately upon seizure of a dog or cat the police officer shall make reasonable effort to ascertain the identity of and notify the owner or person in charge of such animal's seizure and of the condition under which they may regain possession of it. 
(c)	Dogs or cats may be held at the animal shelter until the expiration of the detention period, if the animal has not been claimed by the owner or person in charge. The Humane Society, animal shelter, or its duly authorized agent, upon obtaining possession of each such dog or cat, shall not release said animal to any person until the following requirement have been met: 
(1)	Dogs and cats which appear to be three months of age or older shall have received a rabies inoculation; 
(2)	Male dogs and male cats which appear to be six months of age or older shall have been neutered; 
(3)	Female dogs and cats which appear to be six months of age or older shall have been spayed; 
(4)	Male dogs and male cats which appear to be less than six months of age and female dogs and cats which appear to be less than six months of age, be adopted with the proviso in the certificate of adoption requiring neutering or spaying at the proper age with the proviso being accepted and signed by the adopter; 
(5)	Reimbursement of all costs for food, shelter, and treatment of the animal must be made to the revenue department of the city. 
(d)	No dog or cat that is maimed or diseased or, in the opinion of the animal control officer, humane society or animal shelter, not suitable for adoption shall be put up for adoption. This subsection, however, shall not be so construed as to preclude transfer of an injured, maimed or diseased dog, or cat to a veterinarian agreeable to the animal control officer, humane society or animal shelter, with payment for subsequent veterinary services to be made by the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-36, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-58. When disposal of dogs and cats may take place.
Any confined dog or cat that is injured or diseased and any vicious dog will, as an act of mercy, be humanely destroyed immediately after inspection by a veterinarian or the chief of police or an animal control officer and the Humane Society/animal shelter director, if it is agreed that such destruction is necessary to prevent the spread of disease, or because the animal is incurable. A written agreement to this effect shall be signed by those inspecting the animal and such agreement shall be retained by the animal control officer for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-37, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-59. Manner of disposal of dogs and cats.
The animal shelter, when required to dispose of dogs or cats under the provisions of section 6-58, shall do so by such process as is recognized by veterinary science as being a humane manner in which to destroy dogs and cats. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-38, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-60. Liability in damages of a dog or cat owner.
Any person who owns a dog or cat and by the careless management of the same or by permitting such dog or cat to be at-large, and another person without fault on such other person's part, suffers damages thereby, such owner shall be liable for such damages. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-39, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-61. Dogs or cats habitually causing destruction or damage.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person having custody or control of any dog or cat known to such person to habitually cause destruction or damage to the property of another to allow such dog or cat to be at-large; provided, however, no prosecution shall be commenced, and no arrest made pursuant to this section except upon affidavit made before and warrant issued by a magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-40, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-62. Minimum area, dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any adult dog in any enclosure in the city, unless such enclosure shall have a minimum area of 400 square feet for one adult dog and an additional 100 square feet for each additional adult dog there kept to every portion of which each and every adult dog shall have free and unrestricted access. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-41, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-63. Impoundment of dogs or cats.
Dogs or cats or other animals within in any of the following classes may be captured and impounded in the city: 
(1)	Dogs or cats whose ownership is unknown. 
(2)	Vicious dogs or cats. 
(3)	Dogs or cats in heat off premises of their owners. 
(4)	Dogs or cats or other animals which have bitten a person or animal or which have been bitten by a dog or animal suspected of having rabies. 
(5)	Dogs or cats not wearing a current vaccination tag. 
(6)	Dogs or cats which have strayed from the premises of their owners. 
(7)	Wandering dogs or cats. 
(8)	Dogs or cats suspected of having rabies. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-42, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-64. Condition for release.
Any day or cat impounded hereunder may be reclaimed as herein provided upon payment by the owner the fees charged by a treating veterinarian or the humane society for services rendered in the impoundment, board, vaccination, or necessary care and treatment of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-43, 7-8-2002)
 
Secs. 6-65—6-86. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. RABIES CONTROL
 
Sec. 6-87. Vaccination required, generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or maintain in the city any animal, which has not been vaccinated against rabies within the preceding 12 months. For the purposes of this section, the term "animal" shall include, but not be limited to, all members of the canine family over three months of age, all members of the feline family over three months of age, and all other animals that are capable of having and transmitting rabies and for which the vaccines are recommended by veterinarians. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-61, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-88. Requirements for vaccines and methods of vaccination.
In order to be sufficient under this article, vaccination of animals shall be accomplished by the county rabies inspector, his authorized representative or any duly licensed veterinarian by injecting an amount of anti-rabies vaccine recommended by the manufacturer thereof, such manufacturer having been licensed to manufacture such vaccine by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Such vaccine and the amount to be used shall have been approved by the state health department. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-62, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-89. Tag to be issued at time of inoculation.
Coincident with the vaccination or inoculation of animals, the rabies inspector, his authorized representative or the duly licensed veterinarian administering the anti-rabies vaccine shall furnish a serially numbered tag bearing the year such vaccine was administered, together with a certificate of inoculation bearing the same serial number and year as the tag bears. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-63, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-90. Lost tag; duplicate certificates, license.
In case the tag provided for in this article is lost, a new tag may be issued by the person who issued the original tag, provided the original vaccination certificate is furnished as evidence of original vaccination. In such instance, a new certificate marked duplicate may be issued, setting forth the number of the new tag. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-64, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-91. Attaching tag and license to collar or harness of animals.
The serially numbered rabies tag issued at time of inoculation shall at all times be attached to a collar or harness worn by the dog or cat for which the tag was issued. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in charge of any animal not to keep attached to said animal the tag evidencing the anti-rabies vaccine inoculation as provided in this article when said animal is outside the residence. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-65, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-92. Impounding of animals not inoculated against rabies or found without tag; issuance of citation to owner.
Any animal found in the city which is not displaying a current rabies tag as required by this article, or any animal which has not been properly inoculated against rabies as required by this article, shall be taken up and impounded or a citation issued to the owner or person in charge if known, as provided for in this article. If such animal is impounded, it shall not be released to the owner or person in charge until all fees and fines as prescribed in this article have been paid, and until the animal has been properly inoculated against rabies, or in the case of a properly inoculated animal with a tag, until a duplicate tag has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-66, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-93. Period of vaccination.
The vaccination of animals against rabies shall be good for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-67, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-94. Confinement authorized.
The county health officer shall have authority to quarantine or require confinement of any or all animals in any part or all of the city for such period of time and in such manner as he may determine whenever he considers such quarantine or confinement necessary for the control of rabies. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-68, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-95. Law enforcement dogs exempt from quarantine.
Dogs used in law enforcement work under the control and supervision of a law enforcement officer shall be exempt from the quarantine period where such bite occurs in the line of duty and there is evidence of proper vaccination against rabies, but shall be examined at the end of ten days by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-69, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-96. Animals suspected of having rabies declared violations; impoundment.
Any animal suspected of infection with rabies is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a danger to the health and safety of the community. A police officer or animal control officer shall take up and transport such animal to a licensed veterinarian's office where it will be humanely destroyed if it is determined to have rabies. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-70, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-97. Animals known or suspected to have rabies.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain on or about any place or premises in the city any animal which is known to have or is reasonably suspected of having rabies. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-71, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-98. Confinement of animals bitten by suspected animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or maintain on or about any place or premises in the city any animal whatsoever which had been or is reasonably suspected to have been bitten or otherwise injured by or in contact with another animal afflicted with or suspected of being afflicted with rabies in such a manner as to permit or favor transmission of such disease, unless such animal so bitten, injured or in contact shall be securely confined for not less than six months. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-72, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-99. Confinement following biting of human beings.
It shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of any animal, required by the law of the state to be inoculated against rabies, which has bitten or otherwise injured a human being to notify the health officer of such fact immediately upon learning thereof. It shall thereupon be the duty of such owner or person in charge to have the animal confined under the direct care, custody, control, and supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days. It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person has been bitten by any such animal to refuse to notify promptly the health officer. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any such animal to refuse or fail to comply with the written recommendations made by the county health officer in any particular case. Any expenses incurred in the handling of any animal under this section shall be borne by the owner or person in charge. The veterinarian under whose care the animal has been committed shall report the results of his observations of said animal to the attending physician of the person bitten. Any animal known or reported to have bitten a person shall be confined by the owner or person in charge as herein provided, or in the alternative, the owner or person in charge may authorize the county health department to dispose humanely of the animal and to submit its head to a public laboratory for proper examination and tests. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-73, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-100. Offenses.
Any person violating or aiding in or abetting the violation of any provision of this article, or counterfeiting or foregoing any certificate, permit, or tag, or making any misrepresentation in regard to any matter prescribed by this article, or resisting or obstructing, or impeding any authorized officer in enforcing this article, or refusing to produce, for inoculation, any animal in his possession, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-74, 7-8-2002)
 
Secs. 6-101—6-128. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 6-129. Citations.
When any animal is found by a police officer or animal control officer to be in violation of any provision of this article, and the person responsible becomes known he shall issue a warning or citation to the owner or person in charge for said violation. If a citation is issued, it shall direct the person to appear in the municipal court at a time and a date and place to answer to charges stated in the citation. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to appear in the municipal court at the time and place stated in a citation issued by a police officer or animal control officer. If a warning is issued, it shall indicate the violation and mandate corrective action. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-81, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-130. Humane traps.
(a)	Any police officer or animal control officer is hereby authorized, in order to apprehend animals in violation of this chapter which are otherwise difficult to apprehend, to use traps designed humanely to capture said animals by placing the same upon any public property of the city and upon the private property of any person granting permission therefor. It shall be the duty of the officer to check such traps daily and remove captured animals therefrom to the animal shelter where they shall be disposed of as otherwise provided herein. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest or tamper with any such trap or to remove any animal captured in any such trap or to interfere with a police officer in setting or servicing any such trap. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to set out upon any property within the corporate limits of the city any stakes, pits, snares, traps, poison, or other device or substance capable of causing hurt, injury, or death to any domestic animal. The fact that such device or substance is found or located on such land shall be prima facie evidence that the same was set by the person in charge or control of such land. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-82, 7-8-2002)
 
Secs. 6-131—6-158. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. FINES AND PENALTIES
 
Sec. 6-159. Summary disposition.
The magistrate is authorized to receive, for first offenses only, pleas of guilty for the offenses listed in section 6-160 and to dispose of the case, except the following offenses: 
(1)	Cruelty to animals. 
(2)	Failure to confine female cat or dog in heat. 
(3)	Allowing animal to be at-large. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-91, 7-8-2002)
 
Sec. 6-160. Fines and penalties.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than the minimum fine cited in this section nor more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment or hard labor for the city for not more than six months, or both, in the discretion of the court trying the case. 
Fine and Penalties Related to Animals
Offense	Minimum Fine
1st Offense	Minimum Fine
2nd Offense Within 12 Months	Minimum Fine
3rd Offense Habitual
Cruelty to animals 	$100.00 	$200.00 	$500.00 
Failure to confine female cat or dog in heat 	$35.00 	$100.00 	$200.00 
Failure to attach state rabies tag 	$15.00 	$25.00 	$100.00 
Confining an animal in less than minimum area or improper distance from occupied dwelling 	$25.00 	$50.00 	$200.00 
Harboring vicious or dangerous animal 	$50.00 	$100.00 	$200.00 
Maintaining a nuisance 	$25.00 	$50.00 	$100.00 
Failure to obtain rabies vaccination 	$25.00 	$50.00 	$100.00 
Allowing an animal to be at-large including cats and dogs 	$35.00 	$100.00 	$300.00 
Allowing an animal known or presumed to be vicious to be at-large 	$100.00 	$200.00 	$500.00 
Failure to permit inspection according to section 6-23	$100.00 	$200.00 	$300.00 

(b)	Restitution may also be ordered by the judge trying the case for the upkeep, treatment and/or other costs associated with the capture, retention and possible euthanasia or any other cost which may be associated with the violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-218-02, § 1-92, 7-8-2002)
 
Chapter 8 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 8-1. Requirement to notify city before sale of any residential lot in a subdivision.
(a)	Any owner of property within the police jurisdiction of the city who subdivides the said real property into residential lots must notify the city council at least 30 days before the sale of any residential lot within a subdivision of the pending sale. 
(b)	The term "subdivision" means the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. 
(c)	The city council, or its representative, will inspect the private road after notification, and notify the owner or subdivider as to whether the road will be accepted as a public road, upon proper application by the owner or subdivider. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or subdivider to advertise, notify or in any way transmit that the road or the subdivision is or will be accepted as a public road of the city without complying with the provisions of this chapter, and without previously receiving notification by the city council, or its representative, that the road will be accepted as a public road of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-11-77, 8-8-1977)
 
Sec. 8-2. Numbering of buildings.
(a)	Street address numbers shall be assigned and maintained on file by the building department and/or city clerk's office, who shall also be responsible for approving the quality of said numbers. 
(b)	All existing and future buildings within the corporate limits of the city and which have been assigned a street address number, or may be assigned one in the future, shall be identified by such number permanently displayed as provided for herein. 
(c)	Street address numbers shall be made of durable, weather-resistant and highly visible material. Numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height. All street numbers shall be maintained in a clearly legible condition. 
(d)	Street address numbers shall be placed so as to be clearly visible from the street from either direction. Appropriate locations shall be: 
(1)	On, above or beside the front entrance door. 
(2)	On a freestanding marker located in the front yard of the lot on which the building is located, provided that such sign is located within ten feet of the curb, sidewalk, ditch, or other public improvements and is not at a height greater than that of a mailbox. 
(3)	On a curb-type mailbox, provided such mailbox is located in the front yard of the lot on which the building is located. 
(4)	In any other manner which has been approved by the city building department and/or the city clerk. 
(e)	Placement of the street address number on the curb will not satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(f)	For the purposes of this section, the term "front yard" means, for any corner lot, the yard bordering the right-of-way of the street for which the building has been assigned a street address number. For any other lot, the term "front yard" includes that portion of the publicly unimproved street right-of-way contiguous to the lot. 
(g)	Whenever a building is located more than 60 feet from the street right-of-way, the street address number shall be displayed on a freestanding marker or on a curb-type mailbox, but may be on the building if visible from the street and the numbers are increased to a size approved by the city building department and/or city clerk. 
(h)	All buildings existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall comply with these requirements within 90 days of the effective date. 
(i)	No building constructed or completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be provided permanent water, sanitary sewer or electrical service until these requirements are met. 
(j)	It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any building to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-130-93, 2-8-1993)
 
Secs. 8-3—8-22. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. BUILDING CODES
 
Sec. 8-23. Building codes adopted by reference.
The following building codes (as they exist at the time of adoption and as they are amended in the future), are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)	2015 International Building Code. 
(2)	2015 International Existing Building Code. 
(3)	2015 International Fire Code. 
(4)	2015 International Fuel Gas Code. 
(5)	2015 International Mechanical Code. 
(6)	2015 International Plumbing Code. 
(7)	2015 International Residential Code with the state exceptions and deletions. 
(8)	2014 Edition, National Electrical Code, NFDA 70. 
(Ord. No. 0-001-2019, § 1, 3-25-2019)
 
Sec. 8-24. References to officials in adopted technical codes.
Within those codes adopted in section 8-23, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, those designated officials of the city who have duties corresponding to those of the named officials in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible officials, insofar as enforcing the provisions of said codes is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 0-001-2019, § 2, 3-25-2019)
 
Secs. 8-25—8-51. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PERMITS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 8-52. Permit required.
(a)	It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for the construction of any building or other structure, including accessory structures, or to store building materials or erect temporary field offices, or to commence the moving, alteration, or repair (except repairs not changing the character of the structure and not exceeding $1,000.00 in cost, or painting and wall papering) of any structure, including accessory structures, until the enforcing officer has issued for such work a building permit including a statement that the plans, specifications and intended use of such structure conform in all respects with the provisions of this article. Application for the building permit shall be made to the enforcing officer on forms provided for that purpose. 
(b)	Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of up to 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 1, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-53. Conditions of the permit and permit intent.
A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 2, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-54. Requirements for building permits.
(a)	The following documentation is required to obtain a building permit: 
(1)	Permit from the county health department for installation of a septic system. 
(2)	Plot showing actual size and dimensions of lot. 
(3)	The shape, size and location of structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any buildings or other structures already on the lot. 
(4)	A full set of construction drawings. 
(b)	All owners and general contractors shall furnish the building official with a full and complete list showing the names and addresses of all subcontractors to whom work has been let. The general contractor will be responsible for all subcontractors to see that each one has a state, county and city license as required. The general contractor will be responsible for having all occupational taxes paid by all subcontractors who have performed services on said job. The occupational tax shall be calculated at 20 percent of the cost of construction as labor multiplied by two percent occupational tax. If the general contractor fails to meet the requirements of this section, the building official will not issue a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 3, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-55. Stop work orders.
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of adopted code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent, or the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. If anyone fails to obtain a license or permit and performs work on any construction project, a stop work order will be posted on the job site and work will stop until a license and permit have been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 4, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-56. Violation of code provisions.
(a)	The building official may revoke a permit issued under the provisions of adopted code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or plans on which the permit was based or that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of adopted code. 
(b)	No building permit shall be issued by any city department, official, or employee except in full compliance with this chapter and the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 5, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-57. Roads used by contractor.
(a)	Responsibility for damage and maintenance during construction. The contractor shall, at his expense, repair any damage to existing streets which is caused by his equipment. Should the contractor wish to use a city street as a haul road, he shall meet with the representatives of the city prior to starting. They shall review the condition of the street and reach an agreement as to the maintenance or restoration thereof. The unloading of heavy equipment onto a paved city street will not be allowed unless the vehicle has rubber tires. At no time will dozers or like equipment be allowed to be driven on any paved street. The contractor shall be responsible for any specific damage that may result to the road or its structures from failure to observe regulations governing traffic thereon. Resulting damage shall be repaired, within 30 days, by the contractor and approved by the superintendent of city services and/or city engineer. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to maintain all public streets and roads adjoining the work in a safe and passable condition and free of mud and debris. 
(b)	Spilling material on streets. It shall be unlawful for any person hauling any material whatsoever, whether refuse, trash, fill, rock, sand, concrete, or whatever, to spill such material from the hauling vehicle onto the streets of the city. 
(c)	Roadway excavation.
(1)	Any person, company, corporation, entity, contractor, subcontractor, or other party causing excavation to be performed on any public road in the city limits shall be required to buy a roadway excavation permit. 
(2)	Any person, company, corporation, entity, contractor, subcontractor, or other party causing excavation to be performed on any public road in the city limits shall be required to back fill the excavation site with dense graded base. Said excavation site shall be inspected by the superintendent of city services prior to being back filled, after being back filled and before replacement paving material is to be approved by the superintendent of city services and/or city engineer. Any person, company, corporation, entity, contractor, or other party found to be in violation of this section shall be required to re-excavate the original excavation site and back fill as described within this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 6, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-58. Schedule of fees for building and construction permits.
Before commencement of any project or construction of any type, including additions, roofing, excavations, demolition or locating and placing manufactured or mobile homes, plans must be submitted to the building official or city. Upon approval according to the city ordinance and regulations, a permit shall be issued by the city through the office of the city clerk, subject, however, to payment of fees as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 7, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-59. Construction fees.
Fees for commercial and residential construction per square foot shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and city council. The building and zoning official will determine the square foot classification using the construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 8, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-60. Permit fee schedule and valuation.
The city clerk, building official and/or revenue officer is hereby authorized and directed to charge a permit fee in an amount determined from time to time by the mayor and city council for issuance of a permit for a new building, addition, or alteration of an existing structure. Any person, firm or corporation who shall erect or attempt to erect a building and/or accessory structure within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a permit and furnishing the information herein before described to the city clerk, building inspector and/or revenue officer, or who shall commit any violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $500.00 and may be imprisoned for not more than six months, either or both, at the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 9, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-61. Permit fee schedule for commercial construction.
(a)	For commercial construction, there shall be required a commercial construction building permit fee plus the state construction management fee that equals $1.00 per $1,000.00 of construction authorized. 
(b)	Attachment of the state requirement pertaining to the additional permit fee for commercial construction permits only shall become a part of this section. 
(c)	All required inspections for commercial and residential construction are included in the building permit fees. If the adopted code standards are not met on the initial inspection, said project will be subject to re-inspection and a re-inspection fee will be charged. The re-inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
Required Inspections
Building 	Footing 
	Framing 
	Final 
Electrical 	Temporary pole 
	Rough in 
	Final 
Plumbing 	Rough in 
	Final 
Mechanical 	Rough in 
	Final 
Gas 	Upon completion 

(d)	For mobile homes or manufactured homes, a fee for locating the home for residential purposes shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. Said permit shall be in a form substantially as follows: 
(1)	The name of the placement company. 
(2)	The name of the owner and location of the building or the manufactured home. 
(3)	The permit shall be posted at the location of the building or manufactured home. 
(4)	A health department permit to install a septic system must accompany paperwork. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 10, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-62. Plumbing permit (commercial and residential).
Permit fees and an additional issuing fee for commercial and residential plumbing shall be in an amount as established from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
Plumbing Permit
Minimum permit fee 	Amount as established by mayor and city council 
1,000 to 2,000 square feet 	$0.030 per square foot 
2,001 square feet and up 	$60.00 plus $0.035 for each square foot above 2,000 square feet 
Issuing fee 	Amount as established by mayor and city council 

(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 11, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-63. Electrical permit (commercial and residential).
Permit fees and an additional issuing fee for commercial and residential electrical shall be in an amount as established from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
Electrical Permit
Minimum permit fee 	Amount as established by mayor and city council 
1,000 to 2,000 square feet 	$0.030 per square foot 
2,001 square feet and up 	$60.00 plus $0.035 for each square foot above 2,000 square feet 
Issuing fee 	Amount as established by mayor and city council 

(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 12, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-64. Gas permit (commercial and residential).
Permit fees and an additional issuing fee for commercial and residential gas shall be in an amount as established from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
Gas Permit
Minimum permit fee 	Amount as established by mayor and city council 
1,000 to 2,000 square feet 	$0.030 per square foot 
2,001 square feet and up 	$60.00 plus $0.035 for each square foot above 2,000 square feet 
Issuing fee 	Amount as established by mayor and city council 

(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 13, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-65. Mechanical permit (commercial and residential).
Permit fees and an additional issuing fee for commercial and residential mechanical work shall be in an amount as established from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
Mechanical Permit
Minimum permit fee 	Amount as established by mayor and city council 
1,000 to 2,000 square feet 	$0.030 per square foot 
2,001 square feet and up 	$60.00 plus $0.035 for each square foot above 2,000 square feet 
Issuing fee 	Amount as established by mayor and city council 

(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 14, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-66. Roofing permit (commercial and residential).
Permit fees and an additional issuing fee for commercial and residential roofing shall be in an amount as established from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 15, 4-10-2017)
 
Sec. 8-67. Swimming pool permit.
Permit fees and an additional issuing fee for swimming pools shall be in an amount as established from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2017, § 16, 4-10-2017)
 
Secs. 8-68—8-92. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. MOVING PERMITS
 
Sec. 8-93. Permit required.
(a)	It shall be unlawful to move any building, residence, commercial structure or industrial structure over or across any city street or public way within the city limits without first obtaining from the city a building moving permit. 
(b)	A permit for moving an approved building or structure shall be acquired from the office of the city clerk. Any person, company, partnership, association or corporation desiring such a permit shall file with the city clerk an application showing that the structure to be moved and the location to which it shall be moved will fully comply with this division and any subdivision restrictions or regulations of this city. There shall be filed with such application the following: 
(1)	A plat of the property along with a permit from the health department for an on-site sewage disposal system for the property. 
(2)	Drawings of the property with said structure sketched in, including any additions to be added to the said structure. 
(3)	Drawings should include distances from said structure to property lines. 
(4)	Photographs of all sides of the structure. The said structure shall be inspected by the city to ensure the said structure will meet the building codes adopted by the city, any other applicable state technical codes or rules and, if residential, to ensure it will be compatible with other residences in the area. 
(c)	There will be given a 90-day period starting from the purchase date of the building permit for the move and improvements to said structure to be completed. Upon expiration of this 90-day period, there shall be a fine of $500.00, plus ten percent added to the cumulative fine each 30 days after the expiration date of the building permit if the said structure is not completed. 
(d)	There will be an application fee to be paid to the city clerk in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(e)	The application and all accompanying materials must be reviewed and approved by the mayor and council before the building permit will be issued. 
(f)	The provisions of this division do not apply to the movement or placement of mobile homes. 
(Ord. No. 0-104-90, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. 0-105-90, 3-12-1990)
 
Secs. 8-94—8-114. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. SIDEWALK PERMITS
 
Sec. 8-115. Council determination.
The city council has reviewed the problem of construction on or of sidewalks and driveways interfering with the public right-of-way, and ditches adjoining public roads, and determined that the public interest and the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city require that said construction be regulated. 
(Ord. No. 0-30-79, 4-23-1979; Ord. No. 0-140-94, 4-25-1994; Ord. No. 0-149-95, 3-27-1995; Ord. No. 0-167-97, § 1, 5-12-1997)
 
Sec. 8-116. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, repair, or renew any sidewalk or driveway, if it crosses the public right-of-way or connects with any street in the city, without obtaining a permit for such work. All installations, repairs or renewals shall be in accordance with the standard of specifications for such work furnished by the city, and such work shall be under the supervision and inspection of the building inspector of the city. The permit fee for such work shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. Such fee shall cover all charges for issuance of the permit, and the inspection and supervision of the work. 
(Ord. No. 0-30-79, 4-23-1979; Ord. No. 0-140-94, 4-25-1994; Ord. No. 0-149-95, 3-27-1995; Ord. No. 0-167-97, § 2, 5-12-1997)
 
Sec. 8-117. General contractor responsibility.
It shall be the responsibility of the general contractor to install driveway pipe. All pipe must be reinforced concrete and not less than 16 feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 0-30-79, 4-23-1979; Ord. No. 0-140-94, 4-25-1994; Ord. No. 0-149-95, 3-27-1995; Ord. No. 0-167-97, § 3, 5-12-1997)
 
Sec. 8-118. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation failing to obtain a permit prior to beginning the construction as identified in section 8-116, or failing to follow the specifications for such work as provided by the city or to follow the instructions of the building inspector designated to supervise such work, shall, upon conviction, be punished according to section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 0-30-79, 4-23-1979; Ord. No. 0-140-94, 4-25-1994; Ord. No. 0-149-95, 3-27-1995; Ord. No. 0-167-97, § 4, 5-12-1997)
 
Secs. 8-119—8-149. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. SWIMMING POOLS
 
Sec. 8-150. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Swimming pool means a body of water in an artificial or semiartificial receptacle or other container, whether located indoors or outdoors, used or intended to be used for public, semipublic or private swimming by adults or children, or both adults and children, whether or not any charge or fee is imposed upon such adults or children, operated and maintained by any person whether he is an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, and shall include all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool, and also all swimming pools operated and maintained in conjunction with or by clubs, motels, hotels and community associations. The term "swimming pool" also includes those used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his family, and by friends invited to use it without payment of any fee, in general being what is commonly understood to be a private residential swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 0-34-79, § 1, 11-12-1979)
 
Sec. 8-151. Enclosure of swimming pool.
(a)	Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than five feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes, or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension except for doors and gates; and if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension shall not exceed four inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. 
(b)	All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device located at the top of said gate in a manner so as to be as inaccessible to small children as possible, for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. 
(c)	This requirement shall be applicable to all new swimming pools hereafter constructed, other than indoor pools, and shall apply to all existing pools which have a minimum depth of 18 inches of water; provided, however, that any existing pool which, as of the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived, is completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this section, if it provides protection as established in section 8-152, and otherwise complies with the requirements of this section. No person in possession of land within the city, or police jurisdiction thereof, either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool having a minimum depth of 18 inches shall fail to provide and maintain such fence or wall as therein provided. 
(d)	The owner of any existing swimming pool which does not comply with the requirements of this section shall have 60 days after the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-34-79, § 2, 11-12-1979)
 
Sec. 8-152. Modifications.
The city council may make modifications in individual cases, upon a showing of good cause with respect to the height, nature or location of the fence, wall, gate or latches or the necessity therefor, provided the protection as sought thereunder is not reduced thereby. The city council may permit other protective devices or structures to be used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection afforded by the wall, fence, gate and latch described herein. 
(Ord. No. 0-34-79, § 3, 11-12-1979)
 
Sec. 8-153. Permit required.
All persons, firms, partnerships or corporations building a swimming pool within the corporate limits of the city is required to purchase a building permit from the city clerk or building inspector and furnish the clerk with the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the builder of the swimming pool. 
(2)	The location of the swimming pool. 
(3)	The name and address of the owner of the swimming pool. 
(4)	The name and address of the contractor and/or subcontractor who will perform the work. 
(Ord. No. 0-70-84, § 1, 8-13-1984)
 
Sec. 8-154. Permit fee.
The city clerk or building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to charge a fee for the issuance of a permit for the construction of a swimming pool that exceeds construction costs of $1,000.00. The permit fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. The permit must be posted at the location of the building site for the swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 0-70-84, § 2, 8-13-1984)
 
Chapter 10 COURTS 
 
Sec. 10-1. Court costs.
The council, having made inquiry into the various costs of holding city court, including the expenses of the city clerk, city judge, police officers serving as bailiffs, and the extra duty time for police officers to testify, find that the amount of court costs for each case shall be as established by the mayor and council from time to time, to which should be added any required costs fixed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 0-10-77, § 1, 8-8-1977)
 
Sec. 10-2. Schedule of fines.
The schedule of fines for traffic violations, heretofore published by the state supreme court according to the state rules of judicial administration, rules 18 and 19, is amended to include the following three offenses, and specific fine for each offense, pursuant to the authority granted this body by rule 19(B)(2)(b), and the city clerk, and/or magistrate, is hereby authorized to accept a guilty plea and summarily dispose of the following offenses with the fine for such offense to be collected in the amount hereinbelow established, all in accordance with the terms and provisions of the uniform traffic citation and the rules of the state supreme court: 
(1)	Aggravated speeding: $20.00 minimum plus $1.00 per each and every mile per hour over the posted speed limit. 
(2)	Improper parking: $10.00. 
(3)	Littering: $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 0-10-77, § 2, 8-8-1977)
 
Sec. 10-3. Establishment of municipal court.
There is hereby established a municipal court for the city pursuant to the provisions of Act 1205, 1975 Regular Session of the Alabama Legislature. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 1, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-4. Jurisdiction.
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction of all prosecutions for the breach of ordinances of the municipality within its corporate limits and police jurisdiction. This jurisdiction shall also extend to all prosecutions for violations of state misdemeanors committed within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction of the municipality where such offenses have been made offenses against the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 2, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-5. Time and place of holding court.
The municipal court shall hold court at such time and place as the governing body may determine with the advice of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 3, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-6. Provisions for judge.
(a)	The municipal court shall consist of one municipal judge to be appointed by a vote of a majority of the members elected or appointed to the municipal governing body. The judge shall be appointed for a term of two years. The municipal judge shall be eligible for reappointment upon the expiration of his term. He shall hold office until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)	The municipal judge must be licensed to practice law in the state and must be a qualified elector of the state. No judge shall be otherwise employed in any capacity by the municipality during his term of office. 
(c)	The office of the municipal judge shall be vacant if he dies, resigns, or is removed. Vacancies shall be filled by the municipal governing body in the same manner as original appointments are made. Any person so appointed shall be eligible to serve two years from the date of appointment. 
(d)	The municipal judge shall, before assuming office, take and sign the oath provided by the constitution and a copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state, the administrative director of courts and the city clerk. 
(e)	The municipal judge shall be subject to all grounds of disqualification from hearing specific cases applicable to circuit court judges. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 4, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-7. Compensation of judge.
The annual salary of the municipal shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time and shall be payable in 12 equal monthly installments. This salary shall not be diminished during the judge's term of office. Any general increase in the compensation of all or substantially all municipal employees shall be applied proportionately to the salary of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 5, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-8. Powers of the court.
(a)	The municipal judge shall have the power to admit to bail any person charged with the violation of any municipal ordinance by requiring an appearance bond, with good security, to be approved by the municipal judge or his designee in an amount not to exceed $500.00 and may, in his discretion, admit to bail such persons on a personal recognizance bond conditioned on the appearance of such persons before him on a day named therein to answer the charges preferred against them. 
(b)	The municipal judge shall have the authority to punish any person convicted of violating any municipal ordinance with a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or a sentence of imprisonment or hard labor for a period not exceeding six months; provided, however, that no fine or sentence of imprisonment shall exceed the maximum fine or sentence provided by the city ordinance violated nor shall the fine or sentence exceed the maximum fine and sentence provided for violation of a substantially similar offense under state law. The penalty imposed on a corporation shall consist of the fine only, plus costs of court. 
(c)	The municipal judge, in his judgment, may provide that if a fine and costs are not paid within the time prescribed, the defendant, unless indigent, shall work out the amount of the judgment under the direction of the municipal authority allowing not less than $10.00 for each day's service. 
(d)	Upon each conviction in municipal court for a violation of any ordinance of the city, there shall be taxed against the defendant as court costs the sum of $10.00, and there shall also be taxed as costs the additional costs and fees imposed by the state, and the latter such costs and fees shall be remitted pursuant to the said statutes. All costs taxed for the city, as hereinabove provided, shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(e)	Upon conviction, the court may, upon a showing of inability to make immediate payment of fines and costs, accept defendant's bond with or without surety and with waiver of exemptions as to personally payable within 90 days, upon nonpayment of which execution may issue as upon judgments in state courts. 
(f)	The municipal judge shall have the authority to continue the case from time to time to permit the fine and costs to be paid, remit fines, costs and fees, impose intermittent sentences, establish work release programs, require attendance of educational, corrective or rehabilitative programs, suspend driving privileges for such times and under such conditions as provided by law and order hearings to determine the competency of the defendant to stand trial, provided, further, that the judge may enter an order authorizing the defendant to drive under the conditions set forth in the order. 
(g)	All cases in municipal court shall be tried by a municipal judge without a jury. 
(h)	The municipal judge may suspend execution of sentence and place a defendant on probation for varying periods of time, not to exceed two years, under the procedures and conditions set out in section 8-104(f) of Act 1205, 1975 Regular Session. 
(i)	The municipal judge may administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and compel the production of books and papers, punish by fine not exceeding $50.00 and/or imprisonment not exceeding five days any person found and adjudged to be in contempt of court, and shall have power coextensive with the jurisdiction of the district court to issue writs and other process, and to approve and declare bonds forfeited. The municipal judge shall designate any other municipal officers who shall be authorized to approve appearance and appeal bonds. 
(j)	The municipal court shall take judicial notice of the ordinances of the municipality. 
(k)	The county sheriff and all law enforcement officers of the municipality shall obey the municipal judge having legal authority in faithfully executing the warrants and processes committed to them for service according to their mandates. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 6, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-9. Powers of the mayor.
The mayor may remit fines and such costs as payable to the municipality and commute sentences imposed by municipal judges of the court to which an appeal was taken for violations of municipal ordinances, and may grant pardons, after conviction, for violation of such ordinances, and he shall report his action to the council or other governing body at the first regular meeting thereof in the succeeding month with his reasons therefor in writing. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 7, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-10. Appeals.
(a)	All appeals from judgments of the municipal court shall be to the circuit court of the circuit in which the violation occurred for trial de novo. 
(b)	The municipality may appeal within 60 days without bond, from a judgment of the municipal court holding a municipal ordinance invalid. 
(c)	A defendant may appeal in any case within 14 days from the entry of judgment by filing notice of appeal and giving bond with or without surety approved by the court or the clerk in an amount not more than $500.00 and costs, as fixed by the court, conditioned upon the defendant's appearance before the circuit court. The municipal court may waive appearance bond upon satisfactory showing that the defendant is indigent or otherwise unable to provide a surety bond. If an appeal bond is waived, a defendant sentenced to imprisonment shall not be released from custody but may obtain release at any time by filing a bond approved by the municipal court. If the defendant is not released, the prosecutor shall notify the circuit clerk and the case shall be set for trial at the earliest practicable time. 
(d)	When an appeal has been taken, the municipality shall file the notice and other documents in the court to which the appeal is taken within 15 days, failing which the municipality shall be deemed to have abandoned the prosecution, the defendant shall stand discharged and the bond shall be automatically terminated. 
(e)	Upon trial or plea of guilty in the circuit court on appeal, the court may impose any penalty or sentence which the municipal court might have imposed. 
(f)	Upon failure of an appellant to appear in circuit court when the case is called for trial, unless good cause for such default is shown, the court shall dismiss the appeal and enter judgment of default on the appeal bond, and may also issue a warrant for arrest of the appellant. A copy of the order shall be delivered by the circuit clerk to the clerk of the municipal court. The circuit court may, on motion of the defendant made within 30 days of the order of dismissal, set aside the dismissal and other orders and reinstate the appeal on such terms as the court may prescribe for good cause shown by the defendant. 
(g)	Upon receipt of notice of dismissal of an appeal, the municipal court may issue a warrant for arrest of the defendant, who may also be arrested without a warrant as an escape. Upon arrest the defendant shall be delivered to the municipal authorities and punished in accordance with the judgment of the municipal court. 
(h)	If a judgment is entered against a defendant upon appeal, the circuit court shall remand the defendant to the municipal authorities for punishment in accordance with the judgment of the circuit court, unless, when the judgment is for fine and costs only, the judgment is paid or a judgment is conferred therefor in favor of the municipality with sureties or as otherwise provided for convictions under state law. 
(i)	Upon receipt of payment of fines and costs upon appeals, the clerk of the circuit court shall within 30 days pay 90 percent of such fines and forfeitures, and ten percent of the costs, to the treasurer of the municipality. The circuit clerk shall be liable on his bond for such fines and costs plus a penalty of five percent per month for default in such payments. 
(j)	From the judgment of the circuit court, the municipality, in a case holding invalid an ordinance, or the defendant in any case, may appeal to the court of criminal appeals in like manner as in cases of appeals for convictions of violation of the criminal laws of the state. If the appeal is taken by the municipality, it shall not be required to give surety for the cost of the appeal. When taken by the defendant, he may give bail with sufficient sureties, conditioned that he will appear and abide by the judgment of the appellate court, and failing to give bail he must be committed to the municipal jail; but he may give such bail at any time pending the appeal. When an appeal is taken by the defendant and bail is given pending the appeal, and the judgment of conviction is affirmed or the appeal is dismissed, the defendant is bound by the undertaking of bail to surrender himself to the municipal authorities within 15 days from the date of such affirmance or dismissal, and if he shall fail to do so, the clerk of the circuit court from which the appeal is taken, upon motion of the municipality, must endorse the bail bond forfeited, and a writ of arrest must be issued by the clerk to the sheriff. Upon arrest the defendant shall be delivered to the municipal authorities and the sentence must without delay be carried out as if no appeal has been taken. If bail is forfeited as herein provided, a conditional judgment must be rendered by the court in favor of the municipality and the same proceedings had thereon for the municipality as is authorized by law to be had in the name of the state in state cases. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 8, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-11. Warrants.
The municipal judge is authorized to issue arrest and search warrants upon affidavit for municipal ordinance violations returnable to the municipal court and for violations of state law returnable to any state court. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 9, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-12. Magistrates.
The municipal judge shall take steps to have a magistrate appointed for the city, pursuant to rule 18 of the state rules of judicial administration. The powers of the magistrate shall be limited to: 
(1)	Issuance of arrest warrants; 
(2)	Granting of bail in minor misdemeanor prosecutions in accordance with the discretionary bail schedule and approving property, cash, and professional surety bonds upon a municipal judge's approval; 
(3)	Receiving of pleas of guilty in minor misdemeanors where a schedule of fines has been prescribed by law or rule; 
(4)	Accountability to the municipal court for all uniform traffic tickets and complaints issued, including all electronic traffic tickets or e-tickets, as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-4, in instances in which the court has, in its discretion, determined to use e-tickets, and for all monies received and records of offenses; 
(5)	Accepting and screening affidavits of substantial hardship upon a municipal judge's approval and, if authorized by court order, assigning attorneys on a rotating basis from a list approved by the court; 
(6)	Conducting arraignments and setting nonguilty pleas for trial, upon a municipal judge's approval; 
(7)	Opening court and calling the docket, upon a municipal judge's approval; 
(8)	Granting continuances in municipal ordinance violation cases, upon a municipal judge's approval; 
(9)	Dismissing no driver's license violations pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-6-9 where the defendant shows proof of a driver's license at the time the citation was written; 
(10)	Dismissing mandatory liability insurance violations pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-7A-20 where the defendant has produced satisfactory evidence that at the time of the citation the motor vehicle was covered by a liability insurance policy in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-7A-4; 
(11)	Dismissing equipment violations where a municipal ordinance allows and where the law enforcement officer signs the uniform traffic ticket and complaint verifying that the equipment has been replaced; and 
(12)	Such other authority as may be granted by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 10, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-13. Acting municipal judge.
In the absence from the city, death, disability, or disqualification of a municipal judge, for any reason, the mayor of the municipality shall have the authority to designate a person, licensed to practice law in the state and a qualified elector of the state, not otherwise employed in any capacity by the municipality, to serve as acting municipal judge with all power and authority of a duly appointed municipal judge. No such acting judge may serve for more than 30 successive days or a total of 60 days in any calendar year, provided that when the duly appointed municipal judge is disqualified pursuant to the Constitution, the time of service limitations for acting judges shall not apply during such disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 11, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-14. Report of court proceedings.
The municipal judge shall report on the proceedings of the municipal court as required by law or rule. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 12, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-15. Report to the council.
The municipal judge shall be required to make a report to the council on the operation of the municipal court every month. 
(Ord. No. 0-16-77, § 13, 11-28-1977)
 
Sec. 10-16. Court cost for traffic cases established.
Court cost for traffic cases in the municipal court shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-166-97, § 1, 5-12-1997)
 
Sec. 10-17. Court cost for non-traffic cases established.
Court cost for non-traffic cases in the municipal court shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-166-97, § 2, 5-12-1997)
 
Sec. 10-18. Court cost for city ordinance violations established.
Court cost for cases brought in the municipal court for an offense brought under the city ordinance adopting Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191, or under said section shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-166-97, § 3, 5-12-1997)
 
Sec. 10-19. Increases in costs.
Any increase in municipal court costs for either traffic, non-traffic, or DUI cases mandated by the state or any increase in the court costs and fees of the district court of the county for misdemeanor cases, whether traffic, non-traffic, or DUI shall cause the court costs in the municipal court to increase by the same dollar amount. 
(Ord. No. 0-166-97, § 4, 5-12-1997)
 
Sec. 10-20. Corrections fund established.
There is hereby established a special municipal fund designated as the corrections fund, into which all court costs collected in addition to or over and above those in effect prior to August 1, 1997, shall be deposited for the exclusive purpose of the operation and maintenance of the city jail, the municipal court complex or any other correctional facility, detention center or court complex which the city council may designate pursuant to and in compliance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-7.1. 
(Ord. No. 0-166-97, § 5, 5-12-1997)
 
Sec. 10-21. Fund 13; Municipal Court Judicial Administration Fund (MCJAF) established.
Pursuant to the adoption of Act 2012-535 a new fund is hereby established in the accounting software to establish Fund 13—The Municipal Court Judicial Administration Fund (MCJAF). The fund shall include revenue accounts for traffic, non-traffic court cost and the new bail bond fees. The fund accounting shall have expenditure accounts that would be for the administrative needs of the municipal court. Such fund shall be opened at BB&T Bank in the city. The new court cost shall increase accordingly if new legislation is enacted through the years without having to amend this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2012, § 5, 6-25-2012)
 
Sec. 10-22. Pretrial diversion program.
(a)	Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the city may establish a pretrial diversion program for any defendant within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
(b)	All discretionary powers endowed by a common law and provided by statutes and acts of this state or powers or discretion otherwise provided by law for the city shall be retained. 
(c)	The pretrial diversion program shall be under the direct supervision and control of the city. The city may contract with any agency, person, or corporation for services related to this act. The city may employ necessary persons to accomplish this act and those persons shall serve at the pleasure of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 1, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-23. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Application fee means a one-time administrative fee imposed by the city as a condition precedent to participation in a pretrial diversion program. 
City prosecutor means the person or persons charged with the responsibility of prosecuting cases in the municipal court or any legal staff employed by the city prosecutor. 
Law enforcement means as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-8A-1(1). 
Law enforcement officer means as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-25-1(15), whether employed in the state or elsewhere. 
Municipal court judge means the judge of the municipal court for the city duly appointed by the city council in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-30, or a special judge appointed by the mayor of the city in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-34. 
Offender means any person charged with a criminal offense, including, but not limited to, any misdemeanor, violation, or traffic offense, as defined by the state code, which was allegedly committed in the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city. 
Pretrial diversion program orprogram means a program that allows the imposition by the city or by a designated agency of certain conditions of behavior and conduct for a specified period of time upon an offender which allow the offender to have his charges reduced, dismissed without prejudice, or otherwise mitigated should all of the conditions be met during the time frame set by the city's municipal court judge. 
Serious physical injury means as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2(14). 
Supervision fee means any fee other than the application fee imposed by any agency providing supervision of treatment of the offender. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 2, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-24. Application for admission.
An offender may apply to the city for admittance into the pretrial diversion program. Once a defendant has been approved and completed a pretrial diversion program, said defendant shall not be afforded the same opportunity to re-apply or enroll in another pretrial diversion program with the city municipal court until a period of time in the amount of five years has passed. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 3, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-25. Admission at discretion of judge.
Admittance into the pretrial diversion program is in the sole discretion of the municipal court judge upon application approved by the city prosecutor. An offender deemed by the city prosecutor to be a threat to the safety or wellbeing of the community shall not be eligible for the program. An offender charged with any of the following types of offenses without the express written consent of the victim, and/or the complaining witness may be ineligible for admittance: 
(1)	Any offense involving violence or aggression resulting in injury to a law enforcement officer. 
(2)	Any offense involving eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer. 
(3)	Any offense involving violence where a weapon was used or where children are victims. 
(4)	Any driving under the influence charge where serious physical injuries are involved. 
(5)	Any driving under the influence charge where the defendant refused to test (SFST, PBT, Draeger, alcohol breath tests, drug or alcohol blood tests, etc.) or the defendant has a criminal history of alcohol related offenses. 
(6)	Any offense wherein the offender is a public official and the charge is related to the capacity of the offender as a public official. 
(7)	A person may not be admitted to the program if the person holds a commercial driver license (CDL) issued in any U.S. state, any U.S. possession, any U.S. territory, or a U.S. insular area. 
(8)	Any alcohol, drug or synthetic drug related offense which occurs within a school, educational facility and/or on the grounds of a school or educational facility may make the defendant ineligible for the discretionary pretrial diversion program. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 4, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-26. Qualifications.
The city prosecutor may consider an offender for the pretrial diversion program based on any of the following circumstances: 
(1)	Police officer approval. 
(2)	Prior record of offenses/driving offenses. 
(3)	Assistance provided to law enforcement. 
(4)	Submitted to standard field sobriety testing, portable breath testing and AlcolSensor testing (did not refuse). 
(5)	Admission of guilt and remorse. 
(6)	Current clean drug test. 
(7)	Defendant's attitude from time of arrest and up to consideration of his application for the deferred prosecution program. 
(8)	There is a probability justice will be served if the offender is placed in the program. 
(9)	It is determined the needs of the state, city and of the offender can be met through the program. 
(10)	The offender appears to pose no substantial threat to the safety and wellbeing of the community. 
(11)	It appears the offender is not likely to be involved in further criminal activity if the offender complies with all conditions imposed pursuant to the program. 
(12)	The offender will likely respond to rehabilitative treatment or counseling. 
(13)	The need for restitution for the victim from the offender outweighs the interest of the state and city for incarceration of the offender. 
(14)	The city prosecutor may waive any of the standards specified in this section if justice or special circumstances dictate. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 5, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-27. Further information required from offender.
(a)	Upon application by an offender for admission into the pretrial diversion program, and prior to admission thereto and as a part of the evaluation process of the city, the city prosecutor may require the offender to furnish information concerning past criminal history, education history, work record, family history, medical or psychiatric treatment or care prescribed or received, psychological tests taken, and any other information concerning the offender which the city prosecutor believes has a bearing on the decision whether or not the offender should be admitted to the program. 
(b)	The city prosecutor may require the offender to submit to any type of test or evaluation process or interview the city prosecutor deems appropriate in evaluating the offender for admittance into the program. The costs of any test or evaluation shall be paid by the offender or as otherwise agreed to or provided for by this act. The offender shall provide the city prosecutor written consent to allow the city prosecutor to receive any educational, work, medical, psychiatric, psychological, or other records deemed necessary by the city prosecutor for the evaluation process. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 6, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-28. Participation agreement.
(a)	Following the decision of the city prosecutor to recommend the offender into the pretrial diversion program, but prior to entry, the city prosecutor and the offender shall enter into a written agreement stating the conditions of the participation of the offender in the program. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following: 
(1)	A voluntary waiver of the right of the offender to a speedy trial. 
(2)	An agreement to the tolling, while in the program, of periods of limitations established by statues or rules of court. 
(3)	An agreement to the conditions of the program established by the city prosecutor. 
(4)	If there is a victim of the charged crime, an agreement to the restitution repayment within a specified period of time and in an amount to be determined by the city prosecutor taking into account circumstances of the offender and the victim. 
(5)	A waiver in writing of the right of the offender to a jury trial. 
(6)	Submission of a written plea of guilty to the offense charged or agreed upon included offenses, together with an agreement as to whether the case is to be dismissed upon successful completion of the program, and an agreement, if there be any, as to the recommended sentence should a sentence be imposed. 
(b)	In addition to those requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, or as a condition of continued participation in the program, the city prosecutor may require the offender to agree to any of the following terms or conditions: 
(1)	To participate in substance abuse treatment. 
(2)	To participate in an education setting to include, but not be limited to, K—12, college, job training, trade school, GED classes, or basic education courses. 
(3)	If appropriate, to attempt to learn to read and write the English language. 
(4)	To financially support his children or pay any court ordered child support. 
(5)	To refrain from the use of drugs or alcohol or frequenting places where drugs or alcohol are sold or used. 
(6)	To not commit any criminal offense. 
(7)	To refrain from contact with certain named persons or premises. 
(8)	To maintain or seek employment. 
(9)	To not leave the state without prior written consent of the city attorney or supervising agency or personnel. 
(10)	To maintain a residence approved by the city prosecutor or supervising agency or personnel. 
(11)	To attend individual, group, financial, chemical addiction, family, mental health, sex offender, traffic safety, bad check, substance abuse, truancy, shoplifting, alcohol, financial management, employment or anger management counseling. 
(12)	To pay all court costs, fees, fines, and worthless checks, and obey any other lawful court order associated with the offense for which the offender has entered the program, or any other case. 
(13)	To refrain from the possession or use of any deadly weapon or dangerous instrument as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2. 
(14)	To pay supervision fees and application fees pursuant to this act. 
(15)	To observe curfews, home detention or travel constraints as set out in the agreement signed by the offender. 
(16)	To have restitution, court costs, fees, child support, and any other moneys withheld or garnished from the wages or salary of the offender or withheld from any state income tax due the offender, or from any available insurance policy, or forfeited from any other real or personal property of the offender, and applied to the above. 
(17)	To be admitted to a drug or alcohol treatment program on an inpatient or outpatient basis or receive other treatment alternatives for substance abuse. 
(18)	To submit to periodic or random drug testing as part of the program and other terms and conditions related to substance abuse as the city prosecutor may direct. 
(19)	To waive in writing the right of the offender to a probation hearing in the event of termination or withdrawal from the program. 
(20)	To perform community service. 
(21)	To any other terms or conditions as the city prosecutor or his designee and the offender may agree to in the above-stated agreement, it being the purpose of this act to allow the city prosecutor broad discretion in designing a program specifically for each offender and his particular circumstances. 
(22)	When applicable, to be required to pay supervision fees to the agency or entity responsible for monitoring and verifying the compliance of the offender with the terms of the program set forth by the city prosecutor. The fees shall be paid by the offender to the supervising entity in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 7, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-29. Nonrefundable application fee.
(a)	An offender may be assessed a nonrefundable application fee when the offender is approved for the pretrial diversion program. The amount of the assessment for participation in the program shall be in addition to any court costs, fees, and assessments for the crime victim's compensation fund, department of forensic sciences assessments, drug, alcohol or anger management treatment required by law, and any costs of supervision, treatment and restitution for which the offender may be responsible. A schedule of payments for any of these fees may be established by the city prosecutor. 
(b)	The following application fees shall be applied to offenders accepted into the program: 
(1)	The application fee will be determined by the municipal judge. It shall be the discretion at the time the application is filed what the fee shall be and will be determined by the municipal judge. 
(2)	The application fees required by this act shall be paid in full in advance and shall be collected by the city municipal court and 100 percent shall be disbursed to the city general fund. 
(3)	An applicant offender may not be denied access into the pretrial diversion program based solely on the inability of the offender to pay the application fee. Application fees may be waived or reduced or delayed for just cause, including indigency of the offender, at the discretion of the city. Any determination of the indigency of the offender for purposes of program fee mitigation shall be made by the city, but shall be granted only upon the determination by the municipal court judge that there is no reasonable likelihood within the reasonably foreseeable future that the offender will have the ability to pay the application fee. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 8, 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 0-003-2015, 1-12-2015)
 
Sec. 10-30. Collection of fees.
Application fees required by this act shall be collected by the clerk of the municipal court. The fees shall be disbursed to the general fund on a monthly basis at the same time all court funds are distributed to various agencies for various court cost, fines, etc. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 9, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-31. Municipal court judge approval.
Upon acceptance of an offender into the pretrial diversion program by the city prosecutor, the city prosecutor and the offender shall submit the written application of the offender, the acceptance of the offender by the city prosecutor, and the agreement between the city prosecutor and the offender to the municipal court judge presiding over the affected case of the offender for approval. The offender shall also enter a plea of guilty to the charge or charges involved. If the municipal court judge rejects the agreement and guilty plea, any monies paid by the offender in satisfaction of the application fee shall be refunded to the offender. The offender shall be liable for any actual expenses already incurred by the city prosecutor or any agency or service provider in furtherance of the application and evaluation process and the same will be deducted from any monies so refunded to the offender. 
(1)	Upon approval of the agreement and acceptance of the guilty plea, the court shall expressly retain jurisdiction of the case, any other provision of law notwithstanding, and may withdraw and file the case or otherwise place it on an administrative docket until such time as the court has been notified that the offender has fulfilled the terms of the agreement, has been terminated from the program, or otherwise withdrawn from the program. Imposition of punishment by the court shall be deferred until the offender has successfully completed the program or is terminated from the program. 
(2)	In the event the offender is terminated from the program, the municipal court judge shall impose appropriate punishment in the same manner as with any plea of guilty or finding of guilty and shall not be bound by the terms of agreement as to what punishment to impose. 
(3)	Upon successful completion of the program by the offender, the city prosecutor shall notify the municipal court judge in writing of the fact together with a request that the court enter an order of disposition of the case pursuant to the agreement between the offender and the city prosecutor. 
(4)	Regardless of whether the offender successfully completes the program or withdraws from or is terminated from the program, the offender will still be liable for and required to pay any and all court costs and fees, restitution, victim's compensation fund assessment, and any and all other fees and assessments, in the same manner as if the offender had not applied for entry into the program and had been found guilty of the offense or offenses involved. No costs, fees, restitution, or assessments shall be waived or remitted, absent an express agreement to that effect between the city prosecutor and the offender, without a finding by the municipal court judge that the offender does not have the reasonable ability to pay the same within the reasonably foreseeable future. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 10, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-32. Penalties; violations.
After any violation of any program terms or conditions or upon any breach of any program agreement by the offender, the city prosecutor may do any of the following: 
(1)	Continue the agreement with or without modification. 
(2)	Terminate the offender from the pretrial diversion program. 
(3)	Require the offender to adopt a new agreement as a condition of continued participation. 
(4)	The city prosecutor may waive a violation for good cause shown why the offender should stay in the program. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 11, 10-14-2013)
 
Sec. 10-33. Liability for offender.
In no event shall the city prosecutor or any other agency or service provider have any liability, criminal or civil, for the conduct of any offender while participating in the pretrial diversion program unless the event was foreseeable or for acceptance of an offender into the program. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2013, § 12, 10-14-2013)
 
Chapter 12 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 12-1. Adoption of fire prevention code.
There is hereby adopted by the city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the National Fire Codes, the 2013 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by the state fire marshal, of which code not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and, from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the police jurisdiction. This certain code may also be referenced throughout this chapter and the Code as the "fire prevention code." 
(Ord. No. 70, § 1, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-2. Establishment and duties of bureau of fire prevention.
(a)	The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the city fire department which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)	The chief in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the city council. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service, and he shall not be removed from office except for cause after public trial. 
(c)	The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the mayor the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and non-members of the fire department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause. 
(d)	A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the chief executive officer of the municipality; it shall contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein; the chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 2, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-3. Terms used in the adopted fire prevention code.
(a)	Wherever the term "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it means the city. 
(b)	Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it means the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 3, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-4. Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited.
The limits referred to in section 12.5b of the fire prevention code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as not within fire jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 4, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-5. Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is to be prohibited.
(a)	The limits referred to in section 16.22a of the fire prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as not within fire jurisdiction, over 250 gallons. 
(b)	The limits referred to in section 16.61 of the fire prevention code, in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as not within fire jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 5, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-6. Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted.
The limits referred to in section 21.6a of the fire prevention code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows: an excess of 2,000 gallons of water capacity, not within fire jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 6, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-7. Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents.
The routes referred to in section 12.7m of the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby established as restricted to state and federal highways. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 7, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-8. Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles.
The routes referred to in section 20.14 of the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles are hereby established as restricted to state and federal highways. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 8, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-9. Establishment of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use.
The fire lanes referred to in section 28.16 of the fire prevention code are hereby established as determined by the chief of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 9, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-10. Modifications.
The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 10, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-11. Appeals.
Whenever the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention to the mayor within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 11, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-12. New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits.
The mayor, the chief of the fire department and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 12, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-13. Penalties.
(a)	Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the fire department or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and punished according to the general penalties described in this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 13, 10-13-1975)
 
Sec. 12-14. Permit required.
All persons in the corporate limits of the city shall obtain a permit to burn any materials. 
(Ord. No. 0-115-90, § 1, 12-10-1990)
 
Sec. 12-15. Compliance.
Failure to comply with any portion of the conditions of this permit shall be subject to prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 0-115-90, § 2, 12-10-1990)
 
Sec. 12-16. Police and fire training facility.
The police and fire training facility will be utilized for continued educational training purposes for designated departments within the city. The training facility can also be utilized by the city in offering continued education and training courses for other entities, driver's safety courses and/or coordinated training courses for the general public. the police and fire departments will be responsible for the facility and shall conduct and schedule all training that will be held at the facility. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2007, § 1, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 12-17. Firearms training facility.
The police and fire training facility includes a firearms training facility to be utilized for firearms certification, firearms recertification, firearms safety courses and other related firearms issues. All firearms training sessions must be conducted by a certified FBI firearms instructor. The firearms training sessions will be under the direction of the chief of police. The chief of police shall have the authority to appoint a designee to conduct firearms training seminars. The firearms training facility will not be open to the general public unless a designated representative of the city is present during the training session. A representative of the police and/or fire department must be present during any training session. Personal injury waivers will be required by participants before they can participate in a firearms safety training session. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2007, § 2, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 12-18. Training tower.
The police and fire training facility shall also be a designated location for fire a training tower to be utilized for training firefighters and/or other fire training operations. Other fire related training courses will be conducted at the facility under the direction of the chief of the fire department. The chief of the fire department shall have the authority to appoint a designee to conduct fire training seminars. The fire training tower and/or other fire training buildings will be not be open to the general public unless a designated representative of the fire department is present during the training session. Personal injury waivers will be required by participants before they can participate in a fire safety training session. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2007, § 3, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 12-19. Facility grounds secured.
Due to the nature of the training facility it is necessary to keep the facility grounds secured and not open to the general public. The training facility will not be open to the general public unless a representative of the city is present in conducting a training session. The city reserves the right to post no trespassing signs on the property and shall prosecute all violators in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2007, § 4, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 12-20. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No alcoholic beverages will be allowed on the property of the police and fire training facilities. All persons utilizing the facility shall show respect to others and follow a code of conduct that is not offensive to others utilizing the facility. Violators will be promptly removed from the property. Failure to comply could result in criminal charges. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2007, § 5, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 12-21. Fees.
When training sessions are offered to the general public and/or other entities that require a registration fee, such fees shall be receipted and the funds placed in the general fund of the city to offset the cost of the operation of the training center. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2007, § 6, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 12-22. Designation as multiuse training facility.
The city police and fire training facility is hereby designated as a multiuse training facility and the city council hereby authorizes and designates the use of the facility as a firearms training facility. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2007, § 7, 11-5-2007)
 
Secs. 12-23—12-47. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. FIREWORKS 
 
Sec. 12-48. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
DOT Class C, common fireworks means all articles as are now or hereafter classified as DOT Class C, common fireworks in the regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation for the transportation of explosives and dangerous articles. 
Distributor means any person engaged in the business of making sales of fireworks to wholesalers. 
Manufacturer means any person engaged in making, manufacture or construction of fireworks of any kind within the city. 
Permit means the written authority of the city fire official issued under the authority of this article. 
Person includes any corporation, association, co-partnership, proprietor, salesman, agent, or one or more individuals. 
Retailer means any person engaged in the business of making sales of fireworks to consumers. 
Sale means an exchange of articles of fireworks for money and also includes barter, exchange, gift, or offer thereof, and each such transaction made by any person. 
Special fireworks means all articles of fireworks that are classified as Class B explosives in the regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation regulations and shall include all articles classified as fireworks other than those classified as Class C. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in the business of making sales of fireworks to any other person engaged in the business of making sales at retail. 
(Ord. No. 0-50-81, § 1, 7-28-1981)
 
Sec. 12-49. Permits required.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, publicly display, sell or offer for sale within the city, except as herein excepted, any item of fireworks without, first having secured the required applicable permit from the city fire official. 
(b)	A manufacturer's permit issued under this article shall be subject to all rules and regulations promulgated by the state fire marshal to govern manufacture of fireworks as in his judgment the public welfare may require, as well as state and local regulations. A permit shall not in any manner lessen the responsibility of manufacturer, distributor, wholesaler, retailer or consumer to acquire whatever permits, licenses or bonds that may be required by any federal, state or local agency. 
(c)	A separate permit must be acquired for each location at which fireworks are to be offered for sale and no permit shall be transferable to another person or location. No permit provided for herein shall be considered until the city fire official is in receipt of a copy of the approved and numbered state fireworks permit as issued by the state fire marshal. No permits shall be issued to any person under 18 years of age. All permits shall be for the period of one year from the date of issue. Permits issued to retailers must be prominently displayed in their place of business. 
(d)	No permit for retail sale shall be issued for the sale or display for sale of fireworks from tents or from or in a motor vehicle or from a trailer towed by a motor vehicle. No permit shall be issued until the premises of the applicant have been inspected by the fire official and it shall have been determined that such building and facilities within the building meet reasonable safety standards for the storage and sale of permissible fireworks. 
(e)	Application for a permit for public display must be made to the fire official at least five days before display date. A copy of the approved state public display permit must be presented at the time of application along with the time and date of the display. Possession and sale of special fireworks shall be limited to those persons in possession of a current federal license issued for display fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 0-50-81, § 2, 7-28-1981)
 
Sec. 12-50. Revocation of permit.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be just and fair cause for revocation of the permit, which shall be for a period of up to three years at the discretion of the fire official. If a permit is revoked for a business located within the city, notice must be given in writing to the former holder of the permit stating the cause of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 0-50-81, § 3, 7-28-1981)
 
Sec. 12-51. Permitted items.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for an individual, firm, partnership or corporation to possess, sell or use within the jurisdictional area any pyrotechnics commonly known as fireworks other than items now or hereafter classified as Class C common fireworks by the U.S. Department of Transportation and/or those items that comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling restrictions promulgated by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and permitted for use by the general public under their regulations. 
(b)	Permitted items designed to produce an audible effect are confined to small ground items which include firecrackers not over 1½ inches in length and one-fourth inch in diameter and containing not over 50 milligrams of explosive composition. Permitted aerial devices containing not over 130 milligrams of explosive composition. Propelling or expelling charges consisting of a mixture of charcoal, sulfur and potassium nitrate are not considered as designed to produce an audible effect. 
(c)	Items permitted and for which a permit is required shall include related items not classified by the U.S. Department of Transportation as common fireworks, but identified under their regulations as trick noisemakers, toy novelties, toy smoke device and sparklers, and shall include toy snakes, snappers, auto burglar alarms, smoke balls, smoke novelty items, and wire sparklers containing not over 100 grams of composition per item. Sparklers containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five grams of composition per item. 
(Ord. No. 0-50-81, § 4, 7-28-1981)
 
Sec. 12-52. Regulations for retail sale.
(a)	No fireworks shall be sold at retail at any location where paints, oils, or varnishes are for sale or use unless kept in the original containers, nor within 50 feet of where resin, turpentine, gasoline, or other substance which may generate flammable vapors is used, stored or sold. 
(b)	Fireworks shall not be displayed, located, placed or stored in any location where the sum may shine through glass onto the fireworks displayed. Nor shall the presence of lighted cigars, cigarettes, pipes, matches or lighters be allowed within ten feet of where the fireworks are offered for sale. At all places where fireworks are stored or sold, there must be prominently displayed signs with the words "Fireworks—No Smoking" in red letters not less than four inches high and three-fourths of an inch wide on a white background. 
(c)	Any fireworks which are readily accessible to handling by consumers of purchasers must have their fuses protected in such a manner as to protect against accidental ignition of any item by some ignition source. 
(d)	No fireworks shall be offered for retail sale or sold to any person under 16 years of age, or to any intoxicated or irresponsible person. A driver's license or identification card may be accepted as proof of age. 
(e)	It shall not be lawful to sell or offer for sale any permitted fireworks within 300 feet of any church, hospital, school, asylum, or place of public assembly. 
(Ord. No. 0-50-81, § 5, 7-28-1981)
 
Sec. 12-53. Regulations for use.
(a)	Individual use regulations. Any person igniting or exploding fireworks must be at least 16 years of age and of responsible character. No fireworks may be exploded or ignited within 600 feet of any hospital or asylum or any church, school or public assembly while in use or within 200 feet of where fireworks are stored, sold or offered for sale. In no case shall any person ignite or discharge any permitted article of fireworks within or throw the same from a motor vehicle or building while within nor shall any person place or throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at such a motor vehicle or building, or at or near any person or animal. 
(b)	Public display regulations.
(1)	No display fireworks shall be fired less than 200 feet from the nearest permanent building, public highways, railroad or other means of travel or 50 feet from the nearest aboveground telephone line, tree or other overhead obstruction. In no case shall a display be fired within 500 feet of a church, school, hospital, asylum, or public assembly while in use. 
(2)	Spectators shall be restrained behind lines or barriers in no case less than 200 feet from the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged. All display fireworks are to be discharged. All display fireworks shall be set up so that the projectile will go into the air in a vertical position as nearly as possible. If fireworks are to be discharged beside a large body of water, they shall be directed so that failing residue will fall into the body of water. 
(3)	No fireworks display may be held when the wind reaches a velocity of more than 20 miles per hour. 
(4)	All fireworks to be used in or left over from a display shall be stored in a manner and in a place secure from fire, accidental discharge and theft subject to the approval of the fire official. 
(5)	There shall be at all times no less than two operators on duty at the display from such time as the fireworks are delivered to the site until all debris has been removed from the site, at least one of whom shall hold a certificate of competency. The operators must also possess a notarized certificate of bond adequate to cover any personal or material damages which may occur and accept all liability for same. 
(Ord. No. 0-50-81, § 6, 7-28-1981)
 
Sec. 12-54. Exclusion.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to the manufacture, storage, sale, or use of signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads or other classes of public or private transportation, nor as applying to the military or naval forces of the U.S., or of this state or to peace officers, nor as prohibiting the sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial, theatric or athletic events. 
(Ord. No. 0-50-81, § 7, 7-28-1981)
 
Sec. 12-55. Seizure of illegal fireworks.
The fire official shall seize or cause to be seized as contraband any fireworks which are sold, displayed, used, or possessed in violation of this article. The fire official is authorized to destroy any illegal fireworks so seized. 
(Ord. No. 0-50-81, § 9, 7-28-1981)
 
Sec. 12-56. Municipal privilege fee.
(a)	A business license fee shall be required of the retailer within the corporate limits of city. A different license fee shall be required from the city for retail sale within the police jurisdiction of the city. sales made at wholesale and distributor level shall require a license fee. 
(b)	The appropriate fees are payable to the city revenue department during the normal hours of business operation. A license shall be issued only after compliance with all other provisions of the article. The license fees described in this section shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-50-81, § 12, 7-28-1981)
 
Chapter 14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 14-1. Authorization.
The state legislature has, in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-1—11-52-84, authorized local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 1, 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-2. Findings of fact.
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in hazards to property, health and safety, and may disrupt commerce and governmental services. Also, this inundation can result in extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base which adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These potential flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other properties which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 1(§ B), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 1(§ C), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-4. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(7)	Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 1(§ D), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-5. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before (the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance (or regulation), or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of special flood hazard) or (specific date). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community (before the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of special flood hazard) or (specific date). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland/or tidal waters; 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term "floor" does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term "functionally dependent facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Local administrator means the person or office designated to administer this chapter and is the building inspector/city clerk. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. The term "mean sea level" is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this chapter the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, and includes substantial improvement, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be the appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purpose of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivision means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 2, 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 3(§ A), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-7. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in its flood insurance state maps dated July 2, 1987, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 3(§ B), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-8. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 3(§ C), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-9. Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 3(§ D), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 3(§ E), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-11. Final base flood elevation, community responsibilities.
When the administrator has provided a notice of final base flood elevations within Zones A1-30 and/or AE on the community's FIRM and, if appropriate, has designated AO zones, AH zones, A99 zones, and A zones on the community's FIRM, and has provided date from which the community shall designate its regulatory floodway, the community shall: 
(1)	Meet the requirements of this section; 
(2)	Select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point; 
(3)	Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
(4)	Notwithstanding any other provisions of FEMA Reference code § 60.3, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision, fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of § 65.12, and received the approval of the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 3(§ F), 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 0-008-2008, 9-22-2008)
 
Sec. 14-12. Warnings and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 3(§ G), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-13. Penalties for violation.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 3(§ H), 11-12-1991)
 
Secs. 14-14—14-44. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
 
Sec. 14-45. Designation of local administrator.
The local administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 4(§ A), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-46. Permit procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the local administrator on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage.
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed; 
c.	Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 14-71(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(2)	Construction stage. Provide a floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the local administrator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 4(§ B), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-47. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)	Notify adjacent communities and the state department of economic and community affairs prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(4)	Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)	Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with section 14-46(2). 
(6)	Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 14-46(2). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the local administrator shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with section 14-71(2). 
(8)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the local administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(9)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-7, then the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(10)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the local administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 4(§ C), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-48. Variance procedures.
(a)	The zoning board of adjustment as established by the city shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by law. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures, as defined in this chapter, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continue designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	In passing upon such applications, the zoning board of adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
(1)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)	The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(f)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this section the zoning board of adjustment (appeal board) may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this section. 
(g)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)	Conditions for variances. 
(1)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(2)	Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.	A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 4(§ D), 11-12-1991)
 
Secs. 14-49—14-69. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
 
Sec. 14-70. General standards.
(a)	In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(3)	New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)	New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)	Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within components during conditions for flooding; 
(6)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(7)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(8)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(9)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is in compliance with the provisions of this article or regulation shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this article. 
(b)	Any alteration, repair, construction or improvements to a building which is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 5(§ A), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-71. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in section 14-7 or 14-47(9), the following provisions are required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 14-47(7). 
(3)	Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b.	Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairways or elevator). 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(4)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
a.	All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
b.	All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
3.	The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
4.	In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of subsection (4)b.1 and 3 of this section. 
c.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
2.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (4)a and (4)b.1 and 3 of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 5(§ B), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-72. Standards for streams without established base elevations and/or floodways.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-7, when streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without a floodway being delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 14-47(9). 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 5(§ C), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-73. Standards for subdivision proposals.
(a)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which are greater that the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 5(§ D), 11-12-1991)
 
Sec. 14-74. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-7 are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings shall: 
a.	Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.	Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. No. 0-120-91, art. 5(§ E), 11-12-1991)
 
Chapter 16 LICENSING AND TAXATION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 16-1—16-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. AD VALOREM TAX
 
Sec. 16-19. Tax year.
It is hereby fixed and provided that the tax year for the city shall commence on October 1 of each year hereafter and end on the next succeeding September 30, and that on and after October 1, municipal taxes in said city shall be based and due on state and county assessments for the preceding tax year, and shall be due and delinquent at the time when the state and county taxes for the preceding year are due and delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 0-46-81, § 1, 3-9-1981)
 
Sec. 16-20. Tax levied.
There is hereby levied for each municipal tax year ad valorem taxes on all real estate and personal property and intangibles situated within the corporate limits of the city and which is subject to municipal ad valorem taxes by said city under the constitution and laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 0-46-81, § 2, 3-9-1981)
 
Sec. 16-21. Annual rate.
It is further provided that the annual rate of such levy of ad valorem taxes as provided in section 16-20 shall be in an amount as established by the city based on the assessed value of all taxable property situated in the city, subject to taxation by it, as the same shall be assessed for state taxation for the year ending on September 30 next succeeding the levy, for the purpose of paying the general obligations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-46-81, § 3, 3-9-1981)
 
Sec. 16-22. Tax assessor and tax collector.
It is hereby further provided that the tax assessor and tax collector of the county, are hereby authorized, directed and empowered to assess and collect said municipal taxes as herein provided, and the said tax assessor shall receive as commission the sum of one percent for assessing said taxes and the said tax collector shall receive a sum of one percent for collecting said taxes, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-46-81, § 4, 3-9-1981)
 
Secs. 16-23—16-47. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. GAS TAX 
 
Sec. 16-48. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consumer means and includes every person who stores or keeps gasoline, as defined in this section, in his possession, other than in the tank of a motor vehicle, or for his own use. 
Distributor andseller mean and include every person, as the term "person" is defined in this section, who shall engage in selling gasoline within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction of the city, or shipping, transporting or delivering gasoline as herein defined at or from its storage point or place of business in the city or its police jurisdiction to any point within the city or within the city's police jurisdiction. 
Gasoline means and includes gasoline, naphtha, propane, kerosene, diesel fuel, aviation fuel, and other fuels commonly used in combustion engines, but shall not include lubricating oils. 
Person means and includes every person, individual, partnership, entity, company, corporation, agency, firm, or association. 
Store means and includes every person who takes possession of and stores for any purpose whatsoever any gasoline as herein defined. 
(Ord. No. 0-48-81, § 1, 6-22-1981)
 
Sec. 16-49. License required.
Every distributor, seller, consumer or storer of gasoline as defined above, shall pay a license to the city, such license being hereby fixed and created and shall be a sum and amount equal to $0.02 on each and every gallon of gasoline sold, delivered, stored or consumed in the corporate limits of the city, or its police jurisdiction as according to law, or shipped transported or delivered by distributor, seller, consumer or storer at or from its storage point or place of business in the city or its police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 0-48-81, § 2, 6-22-1981)
 
Sec. 16-50. Records required.
Each and every distributor, seller, storer or consumer shall, on or before the 20th day of each month, file with the city clerk a sworn, written, itemized statement showing the amount and quantity of all gasoline sold, delivered, stored or consumed by such distributor or person within the corporate limits of the city or its police jurisdiction, at and from its storage point or place of business in the city, or its police jurisdiction, to any point within the city during the calendar month next preceding. 
(Ord. No. 0-48-81, § 3, 6-22-1981)
 
Sec. 16-51. Exceptions.
None of the provisions of this article shall apply on sales or deliveries which constitute interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 0-48-81, § 4, 6-22-1981)
 
Sec. 16-52. Penalties—Failure to obtain license.
It shall be unlawful for any distributor, seller, consumer or storer, having no place of business within the corporate limits of the city or its police jurisdiction to make any sales or deliveries of gasoline therein without first obtaining a license from the city clerk to do so; and such seller, distributor, consumer or storer shall be liable for, and shall pay the same license as that fixed and specified in section 16-49; and every such seller, distributor, consumer or storer who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense against said city, and upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-48-81, § 5, 6-22-1981)
 
Sec. 16-53. Penalties—Failure to maintain records.
Any seller, distributor, storer or consumer who shall fail or omit to make the statement herein provided and required to be made or who shall make any false statement therein, shall be guilty of an offense against the city, and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00 for each offense. Each day that such person fails to file such statement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-48-81, § 6, 6-22-1981)
 
Sec. 16-54. Penalties—Failure to pay, failure to pay timely.
The license herein fixed must be paid by each person against whom the same is levied and fixed as herein provided, or who is liable to such license under the provisions of this article on or before the 20th day of each calendar month, being the time fixed for filing of said statement based on sale and deliveries during the preceding month, and any person failing or omitting to pay said license within said time shall be guilty of an offense against the city and shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00 and each day that said license is not paid shall constitute a separate offense and in addition to said punishment, said license tax shall be increased by the addition thereto of a penalty of 20 percent of said license payable and collectible as on other penalties. 
(Ord. No. 0-48-81, § 7, 6-22-1981)
 
Sec. 16-55. License tax beyond corporate limits.
The license tax herein provided shall not be more than one-half the amount charged and collected as provided in this article, when said business is done outside the corporate limits of the city, but within its police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 0-48-81, § 9, 6-22-1981)
 
Secs. 16-56—16-83. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. RENTERS TAX 
 
Sec. 16-84. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means all activities engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, by any person with the object of gain, profit, benefit or advantage, either direct or indirect, to such person. 
Gross proceeds means the value proceeding or accruing from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property, without any deduction on account of the cost of the property so leased or rented, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest paid or any other expenses whatsoever, including any license or privilege taxes passed on to a lessee by a lessor, and without any deductions on account of loss, and shall also include on the part of any person claiming exemption under Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-223(4) an amount equal to the amount of rental paid on any tangible personal property acquired under such exemption and thereafter diverted to the use of such person. 
Leasing or rental means a transaction whereunder the person who owns or controls the possession of tangible personal property permits another person in the city to have the possession or use thereof for a consideration and for the duration of a definite or indefinite period of time, without transfer of the title of such property. The detention by the user thereof of freight cars, oxygen and acetylene tanks, and similar property, in respect of which detention a demurrage or per diem charge is made against the user of such property, shall not be deemed to constitute a transaction whereunder property is leased or rented to another within the meaning of this article. 
Tangible personal property means personal property which may be seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched, or is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. The term "tangible personal property" shall not include stocks, bonds, notes, insurance or other contracts or securities. 
(Ord. No. 0-83-86, 2-10-1986)
 
Sec. 16-85. Levied; rate.
There is hereby levied in addition to all privilege license taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against persons on account of the business activities and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross proceeds as follows: 
(1)	Upon each person whose place of business is within the city engaging or continuing to engage in the business of leasing or renting tangible personal property within the city or outside the city, at the rate of two percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor therefrom, provided that the privilege license tax levied in this section shall not apply to any leasing or rental, as lessor, by the U.S., the state, or any municipality or county in the state. 
(2)	Upon each person whose place of business is not within the corporate limits of the city but who engages in or continues in the business of leasing or renting tangible personal property used or to be used within the city at the rate of two percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor therefrom from the tangible personal property used or to be used within the city, provided that the privilege license tax levied in this section shall not apply to any leasing or rental, as lessor, by the U.S., the state or any municipality or county in the state. 
(Ord. No. 0-83-86, 2-10-1986)
 
Sec. 16-86. Exemptions.
There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the privilege license tax levied, assessed or payable under this article the gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the U.S., or under the constitution and laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 0-83-86, 2-10-1986)
 
Sec. 16-87. When payment due.
(a)	The privilege license tax levied under the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided, shall be due and payable in monthly installments on the first day of the month next succeeding the month in which the privilege license tax accrues. On the first day of each month, every person on whom the amounts levied by this article are imposed shall render to the city, on a form prescribed by the city, a true and correct statement showing the gross proceeds of his business, for the next preceding month, the amount of gross proceeds which are not subject to the privilege license tax or are not to be used as a measurement of the amounts due by such person and the nature thereof, together with such other information as the city may require, and at the time of making such monthly report such person shall compute the privilege license taxes due and shall pay to the city the amounts shown to be due. 
(b)	Such report and such payment shall be delinquent if not rendered and paid on or before the last day of the month in which they are due and payable. 
(c)	If any person subject to this article should fail to render any report required hereby or should willfully make a false statement of facts in the statements or returns required hereunder he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 16-90. 
(Ord. No. 0-83-86, 2-10-1986)
 
Sec. 16-88. Reports of cash and credit rentals.
Any person taxable under this article, making cash and credit leases or rentals, may if he desires, report such cash leases or rentals only, and he shall thereafter include in each monthly report all cash and credit collections made during the month preceding, and shall pay the privilege license tax due thereon at the time of filing such report. 
(Ord. No. 0-83-86, 2-10-1986)
 
Sec. 16-89. Records.
(a)	It shall be the duty of every person engaging in or continuing in any business for which a privilege tax is imposed by this article to keep and preserve suitable records of the gross proceeds of any such business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is liable under the provisions of this article. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve for a period of three years, all invoices of gross proceeds proceeding or accruing from the leasing or rental herein taxed; and all such books, invoices, and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the city clerk or his authorized representative. Any person leasing who in addition leases for re-leasing shall keep his books so as to show separately the gross proceeds of leasing and the gross proceeds of leasing for re-leasing. 
(b)	The books, records and accounts mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall at all times be open to examination by the city clerk or his authorized representative, upon request by the city clerk. Upon demand by the city clerk or his authorized representative, it shall be the duty of any person subject to this license tax to submit to the city clerk or his authorized representative, for inspection and examination, during reasonable business hours, in the city, all books of account. Each occurrence of a failure to keep records or allow examination thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-83-86, 2-10-1986)
 
Sec. 16-90. Penalty.
Any person who shall fail to keep records as required by this article or who shall refuse to permit their examination or who violates any other provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction shall be punishable by such fine as may be fixed by ordinance, not to exceed the sum of $100.00 for each offense, and by imprisonment, not to exceed six months, or both, at the discretion of the court trying the same, and each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-83-86, 2-10-1986)
 
Secs. 16-91—16-108. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. SALES AND USE TAX 
 
Sec. 16-109. Levy of sales tax within the city; rate.
There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of rates against gross sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows: 
(1)	Upon every person, firm or corporation (including the state, the University of Alabama, Auburn University and all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether such institutions, and any association or other agency or instrumentality of such institutions), engaged, or continuing with the city in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character, (not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sale or sales of material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources), an amount equal to five percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein; provided, however, that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of such business at the rates specified, when his books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his books are not so kept he shall pay the tax as retailer on the gross sales of the business. 
(2)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged, or continuing within the city in the business of conducting, or operating, places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devises, theaters, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games, (including athletic contests, conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within this state, or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether the institution or association be a denominational, a state, or county, or a municipal institution, or association or a state, county, or city school, or other institution, association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, golf courses, or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement or entertainment is offered to the public or place or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dance halls of every kind and description within the city an amount equal to five percent of the gross receipt of any such business; provided, however, notwithstanding any language to the contrary in the prior portion of this subdivision, the tax provisions so specified shall not apply to any athletic event conducted by a public or nonpublic primary or secondary school or any athletic event conducted by or under the auspices of the Alabama High School Athletic Association. The tax amount which would have been collected pursuant to this subdivision shall continue to be collected by the public or nonpublic primary or secondary school, but shall be retained by the school which collected it and shall be used by the school for school purposes. 
(3)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property, an amount equal to one percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of such machines, provided that the term "machines" as herein used, means and includes machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefore, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(4)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer, or house trailer, or mobile home set-up materials and supplies, including, but not limited to, steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes, and any other materials pertaining thereto an amount equal to one percent of the gross proceeds of sale of said automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer, provided, however where a person subject to the rate provided for in this subsection withdraws from his stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer for use by him or by his employee or agent in the operation of such business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a fee per year on part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. Each such year, or part thereof, shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be, of such withdrawal and shall run for the 12 succeeding months or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Where any used automobile vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(5)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements thereof which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to one percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof; provided, however, the one percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(6)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within this state in the business of selling through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for human consumption, not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products, and substitutes therefore, there is hereby levied a tax equal to five percent of the cost of such food, food products, and beverages sold through such machines, which cost for the purpose of this subsection shall be the gross proceeds of sales of such business. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 1, 8-14-2017)
 
Sec. 16-110. Levy of the tax in police jurisdiction.
Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in the doing of any act, or who shall do any act, or continuing in the doing of any act, or engaged in the operation of any business or who shall engage in the operation of any business, within the police jurisdiction of the city, but beyond the corporate limits of said city, for which or upon which a privilege or license tax is in this article levied or required within the corporate limits of the city, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by laws or by municipal ordinance, to be collected as within the corporate limits of the city, a privilege or license tax equal to one-half of that provided, levied or required in this therein, or the engaging or continuing in the operation of such business within the corporate limits of the city. Provided further, that except for the amount of the privilege or license tax herein levied within the police jurisdiction of said city but without the corporate limits thereof, all the provisions of this article extend and apply to all the area within the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 2, 8-14-2017)
 
Sec. 16-111. Provisions of state sales tax statues applicable to the ordinance and taxes herein levied.
The taxes levied by sections 16-109 and 16-110 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulation, provisions, discounts, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state sales tax statues, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all provisions of state sales tax statues for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 3, 8-14-2017)
 
Sec. 16-112. Rates.
(a)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property (not including materials and supplies bought for use in fulfilling a contract for painting, repairing, or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources) purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city, except as provided in subsections (b) through (d) of this section, at the rate of five percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of said city. 
(b)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, and manufacturing of tangible personal property purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived at the rate of one percent of the sales price of any such machine, within the corporate limits of the city, or the amount of tax collected by the seller, whichever is greater; provided, however, when the seller follows the department of revenue's suggested use tax brackets and his records prove that his following said brackets resulted in a net under collection of tax for the month, he may report the tax due or tax collected, whichever is less. The term "machine," as herein used, means and includes machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements thereof, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary in the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(c)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer, and mobile home set-up materials and supplies, including, but not limited to, steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes and any other materials pertaining thereto, purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one percent of the sales price of such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer, and mobile home set-up materials and supplies as specified above, within the corporate limits of said city, or the amount of tax collected by the seller, whichever is greater; provided, however, when the seller follows the department of revenue's suggested use tax brackets and his records prove that his following said brackets resulted in a net under collection of tax for the month, he may report the tax due or tax collected, whichever is less. Where any used automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(d)	An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machine, machinery, or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock, or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery, or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery, or equipment, which is purchased at retail after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for the storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of said city, regardless of whether the retailer is or is not engaged in the business in this city; provided, however, the one percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products or used in connection with the production of agricultural products or products, livestock, and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery, or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery, or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery, or equipment taken in trade. 
(e)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on tangible personal property at one-half the rates specified in subsections (a) through (d) of this section on the storage, use or other consumption of such tangible personal property outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 4, 8-14-2017)
 
Sec. 16-113. Definitions.
The taxes levied by section 16-112 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, discounts, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state use tax statues, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all provisions of the state use tax statues for enforcement and collections of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 5, 8-14-2017)
 
Sec. 16-114. This article cumulative to general license code or ordinance.
This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code or ordinance of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes herein shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city by its general license code or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 6, 8-14-2017)
 
Sec. 16-115. Collections of taxes.
The tax levied by this article hereof may be collected by an outside third-party company as approved of by the mayor and council. The outside third-party company is contracted with the city to collect, review and audit taxes submitted on behalf of the city. Payments for taxes due shall be remitted to Revenue Discovery Systems for payment. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 8, 8-14-2017)
 
Sec. 16-116. Due date.
The city sales tax is due monthly (as is the state), with tax returns to be filed by the 20th of each month for the previous month's sales. If the 20th of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, then the sales tax returns must be postmarked on or before the next working day to be considered timely filed. A sales tax return must be filed for any business which has an account with the state department of revenue regardless of whether there were any sales in the previous months. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 10, 8-14-2017)
 
Sec. 16-117. Discount to be given for timely filing and payment.
A discount is allowed if the tax is paid before the 20th day of the month in which the tax is due. The sales tax discount consists of five percent on the first $100.00 of tax due, and two of all tax over $100.00. The monthly discount may not exceed $900.00. No discount is to be taken if tax is not paid by the 20th day of each month. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 11, 8-14-2017)
 
Sec. 16-118. Penalties.
Penalties and interest are due if the tax is paid after the 20th day of the month in which the tax is due. The failure to timely file penalty is ten percent of the tax required to be paid or $50.00, whichever is greater. The failure to timely pay penalty is ten percent of the tax required to be paid. Interest is due at the current rate imposed by the state department of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 0-009-2017, § 12, 8-14-2017)
 
Secs. 16-119—16-149. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. SALES TAX HOLIDAYS
 
Sec. 16-150. Severe weather preparedness sales tax holiday exemption.
(a)	In conformity with the provisions of Severe Weather Preparedness Sales Tax Holiday, Rule 810-6-3.66-.02ER and Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-230 et seq., providing for a severe weather preparedness sales tax holiday, the city exempts covered items from municipal sales and use tax during the same period, beginning at 12:01 a.m. on Friday and ending at 12:00 midnight on the following Sunday each year until and unless annual participation is rescinded by further action of the city council. 
(b)	This article shall be subject to all terms, conditions, definitions, time periods, and rules as provided by the state code. 
(Ord. No. 0-014-2016, §§ 1—5, 11-14-2016)
 
Sec. 16-151. Back-to-school sales tax holiday exemption.
(a)	In conformity with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 20-23-211 and 20-23-213, providing for a state back to school sales tax holiday, the city exempts covered items from municipal sales tax during the same period, beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the third Friday in July and ending at 12:00 midnight the following Sunday and each year thereafter until and unless annual participation is rescinded by further action of the city council. 
(b)	This article shall be subject to all terms, conditions, definitions, time periods, and rules as provided by Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 20-23-211 and 20-23-213. 
(c)	The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to certify a copy of this article under the seal of the city, and to forward a certified copy to the state department of revenue to be recorded and posted on the department website. 
(Ord. No. 0-002-2017, §§ 1—6, 4-10-2017)
 
Secs. 16-152—16-170. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. LODGING TAXES 
 
Sec. 16-171. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in, by any person with the object of gain, profit, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect, to such person and all such activities which may be licensed under Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90. 
Gross proceeds means the value proceeding or accruing from the renting or furnishing of any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for consideration, including any charge for use or rental of personal property and services furnished in such room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations. 
Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, receiver, trust, trustee, estate, executor, administrator or other entity, or any other group or combination of any thereof acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number, unless the intention to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by context. 
Taxpayer means any person liable for taxes hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 1, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-172. Tax imposed; exemptions; definitions.
(a)	There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, a privilege or license tax upon every person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of renting or furnishing any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for consideration, in the city, in an amount equal to five percent of the charge for such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations, including the charge for use or rental of personal property and services furnished in such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. This license tax shall be in addition to any privilege, license, or lodging tax imposed by the state, or by the county. 
(b)	The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodgings, or accommodations supplied: 
(1)	For a period of 180 continuous days or more in any place; 
(2)	By camps, conference centers, or similar facilities operated by nonprofit organizations primarily for the benefit of, and in connection with, recreational or educational programs for children, students, or members or guests of other nonprofit organizations during any calendar year; 
(3)	In connection with the production of an approved project authorized by the state film office and which meets criteria established by the state film office through the Alabama Administrative Procedures Act; or 
(4)	By privately operated camps, conference centers, or similar facilities that provide lodging and recreational or educational programs exclusively for the benefit of children, students, or members or guests of nonprofit organizations during any calendar year. 
(c)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in subsection (b) of this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Children means individuals under 21 years of age. 
Nonprofit organization means an organization exempt from federal income tax under 26 USC 501(c)(3), as in effect from time to time or by any successor law. 
Privately operated means any camp, conference center, or similar facility other than those operated by a nonprofit organization as herein defined. 
Student is defined in accordance with 26 USC 151(c)(4), as in effect from time to time or by any successor law. 
(d)	The privilege or license tax levied by this section shall be known as the city lodging tax. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 2, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-173. License required.
If any person shall engage in or continue in any business for which the city lodging tax is imposed by section 16-172, as a condition precedent to engaging in or continuing in such business, he shall apply for and obtain from the city a license to engage in and conduct such business for the current tax year upon the condition that he shall pay the taxes accruing to the city under the provisions of this article; provided that no license shall be issued to any person who has not complied with the provisions of this article, and no provision in this article shall be construed as relieving any person from the payment of any other applicable license or privilege tax now or hereafter imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 3, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-174. When tax due; monthly reports and payments.
The taxes levied under the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided, shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrues. On or before the 20th day of each month after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, every person, firm or corporation on whom the taxes levied by this article are imposed shall render to the city clerk on a form prescribed by the city clerk, a true and correct statement showing the gross proceeds of the business for the next preceding month, together with such other information as the city clerk may demand and require, and at the time of making such monthly report the taxpayer shall compute the taxes due and shall pay to the city clerk the amount of taxes shown to be due. In the alternative, each such person, firm or corporation on whom the taxes levied by this article and imposed, may submit returns and remittance of the city lodging tax through electronic submission to Revenue Discovery Systems on or before the due date. In such case, the rules, regulations and procedures by Revenue Discovery Systems concerning electronic submissions shall apply fully and are adopted hereby as if set forth fully herein. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 4, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-175. Cash and credit businesses.
Any person, firm or corporation taxable under this article having a cash and credit business may report such cash business and the taxpayer shall thereafter include in each monthly report all credit collections made during the month preceding and shall pay the taxes due thereon at the time of filing such report, but in no event shall the gross proceeds of such credit business be included in the measure of the tax to be paid until collections of such credit business have been made. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 5, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-176. Annual return and payment.
On or before 30 days after the end of the tax year, each person, firm or corporation liable for the payment of the city lodging tax levied by this article shall make a return showing the gross proceeds of business done and compute the amount of tax against him or it in accordance with the provisions of this article and deduct the amount of monthly payments as hereinbefore provided, if any have been made, and transmit with this report a remittance in the form required by this article covering the residue of the tax chargeable against him, to the office of the city clerk, and such report shall be verified by oath. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 6, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-177. Verification of reports.
The monthly reports herein required are not required to be made on oath, but wherever in this article any report is required to be sworn to, the same shall be sworn to by the taxpayer or his agent before some officer authorized to administer oaths. Any false statement of a material fact made with intent to defraud shall constitute perjury and, upon conviction thereof, the person so convicted shall be punishable as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 7, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-178. Penalty calculations.
(a)	Failure to timely file (FTTF). The penalties for the failure to timely file the return required hereby shall be equal to the greater of ten percent of the tax required to be paid on the return or $50.00, as set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-11(a). All taxpayers that submit returns electronically to Revenue Discovery Systems after 12:00 midnight CST of the due date are subject to a FTTF penalty which is the greater of ten percent of the tax required to be paid on the return or $50.00. 
(b)	Failure to timely pay (FTTP). The penalty for the failure to timely pay the tax payments required hereby shall be ten percent of the delinquent tax, as set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-11(b). Tax payments submitted by electronic means to Revenue Discovery Systems must be remitted by the time specified by Revenue Discovery Systems and in accordance with its rules and regulations to avoid penalty. If a taxpayer fails to pay any amount required to be paid on any return within 30 calendar days from the date of the first notice and demand therefore, there shall be added as a penalty one percent of the amount of the tax due, if the failure to pay is for not more than one month, with an additional one percent for each additional month or fraction thereof during which failure to pay continues, not exceeding 25 percent in the aggregate. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 8, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-179. Failure to make reports and keep records.
Any person, firm or corporation subject to the provisions of this article who fails to make the reports as herein required, or who fails to keep the records as herein required, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. Each month of such failure shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 9, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-180. Willful refusal to make reports or permit examination of records.
Any person, firm or corporation subject to the provisions of this article willfully refusing to make the reports herein required, or who shall refuse to permit the examination of his or its records by the city clerk, or his duly authorized agents, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and in addition may be imprisoned in the city jail for a period not to exceed six months. Each month of failure to make such a report shall constitute a separate offense and each refusal of a written demand of the city clerk to examine, inspect or audit such records shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 10, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-181. Failure to add tax to price of service; refund or absorption of tax prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation engaged in or continuing within the city in any business for which the southside lodging tax is required by this article to fail or refuse to add to the price of the service rendered the amount due by the taxpayer on account of the tax levied by this article. Nor shall any person refund or offer to refund all or any part of the amount collected as tax under this article or to absorb such tax or to advertise directly or indirectly the absorption or refund of such tax or any portion of the same. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, or may be imprisoned in the city jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each act or violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 11, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-182. Violations restrained from continuing business.
Any taxpayer who shall violate any of the provisions of this article may be restrained from continuing in business, and the proper prosecution shall be instituted in the name of the city until such person shall have complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 12, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-183. Rules and regulations.
The city or Revenue Discovery Systems, as agent on its behalf, shall from time to time promulgate such rules and regulations for making returns and for ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed hereunder as it may deem necessary to enforce the provisions of this article, and upon request shall furnish to the taxpayer a copy of such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 13, 7-24-2017)
 
Sec. 16-184. Distribution of taxes.
The net proceeds of the taxes levied shall be distributed by Revenue Discovery Systems to the city lodging tax savings account. The lodging tax proceeds shall be designated towards the waterfront property development and the parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2017, § 14, 7-24-2017)
 
Secs. 16-185—16-206. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. BINGO PERMITS
 
Sec. 16-207. Findings.
(a)	The state legislature has passed Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-8-150 et seq., which legalizes the operation of paper bingo games for charitable purposes in Calhoun County and provides for a permitting procedure for bingo games. 
(b)	Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-8-150.03 provides any qualified organization desiring to obtain a permit to conduct bingo games in a calendar year shall apply to the county governing body if the proposed site for the bingo session or sessions are not within the police jurisdiction of any municipality. If the proposed site for the bingo session or sessions is within the police jurisdiction of any municipality in Calhoun County, the qualified organization desiring to obtain a permit shall apply to the governing body of the respective municipality. 
(c)	A portion of the city and the its police jurisdiction includes Calhoun County and the city has received applications from qualified organizations who wish to operate paper bingo games in portions of Calhoun County within the police jurisdiction and have requested a permit from the city in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-8-150.03. 
 
Sec. 16-208. Short title.
This shall be known and may be cited as the city bingo permitting ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2016, § 1, 7-11-2016)
 
Sec. 16-209. Application.
Any qualified nonprofit organization desiring to obtain a permit to operate bingo games within the police jurisdiction of the city shall apply to the mayor, as set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-8-150.03. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2016, § 2, 7-11-2016)
 
Sec. 16-210. Review of permit.
Upon receiving completed applications from qualified nonprofit organizations for the issuance of permits, the mayor shall immediately deliver to the Calhoun County bingo regulatory commission a copy of each application and consult with the Calhoun County bingo regulatory commission before issuing any permit. In no event shall the city issue a permit for the operation of bingo within its jurisdiction until the sooner of 30 days after the city has delivered a copy of the completed application to the Calhoun County bingo regulatory commission if no recommendation is made by the Calhoun County bingo regulatory commission within those 30 days or after the city has delivered a copy of the completed application to the Calhoun County bingo regulatory commission and has received the recommendation of the Calhoun County bingo regulatory commission regarding the application. In the event of any controversy concerning whether or not a permit for the operation of bingo should be issued, the decision of the Calhoun County bingo regulatory commission that the permit shall not be issued shall control. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2016, § 3, 7-11-2016)
 
Sec. 16-211. Issuance of permit; fees.
The types of permits issued by the city and fees associated therewith shall be those set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-8-150.04. In addition, there shall be a bingo license fee assessed by the city in an amount as established by the mayor and city council for each day of operation of bingo games for each bingo location. Permit fees will be reviewed every 24 months. The city reserves the right to change the rates upon the review process. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2016, § 4, 7-11-2016)
 
Sec. 16-212. Compliance with state law.
All bingo operations and prizes must be in compliance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-8-150 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2016, § 5, 7-11-2016)
 
Sec. 16-213. Prizes maximum amounts.
Prizes shall not exceed the maximum amount allowed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-8-150.08. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2016, § 6, 7-11-2016)
 
Sec. 16-214. Compliance.
Licensees will comply with the provisions of article IX of this chapter or any business license in existence now and hereafter. Licensees shall comply with the provisions of Alabama Constitutional Amendment 508 and Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-8-150 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2016, §§ 7—8, 7-11-2016)
 
Sec. 16-215. Administrative action.
Administrative action shall be granted to the mayor to conduct investigations, render decisions as to article intent, issue written warnings and suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article that is deemed a violation of any city, state, or federal law or endangers public safety; provided, however, the licensee shall be given a hearing for any administrative action that would result in suspension or revoking of a license. The licensee shall be notified in writing at least 30 days prior of the place date and time for a hearing with the city council. Evidence shall be presented at the hearing as to the administrative action and a written decision shall be rendered by the city council within ten days following the hearing as to the findings and actions to be taken. The city council by majority vote may request for a review or hearing on any administrative action not subject to a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2016, § 9, 7-11-2016)
 
Sec. 16-216. Etowah County not affected by this article.
Nothing herein shall be construed as related to the permitting of paper bingo games in Etowah County. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2016, § 12, 7-11-2016)
 
Sec. 16-217. License rates for paper bingo operations.
(a)	The code number 713290 has been established as the paper bingo license code and an amount as set by the mayor and city council from time to time been established for the paper bingo license for businesses that are located within the city limits of the city. One-half of this rate would apply within the police jurisdiction. 
(b)	Charitable paper bingo permits shall be issued in chronological order. Paper bingo permits shall be issued for each charity that has been permitted by the governing bingo commission for the county in which the establishment is located. The cost for each charity permit shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. Each permit shall be for a term that is shown on the governing county permit (date of application to term expiration of the county). 
(Ord. No. 0-011-2016, §§ 1—3, 7-25-2016)
 
Secs. 16-218—16-242. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IX. BUSINESS LICENSE CODE
 
Sec. 16-243. Levy of tax.
Pursuant to the state code, the following is hereby declared to be and is adopted as the business license code and schedule of licenses for the municipality. There is hereby levied and assessed a business license fee for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession or other activity in the municipality, or the police jurisdiction, by whatever name called. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 1, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-244. Definitions.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any commercial or industrial activity or any enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, or livelihood, including the lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, which is engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, within a municipality. 
Business license means an annual license issued by the municipality for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession, or any other activity in the municipality, by whatever name called, which document is required to be conspicuously posted or displayed except to the extent the taxpayer's business license tax or other financial information is listed thereon. 
Business license remittance form means any business license return, renewal reminder notice, or other writing on which the taxpayer calculates the business license tax liability for all or part of the license year and remits the amount so calculated with the form. 
Department or department of revenue means the state department of revenue, as created under Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2-1 et seq. 
Designee means an agent or employee of the municipality authorized to administer or collect, or both the municipality's business license taxes, which may include another taxing jurisdiction, the department of revenue, or a private auditing or collecting firm as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3. 
Gross receipts means the measure of any and all receipts of a business from whatever source derived, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable laws and constitutional provisions, to be used in calculating the amount due for a business license. Provided, however, that: 
(1)	Gross receipts shall not include any of the following taxes collected by the business on behalf of any taxing jurisdiction or the federal government: All taxes which are imposed on the ultimate consumer, collected by the taxpayer and remitted by or on behalf of the taxpayer to the taxing authority, whether state, local or federal, including utility gross receipts levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-21-3; license taxes levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-21-2; or reimbursements to professional employer organizations of federal, state or local payroll taxes or unemployment insurance contributions; but no other deductions or exclusions from gross receipts shall be allowed except as provided in this article. 
(2)	A different basis for calculating the business license may be used by the municipality with respect to certain categories of taxpayers as prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90B. 
(3)	For a utility or other entity described in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-129, gross receipts shall be limited to the gross receipts derived from the retail furnishing of utility services within the municipality during the preceding year that are taxed under Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-21-3, except that nothing herein shall affect any existing contract or agreement between a municipality and a utility or other entity. The gross receipts derived from the furnishing of utility services shall not be subject to further business license taxation by the municipality. 
(4)	Gross receipts shall not include dividends or other distributions received by a corporation, or proceeds from borrowing, the sale of a capital asset, the repayment of the principal portion of a loan, the issuance of stock or other equity investments, or capital contributions, or the undistributed earnings of subsidiary entities. 
License form means any business license application form, renewal reminder notice, business license remittance form, or business license return by whatever name called. 
License officer or municipal license officer means the municipal employee charged by the municipality with the primary responsibility of administering the municipality's business license tax ordinance and related matters thereto. 
License year means the calendar year. 
Municipality means any town or city in the state that levies a business license tax from time to time. The term "municipality" shall also include the town's or city's police jurisdiction, where the business license tax is levied in the police jurisdiction. 
Person means any individual, association, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity of any kind, except for any nonprofit corporation formed under the laws of the state which is operated to enable municipalities that become members of such nonprofit corporation to finance or refinance capital projects and related undertakings, on a cooperative basis, and whose board of directors or other governing body consists primarily of elected officials of the municipality. 
Taxing jurisdiction means any municipality that levies a business license tax, whether or not a business license tax is levied within its police jurisdiction, or the department of revenue acting as agent on behalf of a municipality pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-180 et seq., as the context requires. 
Taxpayer means any person subject to or liable under this article for any business license tax; any person required to file a return with respect to, or pay or remit the business license tax levied under this article or to report any information or value to the taxing jurisdiction; or any person required to obtain, or who holds any interest in, any business license issued by the taxing jurisdiction; or any person that may be affected by any act or refusal to act by the taxing jurisdiction under this article, or to keep any required by this article. 
USC means the applicable title and section of the United States Code, as amended from time to time. 
(b)	Other terms. Other capitalized or specialized terms used in this article, and not defined above, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3, unless the context therein otherwise specifies. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 2, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-245. License term; minimums.
The license term and the minimum amount for a business license are as follows: 
(1)	Full year. Every person who commences business before July 1 shall be subject to and shall pay the annual license for such business in full. Unless otherwise specified in the enclosed schedules, the minimum annual license shall be $100.00. 
(2)	Half year. Every person who commences business on or after July 1, shall be subject to and shall pay one-half the annual license for such business for that calendar year. 
(3)	Issue fee. For each license issued there shall be an issue fee collected and said issue fee shall be collected in the same manner as the license tax. The issue fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. The city shall reserve the right to increase the issuance fee without having to amend this section if the state legislature grants an increase is the maximum amount allowed for the issuance fee. 
(4)	Annual renewal. Except as provided in subsection (1) or (2) of this section, the business license shall be renewed annually on or before January 31 each year. 
a.	If the due date for payment of any business license falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized by the municipality from time to time, the due date shall automatically be extended until the next business day. 
b.	Insurance company annual license renewals shall be renewed in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-122, which states that each year, each insurance company shall furnish the municipality a statement in writing duly certified showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding year and shall accompany such statement with the amount of license tax due according to the licensing schedule. Failure to furnish such statement or to pay such sum shall subject the company and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license as provided for in the municipal code. 
c.	On or before December 31 of each year, a renewal reminder shall be mailed to each licensee that purchased a business license during the current year. Said renewal notice shall be mailed via regular U.S. mail to the licensee's last known address of record with the municipality. Licensees are required to furnish the municipality any address changes for their business prior to December 1st in order for them to receive their notice. 
d.	Business license renewal payments received by the municipality shall be applied to the current renewal only when any and other debts the licensee owes to the municipality are first paid in full. No business license shall be issued if the current renewal payment does not meet said prior obligations and the current renewal. Failure to pay such sums shall subject the licensee and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license provided for in the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 3, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-246. License shall be location specific.
(a)	For each place at which any business is carried on, a separate license shall be paid, and any person desiring to engage in any business for which a license is required shall designate the place at which business is carried on, and the license to be issued shall designate such place, and such license shall authorize the carrying on of such business only at the place designated. 
(b)	Every person dealing in two or more of the articles, or engaging in two or more of the businesses, vocations, occupations or professions scheduled herein, shall take out and pay for a license for each line of business. 
(c)	A taxpayer subject to the license authorized by this article that is engaged in business in other municipalities, may account for its gross receipts so that the part of its gross receipts attributable to its branch offices will not be subject to the business license imposed by this section. To establish a bona fide branch office, the taxpayer must demonstrate proof of all following criteria: 
(1)	The taxpayer must demonstrate the continuing existence of an actual facility located outside the police jurisdiction in which its principal business office is located, such as a retail store, outlet, business office, showroom, or warehouse, to which employees and/or independent contractors are assigned or located during regular normal working hours. 
(2)	The taxpayer must maintain books and records, which reasonably indicate a segregation or allocation of the taxpayer's gross receipts to the particular facility of facilities. 
(3)	The taxpayer must provide proof that separate telephone listings, signs, and other indications of its separate activity are in existence. 
(4)	Billing and/or collection activities relating to the business conducted at the branch office or offices are performed by an employee or other representative, of the taxpayer who has such responsibility for the branch office. 
(5)	All business claimed by a branch office or offices must be conducted by and through said office or offices. 
(6)	The taxpayer must supply proof that all applicable business licenses with respect to the branch office or offices have been issued. 
(d)	Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting businesses from payment of a license on the basis of a lack of physical location. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 4, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-247. Restriction on transfer of license.
No license shall be transferred except with the consent of the council or other governing body of the municipality or of the director of finance or other chief revenue officer or his designee, and no license shall be transferred to reflect a physical change of address of the taxpayer within the municipality more than once during a license year and never from one taxpayer to another, provided that a mere change in the name or ownership of a taxpayer that is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other form of legal entity now or hereafter recognized by state laws shall not constitute a transfer for purposes of this section, unless the change requires the taxpayer to obtain a new federal employer identification number or department of revenue taxpayer identification number or, if in the discretion of the municipality, the subject license is one for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a municipality from requiring a new business license application and approval for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 5, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-248. Unlawful to do business without a license.
It shall be unlawful for any person, taxpayer, or agent of a person or taxpayer to engage in businesses or vocations in the municipality for which a license is required without first having procured a license. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and if a willful violation, by imprisonment, not to exceed six months, or both, at the discretion of the court trying the same. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 6, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-249. License must be posted.
Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place, where said business, trade or occupation is carried on, and the holder of the license shall immediately show same to the designee of the municipality upon being requested so to do. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 7, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-250. Duty to file report.
(a)	It shall be the duty of every person subject to such license tax to render to the municipality on such forms as may be required, a sworn statement showing the total business done, amount of sales, gross receipts and gross sales, stock, value of furniture and other equipment, capital invested, number of helpers or employees, amount of space occupied, or other factor described in the schedule, one or several, as the case may require, for the ascertainment of the classification of such person for license taxation purposes and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject. 
(b)	If the municipality determines that the amount of business license tax reported on or remitted with any business license remittance form is incorrect, if no business license remittance form is filed within the time prescribed, or if the information provided on the form is insufficient to allow the taxing jurisdiction to determine the proper amount of business license tax due, the municipality shall calculate the correct amount of the tax based on the most accurate and complete information reasonably obtainable and enter a preliminary assessment for the correct amount of business license tax, including any applicable penalty and interest. 
(c)	The municipality shall promptly mail a copy of any preliminary assessment to the taxpayer's last known address by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested, or, in the sole discretion of the municipality, deliver the preliminary assessment to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(d)	If the amount of business license tax remitted by the taxpayer is undisputed by the municipality, or if the taxpayer consents to the amount of any deficiency or preliminary assessment in writing, the municipality shall enter a final assessment for the amount of the tax due, plus any applicable penalty and interest. 
(e)	Petition for review and preliminary assessment. 
(1)	If a taxpayer disagrees with a preliminary assessment as entered by the taxing jurisdiction, the taxpayer shall file a petition for review with the municipal license officer within 30 days from the date of entry of the preliminary assessment setting out the specific objections to the preliminary assessment. If a petition for review is timely filed, the license officer of the municipality shall schedule a conference with the taxpayer for the purpose of allowing the taxpayer or its representatives and the representatives of the municipality to present their respective positions, discuss any omissions or errors, and to attempt to agree upon any changes or modifications to their respective positions. 
(2)	If a petition for review is not timely filed, or is timely filed, and upon further review the license officer determines that the preliminary assessment is due to be upheld in whole or in part, the municipality may make the assessment final in the amount of business license tax due as computed by the license officer, with applicable interest and penalty computed to the date of entry of the final assessment. The license officer shall, whenever practicable, complete his review of the taxpayer's petition for review and applicable law within 90 days following the later of the date of filing of the petition or the conference, if any. 
(3)	A copy of the final assessment shall promptly be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of $500.00 or less, or by certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of more than $500.00. In either case, at the option of the taxing jurisdiction a copy of the final assessment may be delivered to the taxpayer by personal delivery. The final assessment shall include a statement informing the taxpayer of his right to appeal the final assessment to circuit court within 30 days from the date of the entry of the final assessment. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 8, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-251. Duty to permit inspection and produce records.
Upon demand by the designee of the municipality, it shall be the duty of all licensees to: 
(1)	Permit the designee of the municipality to enter the business and to inspect all portions of his place of business for the purposes of enabling said municipal designee to gain such information as may be necessary or convenient for determining the proper license classification, and determining the correct amount of license tax; 
(2)	To furnish information during reasonable business hours, at the licensee's place of business, in the municipality or the police jurisdiction, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information from which the correct license tax classification of such person may be ascertained and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax returns to the state and copies of state and federal income tax returns. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 9, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-252. Unlawful to obstruct.
It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any agent, servant or employee of such person, to fail or refuse to perform any duty imposed by this article; nor shall any person, agent, servant or employee of such person obstruct or interfere with the designee of the municipality in carrying out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 10, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-253. Privacy.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the administration of this article to divulge any information obtained by him in the course of inspection and examination of the books, papers, reports and memoranda of the taxpayer made pursuant to the provisions of this article, except to the mayor, the municipal attorney or others authorized by law to receive such information described herein. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to print, publish, or divulge, without the written permission or approval of the taxpayer, the license form of any taxpayer or any part of the license form, or any information secured in arriving at the amount of tax or value reported, for any purpose other than the proper administration of any matter administered by the taxing jurisdiction, or upon order of any court, or as otherwise allowed in this article. 
(c)	Nothing herein shall prohibit the disclosure of the fact that a taxpayer has or has not purchased a business license. Statistical information pertaining to taxes may be disclosed to the municipality council upon their written request through the mayor's office. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 11, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-254. Failure to file assessment.
(a)	In any case where a person subject to paying a license tax as provided herein fails to do so, the municipal designee shall be authorized to assess and determine the amount of license taxes due using the best information available either by return filed or by other means. 
(b)	The taxpayer shall be notified by registered or certified mail, or by personal service, of the amount of any such assessment, and of his right to appear before the municipal governing body on a day named not less than 20 days from the date of notice and to show cause why such assessment shall not be made final. Such appearance may be made by agent or attorney. 
(c)	If no showing is made on or before the date fixed in such notice, or if such showing is not sufficient in the judgment of the municipality, such assessment shall be made final in the amount originally fixed, or in such other amount as is determined by the municipality to be correct. If upon such hearing the municipal designee finds a different amount due than that originally assessed, he shall make the assessment final in the correct amount, and in all cases shall notify the taxpayer of the assessment as finally fixed. 
(d)	A notice by the U.S. mail, addressed to the taxpayer's last known place of business, shall be sufficient. Any assessment made by the designee of the municipality shall be prima facie correct upon any appeal. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 12, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-255. Lien for nonpayment of license tax.
On all property, both real and personal, used in the business, the municipality shall have a lien for such license, which lien shall attach as of the date when the license is due, as allowed by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-44. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 13, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-256. Civil penalties.
In addition to the remedies provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-150 et seq., the continued or recurrent performance of any act or acts within the corporate limits or within its police jurisdiction for which a license may be revoked or suspended under this article is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the public and is a nuisance. The municipality, as an additional or alternative remedy, may institute injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 15, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-257. Penalties and interest.
(a)	All licenses not paid within 30 days from the date they fall due shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 30 days they shall be delinquent, and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 60 or more days, but this provision shall not be deemed to authorize the delay of 30 days in the payment of the license due, which may be enforced at once. 
(b)	In the case of persons who began business on or after the first day of the calendar year, the license for such new business shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 15 days they shall be delinquent, and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 45 days or more. 
(c)	All delinquent accounts (both license taxes and penalties) shall also be charged simple interest at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 16, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-258. Prosecutions unaffected.
The adoption of this article shall not in any manner affect any prosecution of any act illegally done contrary to the provisions of any ordinance now or heretofore in existence, and every such prosecution, whether begun before or after the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be governed by the law under which the offense was committed; nor shall a prosecution, or the right to prosecute, for the recovery of any penalty or the enforcement of any forfeiture be in any manner affected by the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived; nor shall any civil action or cause of action existing prior to or at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived be affected in any manner by its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 17, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-259. Procedure for denial of new applications.
(a)	The municipal designee shall have the authority to investigate all applications and may refer any application to the municipal governing body for a determination of whether such license should or should not be issued. 
(b)	If the municipal governing body denies the issuance of any license referred to it, the municipal clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of the municipal governing body's decision. 
(c)	If said applicant desires to appear before the municipal governing body to show cause why said license should be issued, he shall file a written notice with the municipal clerk, said notice to be filed within two weeks from the date of mailing by the municipal clerk of the notice of the denial of such license by the municipal governing body. 
(d)	Upon receipt of said notice the municipal clerk shall promptly schedule a hearing, to be held within 15 days from the date of receipt of such notice, before the municipal governing body and shall give the notice of the date, time and place of said hearing to the applicant. 
(e)	The applicant shall be given the opportunity to appear personally, or through his counsel, or both, and the municipal governing body shall proceed to hear any evidence which may be presented both for and against the issuance of said license. 
(f)	If the municipal governing body determines from the evidence presented that in order to either provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the prosperity, or improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the municipality said license should not be granted, it shall enter an order to that effect; otherwise, said license shall be ordered issued upon payment of any required license fees. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 18, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-260. Procedure for revocation or suspension of license.
(a)	Any lawful license issued to any person to conduct any business shall be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body for the violation by the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee of any provision of this article or of any ordinance of the municipality, or any statute of the state relating to the business for which such license is issued; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee under color of such license violates or aids or abets in violating or knowingly permits or suffers to be violated any penal ordinance of the municipality or any criminal law of the state; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if, in connection with the issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee or his agent filed or caused to be filed any application, affidavit, statement, certificate, book, or any other data containing any false, deceptive or other misleading information or omission of material fact. 
(b)	The conditions set forth in subsection (a) of this section as grounds for the revocation of a license shall also constitute grounds for refusing to renew a license. 
(c)	The municipal governing body shall set a time for hearing on the matter of revoking or refusing to renew a license. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee, or the applicant for renewal, as the case may be, at least ten days before the day set for said hearing. At the hearing the municipal governing body shall hear all evidence offered by any party and all evidence that may be presented bearing upon the question of revocation or the refusal of renewal, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 19, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-261. Refunds on overpayments.
(a)	Any taxpayer may file a petition for refund with the municipality for any overpayment of business license tax erroneously paid to the municipality. If a final assessment for the tax has been entered by the municipality, a petition for refund of all or a portion of the tax may be filed only if the final assessment has been paid in full prior to or simultaneously with the filing of the petition for refund. 
(b)	A petition for refund shall be filed with the municipality within two years from the date of payment of the business license tax, which is the subject of the petition. 
(c)	The municipality shall either grant or deny a petition for refund within six months from the date the petition is filed, unless the period is extended by written agreement of the taxpayer and the municipality. The taxpayer shall be notified of the municipality's decision concerning the petition for refund by first class U.S. mail or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, sent to the taxpayer's last known address. It the municipality fails to grant a full refund within the time provided herein, the refund petition shall be deemed to be denied. 
(d)	If the petition is granted or the municipality or a court otherwise determines that a refund is due, the overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer by the municipality, together with interest to the extent provided for in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-192. If the municipality determines that a refund is due, the amount of overpayment plus any interest due thereon may first be credited by the municipality against any outstanding tax liabilities due and owing by the taxpayer to the municipality, and the balance of any overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer. If any refund or part thereof is credited to any other tax by the municipality, the taxpayer shall be provided with a written detailed statement showing the amount of overpayment, the amount credited for payment to other taxes, and the resulting amount of the refund. 
(e)	A taxpayer may appeal from the denial in whole or in part of a petition for refund by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the circuit court of the county in which the municipality denying the petition for refund is located. Said notice of appeal must be filed within two years from the date the petition was denied. The circuit court shall hear the appeal according to its own rules and procedures and shall determine the correct amount of refund due, if any. If an appeal is not filed with the appropriate circuit court within two years of the date the petition was denied, then the appeal shall be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 20, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-262. Delivery license.
(a)	In lieu of any other type of license, a taxpayer may, at his option, purchase in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time, plus the issuance fee, a delivery license for the privilege of delivering its merchandise in the municipality if the taxpayer meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)	Other than deliveries, the taxpayer has no other physical presence within the municipality; 
(2)	The taxpayer conducts no other business in the municipality other than delivering merchandise and performing the requisite set-up and installation of said merchandise; 
(3)	Such delivery and set-up and installation is performed by the taxpayer's employees or agents, concerns the taxpayer's own merchandise in that municipality, and is done by means of delivery vehicles owned, leased, or contracted by the taxpayer; 
(4)	The gross receipts derived from the sale and any requisite set-up or installation of all merchandise so delivered shall not exceed $75,000.00 during the license year; 
(5)	Any set-up or installation shall relate only to that required by the contract between the taxpayer and the customer or as may be required by state or local law, and the merchandise so delivered; 
(6)	If at any time during the current license year the taxpayer fails to meet any of the criteria of this subsection (a), then within 45 days after any of said criteria have been violated or exceeded, the taxpayer shall purchase a business delivery license or other appropriate license from the municipality and will be subject to a penalty of $10.00. Mere delivery of the taxpayer's merchandise by common carrier shall not allow the municipality to assess a business license tax against the taxpayer, but the gross receipts derived from any sale and delivery accomplished by means of a common carrier shall be counted against the $75,000.00 limitation described in the preceding section if the taxpayer also during the same license year sells and delivers into the taxing jurisdiction using a delivery vehicle other than a common carrier. 
(b)	A common carrier, contract carrier, or similar delivery service making deliveries on behalf of others shall not be entitled to purchase a delivery license. 
(c)	The delivery license shall be calculated in arrears, based on the related gross receipts during the preceding license year. 
(d)	The purchase of a delivery license (or the exemption from the purchase of a delivery license pursuant to subsection (e) of this section) shall not, in and of itself, establish nexus between the taxpayer and the municipality for purposes of the taxes levied by or under the authority of Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, or other provisions of law, nor does the purchase of a delivery license conclusively determine that nexus does not exist between the taxpayer and the municipality. 
(e)	A taxpayer that otherwise meets the criteria for the purchase of a delivery license is not required to purchase a delivery license or a regular business license if the taxpayer's gross receipts that are derived from within the municipality do not exceed $10,000.00; and the taxpayer has no other physical presence within the municipality during the year. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 21, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 0-010-2017, § 1, 9-25-2017)
 
Sec. 16-263. License classifications.
CODE	2002 NAICS TITLES/BUSINESS LICENSE CODES	SCHEDULE
111 	111998 	Farming and crop production—agriculture, crop production, nursery, fruit, growers 	F 
112 	112990 	Animal production—dairy, cattle, ranching, sheep, chickens, poultry 	F 
113 	113110 	Forestry—logging, forestry, timber track operations, timber mgt 	D 
114 	114119 	Fishing and hunting—hunting and trapping, finfish, shellfish, supplies 	E 
115 	115114 	Agriculture support—cotton gins, farm mgt, post-harvest activities 	F 
211 	211111 	Oil and gas extraction—natural gas liquid extraction, crude extraction 	C 
212 	212299 	Mining—(except for oil and gas) all related mining activities 	C 
213 	213112 	Mining support services—for oil and gas mining activities, oil/gas wells 	C 
221 	221122 	Utilities—electric power or light company 	G 
221 	221210 	Utilities—natural gas company 	G 
221 	221310 	Utilities—water, sewage treatment, steam, and other 	G 
236 	236115 	Contractors—general contractors, comm. bldg, residential, subdivisions 	E 
237 	237310 	Contractors—heavy construction, highway, bridge, street, water, sewer 	D 
238 	238220 	Contractors—specialty trade—plumbing, heating and air conditioning 	E 
238 	238320 	Contractors—specialty trade—painting and wall covering 	E 
238 	238210 	Contractors—specialty trade—electrical contractors 	E 
238 	238140 	Contractors—specialty trade—masonry and stone contractors 	E 
238 	238310 	Contractors—specialty trade—drywall, acoustical and insulation 	E 
238 	238340 	Contractors—specialty trade—tile, marble, terrazzo and mosaic 	E 
238 	238350 	Contractors—specialty trade—carpentry contractors 	E 
238 	238330 	Contractors—specialty trade—floor coverings/all types 	E 
238 	238160 	Contractors—specialty trade—roofing, siding and sheet metal 	E 
238 	238190 	Contractors—specialty trade—concrete contractors 	E 
238 		Contractors—specialty trade—water well drilling and irrigation 	E 
238 	238120 	Contractors—specialty trade—structural steel erection 	E 
238 	238150 	Contractors—specialty trade—glass and glazing contractors 	E 
238 	238910 	Contractors—specialty trade—excavation and site development 	E 
238 	238910 	Contractors—specialty trade—wrecking and demolition 	E 
238 	238290 	Contractors—specialty trade—building equipment & mechanical install 	E 
238 	239290 	Contractors—specialty trades contractors—non-general and non-heavy 	D 
311 	311612 	Food mfg—meat, seafood, grain, fruit, dairy, animal, poultry processing 	F 
312 	312100 	Beverage mfg—all types of soft drinks, bottled water, breweries, ice 	E 
312 	312121 	Beer—off-premises—state regulated through ABC 	H 
312 	312122 	Beer—on-premises—state regulated through ABC 	H 
312 	312131 	Wine—state regulated through ABC 	H 
312 	312132 	Beer and wine—wholesale distributor 	H 
312 	312141 	Alcohol—state regulated through ABC 	H 
313 	313112 	Textile mfg—fabric, yarn, carpet, canvas, rope, twine, fabric mills 	E 
314 	314129 	Other mfg—mill operations not covered in code 313, rugs, linen, curtains 	E 
315 	315999 	Apparel mfg—women, men, children, hosiery, lingerie outerwear, accessories 	D 
316 	316993 	Leather and allied products mfg—shoes, luggage, handbag, related products, all footwear 	D 
321 	321199 	Wood mfg—sawmills, wood preservation, veneer, trusses, millwork 	F 
322 	322229 	Paper mfg—pulp, paper, and converted products, stationary, tubes, cores 	E 
323 	323112 	Printing—screen, quick, digital, books, lithographic, handbills, comm. 	D 
323 	323113 	Printing—T-shirts screen printing 	D 
324 	324199 	Petroleum and coal mfg—asphalt, grease, roofing, paving products 	C 
325 	325998 	Chemical mfg—of fertilizer, wood, pesticide, paint, soap, and resin 	C 
326 	326291 	Plastic and rubber mfg—tires, pipe, hoses, belts, bottles, sheet, wrap, film 	D 
327 	327331 	Nonmetallic mfg—clay, glass, cement, lime, pottery, ceramic, brick, tile 	C 
331 	331528 	Primary metal mfg—iron, steel, aluminum, wire, copper, foundries 	C 
332 	332618 	Fence sales and installation 	C 
332 	332999 	Metal fabrication—cutlery, structural, ornamental, machine shops 	D 
333 	333990 	Machinery mfg—office machinery, industrial, engines, farm, HVAC 	C 
334 	334419 	Computer & electronic mfg—audio, video, circuit boards, peripherals 	C 
335 	335211 	Appliance mfg—small appliance, lighting, electrical, battery, freezer 	C 
336 	336210 	Transportation mfg—mfg auto, truck, trailer, motor home, boat, ship and motorcycle 	D 
337 	337129 	Furniture mfg—cabinets, office, household, beds, kitchen 	C 
339 	339999 	Miscellaneous mfg—misc. manufacturing, medical, dental, jewelry, sporting goods, toys, signs, all other 	B 
421 	421990 	Wholesale trade—durable, vehicle, machinery, equipment, furniture 	E 
422 	422424 	Wholesale trade—non-durable, wholesale gasoline distributor 	F 
422 	422990 	Wholesale trade—non-durable, paper, apparel, grocery, beverages, dairy 	E 
441 	441310 	Motor vehicle parts and accessories—auto, motorcycles, boats, parts and accessories 	C 
441 	441310 	Motor vehicles—new and/or used automobiles, motorcycles, boats, etc.—dealerships and lots 	D 
442 	442290 	Furniture—furniture, home furnishings, stores, floor coverings, window 	C 
443 	443112 	Electronic and appliance store—household, radio, television, computers 	B 
444 	444130 	Building materials and gardening equipment dealers—hardware, paint, home center, wallpaper, nursery 	C 
445 	445120 	Food and beverage stores—grocery, convenience store, markets 	F 
445 	445310 	Package stores—selling beer, wine and liquor plus general mdse 	D 
446 	446110 	Health and personal care stores—drug, pharmacy, cosmetic, optical, health food 	C 
447 	447110 	Gasoline retail—selling gasoline with or without convenience stores 	T 
448 	448190 	Clothing and accessories—men, women, children, infant, shoe, jewelry 	B 
451 	451120 	Sporting goods & hobbies—toy, fish, gun, books, games 	B 
452 	452110 	General merchandise stores—department, warehouse clubs, superstore 	C 
453 	453310 	Used merchandise stores—books, misc, consignment, flea market 	F 
453 	453998 	Miscellaneous retailers—florist, gift, novelty, pet, art, and tobacco 	B 
454 	454390 	Non-store retailers—vending machine operators, direct selling, mail order 	D 
454 	454391 	Non-store retailer—peddlers license/local peddler 	I 
481 	481111 	Air transportation—airline tickets, shipping, freight, charters service 	B 
482 	482110 	Rail transportation—transportation, ticket offices, state regulated Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-124 	
483 	483212 	Water transportation—coastal, freight forwarders, inland, passenger 	B 
484 	484122 	Truck transportation—local, long-distance, freight, moving, & storage 	C 
484 	484230 	Truck transportation—terminal—state regulated Code of Ala. 1975, § 37-3-33 	
485 	485113 	Passenger transportation—charter and other vehicle transit services 	B 
485 	485114 	Passenger transportation—bus terminals state regulated Code of Ala. 1975, § 37-3-33 	
485 	485320 	Passenger transportation—buses, taxicabs, limousine service, buggy, charters 	J 
485 	485321 	Passenger transportation—number of buses, taxis, cabs, limousines, or buggies 	J 
487 	487990 	Sightseeing transportation—scenic and sightseeing, land, air, water, special trans 	A 
492 	492210 	Couriers—couriers and local messengers, services, local delivery services 	C 
493 	493110 	Warehousing and storage—distribution, household, refrigerated, special 	F 
511 	511199 	Publishing industries except internet—newspaper, book, periodical, databases, software 	B 
512 	512131 	Motion pictures—theatres, videos, recording, drive-ins, sound studios 	A 
515 	515100 	Broadcasting—radio and television stations 	B 
517 	517110 	Telecommunications—telephone local per Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-128 	K 
517 	517110 	Telecommunications—telephone long distance per Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-128 	K 
517 	517212 	Telecommunications—cellular and other wireless, paging 	K 
517 	517310 	Telecommunications—resellers of service 	K 
519 	519190 	Information services and data processing—providing, storing, processing, access to information 	A 
522 	522110 	Bank main office—not branch location or ATM 	U 
522 	522111 	Bank branch or ATM—not main office of bank 	U 
522 	522120 	Savings and loans—not branch location or ATM 	U 
522 	522121 	S&L branch or ATM—not main office of S&L 	U 
522 	522298 	Pawn shop—whether title pawn or merchandise 	A 
522 	522390 	Credit services—companies and activities related to credit and mediation 	B 
523 	523999 	Securities, commodity—brokerage, portfolio, investment, other financial services 	A 
524 	524126 	Insurance company and/or its agents—casualty, fire, and/or marine premiums Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-120—11-51-123 	
524 	524113 	Insurance company and/or its agents—health, allied and all other premiums Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-120—11-51-123 	
524 	524292 	Agent office—administration of third parties, pension funds, annuities, etc. 	B 
525 	525990 	Funds, trusts, other financial agencies—funds, plans, and/or programs organized to pool securities or other assets for others, other than the state municipal funding corp. 	A 
531 	531390 	Real estate—offices, agents, brokers, management, appraisers 	B 
532 	532490 	Rental and leasing—auto, truck, trailer, RV, all tangible property 	C 
532 	532490 	Rental and leasing—movie and video rental 	D 
541 	541110 	Attorney/lawyers—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
541 	541211 	Accountant/CPAs—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
541 	541310 	Architect—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
541 	541330 	Engineer—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
541 	541360 	Surveyor—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
541 	541511 	Computer programmer—individual and/or professional firm license 	A 
541 	541921 	Photographer—studios, portrait, commercial, services 	A 
541 	541940 	Veterinarian—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
541 	541990 	Professional services not elsewhere classified—scientific, technical 	A 
551 	551110 	Management companies—offices, enterprises, regional, corporate 	B 
561 	561621 	Alarm companies 	C 
561 	561710 	Exterminating services—exterminating company and its services 	E 
561 	561720 	Janitorial firm—janitorial cleaning services—individual or firm 	F 
561 	561730 	Landscaping services 	F 
561 	561731 	Lawn maintenance 	F 
561 	561439 	Administrative services—answering, employment, office, sec., travel 	C 
562 	562998 	Waste management—companies, trucks, septic tanks, landfill, services 	F 
611 	611699 	Educational services—technical, computer, sports, services, business 	D 
621 	621200 	Physician—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
621 	621200 	Dentist—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
621 	621200 	Chiropractor—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
621 	621200 	Optometrist—individual and/or firm professional license 	A 
621 	621491 	HMO—medical centers and services 	B 
621 	621498 	Outpatient care centers—all other types of services 	C 
621 	621910 	Ambulance—ambulance company and/or services 	D 
622 	622110 	Hospitals—surgical, substance abuse, psychiatric, general care, special 	C 
623 	623110 	Nursing care—residential care facility, day care, assisted living 	C 
623 	623312 	Nursing home—care for elderly and continuing care facilities 	D 
624 	624229 	Social assistance—shelters, vocational, child care, abuse, emergency 	E 
711 	711219 	Arts and sports—dance, musical, teams, tracks, promoters, agents 	B 
711 	711310 	Special events—promoter or activity—see schedule for rates 	L 
712 	712190 	Museums—museums and historical sites, zoos, botanical gardens, parks 	C 
713 	713290 	Amusement—bingo license 	
713 	713990 	Amusement—arcades, golf clubs, marinas, fitness, bowling centers 	B 
721 	721110 	Accommodations—hotels, motels and similar facilities 	C 
721 	721191 	Accommodations—bed and breakfast inns and services 	D 
721 	721214 	Accommodations—trailer parks, RV parks, and travel parks 	E 
721 	721310 	Accommodations—roominghouses and boardinghouses 	E 
722 	722110 	Restaurant—full service restaurant facility 	D 
722 	722211 	Restaurant—limited facility or service 	D 
722 	722320 	Caterers and/or mobile food services 	C 
722 	722410 	Drinking establishment—club, lounge, bar or other 	B 
811 	811118 	Repairs and maintenance—auto, paint/body, carwash, other vehicular 	C 
811 	811219 	Repairs and maintenance—all electronic equipment 	B 
811 	811412 	Repairs and maintenance—all appliances, home and garden equipment 	D 
812 	812112 	Personal services—hair, skin, barber, beautician, diet, nail, tanning, funerals 	B 
812 	812111 	Barbershops 	B 
812 	812910 	Pet care grooming 	B 
812 	812990 	Bail bondsmen 	B 
812 		Fortune teller or clairvoyant—individual reader license 	M 
910 	91000.001 	Category for number of—vending machines for all types vending 	N 
910 	91000.002 	Category for number of—pool tables 	O 
910 	91000.003 	Category for number of—amusement devices and/or games 	P 
920 	920110 	Category for number of—employees as a basis for calculating license 	R 
930 	930110 	Category for number of—square feet used for calculating license amount 	S 
999 		Unclassified miscellaneous business services not elsewhere classified 	C 
999100 		Unclassified miscellaneous personal services not elsewhere classified 	B 
923___ 		Administration of human resource programs 	
924___ 		Administration of environmental quality programs 	
925___ 		Administration of housing, urban, communities 	
926___ 		Administration of economic programs 	
927___ 		Space, research, and technology 	
928___ 		National security and international affairs 	

Note: The North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) identification (sector/sub-sector) numbers are required as a part of the periodic reporting requirements for every business. For municipal business license purposes, each taxpayer must be minimally classified as required by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90B. The descriptions listed beside each NAICS code incorporate examples of each category; however these examples are not all inclusive. A business is classified and licensed based upon the business activity or activities which it conducts within the city. Each business will be placed in the NAICS sector/sub-sector which best matches its activity or activities and shall pay a license tax based upon the corresponding schedule assigned to its description unless otherwise specified. The city reserves the right to assign additional digits of each NAICS code for reporting purposes and proper administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 22, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-264. License fee schedules.
(a)	Schedule A. If gross receipts are: 
More Than	But	Less Than		
$0.00 		$99,999.00 	100 	
$100,000.00 		$199,999.00 	346 +2.72 per M in excess of 	$100,000.00 
$200,000.00 		$299,999.00 	618 +2.35 per M in excess of 	$200,000.00 
$300,000.00 		$399,999.00 	853 +2.21 per M in excess of 	$300,000.00 
$400,000.00 		$499,999.00 	1,074 +2.16 per M in excess of 	$400,000.00 
$500,000.00 		$599,999.00 	1,290 +2.11 per M in excess of 	$500,000.00 
$600,000.00 		$699,999.00 	1,501 +2.05 per M in excess of 	$600,000.00 
$700,000.00 		$799,999.00 	1,706 +2.00 per M in excess of 	$700,000.00 
$800,000.00 		$899,999.00 	1,906 +1.95 per M in excess of 	$800,000.00 
$900,000.00 		$999,999.00 	2,101 +1.89 per M in excess of 	$900,000.00 
$1,000,000.00 		$1,099,999.00 	2,290 +1.84 per M in excess of 	$1,000,000.00 
$1,100,000.00 		$1,199,999.00 	2,274 +1.79 per M in excess of 	$1,100,000.00 
$1,200,000.00 		$1,299,999.00 	2,653 +1.73 per M in excess of 	$1,200,000.00 
$1,300,000.00 		$1,399,999.00 	2,826 +1.68 per M in excess of 	$1,300,000.00 
$1,400,000.00 		$1,499,999.00 	2,994 +1.63 per M in excess of 	$1,400,000.00 
$1,500,000.00 		$1,999,999.00 	3,157 +1.60 per M in excess of 	$1,500,000.00 
$2,000,000.00 		$2,499,999.00 	3,957 +1.57 per M in excess of 	$2,000,000.00 
$2,500,000.00 		$2,999,999.00 	4,742 +1.55 per M in excess of 	$2,500,000.00 
$3,000,000.00 		$3,499,999.00 	5,517 +1.49 per M in excess of 	$3,000,000.00 
$3,500,000.00 		$3,999,999.00 	6,262 +1.44 per M in excess of 	$3,500,000.00 
$4,000,000.00 		$4,999,999.00 	6,982 +1.39 per M in excess of 	$4,000,000.00 
$5,000,000.00 		$5,999,999.00 	8,372 +1.33 per M in excess of 	$5,000,000.00 
$6,000,000.00 		$7,999,999.00 	9,702 +1.28 per M in excess of 	$6,000,000.00 
$8,000,000.00 		$10,999,999.00 	12,262 +1.23 per M in excess of 	$8,000,000.00 
$11,000,000.00 		$13,999,999.00 	15,952 +1.17 per M in excess of 	$11,000,000.00 
$14,000,000.00 		$57,999,999.00 	19,462 +1.12 per M in excess of 	$14,000,000.00 
$58,000,000.00 		$91,999,999.00 	68,742 +1.01 per M in excess of 	$58,000,000.00 
$92,000,000.00 		Over $92MM 	102,080 + .80 per M in excess of 	$92,000,000.00 

(b)	Schedule B. If gross receipts are: 
More Than	But	Less Than		
$0.00 		$99,999.00 	100 	
$100,000.00 		$199,999.00 	300 +2.41 per M in excess of 	$100,000.00 
$200,000.00 		$299,999.00 	541 +2.05 per M in excess of 	$200,000.00 
$300,000.00 		$399,999.00 	746 +1.94 per M in excess of 	$300,000.00 
$400,000.00 		$499,999.00 	940 +1.89 per M in excess of 	$400,000.00 
$500,000.00 		$599,999.00 	1,129 +1.84 per M in excess of 	$500,000.00 
$600,000.00 		$699,999.00 	1,313 +1.80 per M in excess of 	$600,000.00 
$700,000.00 		$799,999.00 	1,492 +1.75 per M in excess of 	$700,000.00 
$800,000.00 		$899,999.00 	1,668 +1.70 per M in excess of 	$800,000.00 
$900,000.00 		$999,999.00 	1,838 +1.66 per M in excess of 	$900,000.00 
$1,000,000.00 		$1,099,999.00 	2,004 +1.61 per M in excess of 	$1,000,000.00 
$1,100,000.00 		$1,199,999.00 	2,165 +1.56 per M in excess of 	$1,100,000.00 
$1,200,000.00 		$1,299,999.00 	2,321 +1.52 per M in excess of 	$1,200,000.00 
$1,300,000.00 		$1,399,999.00 	2,473 +1.47 per M in excess of 	$1,300,000.00 
$1,400,000.00 		$1,499,999.00 	2,620 +1.42 per M in excess of 	$1,400,000.00 
$1,500,000.00 		$1,999,999.00 	2,762 +1.40 per M in excess of 	$1,500,000.00 
$2,000,000.00 		$2,499,999.00 	3,462 +1.38 per M in excess of 	$2,000,000.00 
$2,500,000.00 		$2,999,999.00 	4,152 +1.35 per M in excess of 	$2,500,000.00 
$3,000,000.00 		$3,499,999.00 	4,827 +1.31 per M in excess of 	$3,000,000.00 
$3,500,000.00 		$3,999,999.00 	5,482 +1.26 per M in excess of 	$3,500,000.00 
$4,000,000.00 		$4,999,999.00 	6,112 +1.21 per M in excess of 	$4,000,000.00 
$5,000,000.00 		$5,999,999.00 	7,322 +1.17 per M in excess of 	$5,000,000.00 
$6,000,000.00 		$7,999,999.00 	8,492 +1.12 per M in excess of 	$6,000,000.00 
$8,000,000.00 		$10,999,999.00 	10,732 +1.07 per M in excess of 	$8,000,000.00 
$11,000,000.00 		$13,999,999.00 	13,942 +1.03 per M in excess of 	$11,000,000.00 
$14,000,000.00 		$57,999,999.00 	17,032 + .98 per M in excess of 	$14,000,000.00 
$58,000,000.00 		$91,999,999.00 	60,152 + .89 per M in excess of 	$58,000,000.00 
$92,000,000.00 		Over $92MM 	90,412 + .70 per M in excess of 	$92,000,000.00 

(c)	Schedule C. If gross receipts are: 
More Than	But	Less Than		
$0.00 		$99,999.00 	100 	
$100,000.00 		$199,999.00 	259 +2.05 per M in excess of 	$100,000.00 
$200,000.00 		$299,999.00 	464 +1.76 per M in excess of 	$200,000.00 
$300,000.00 		$399,999.00 	640 +1.66 per M in excess of 	$300,000.00 
$400,000.00 		$499,999.00 	806 +1.62 per M in excess of 	$400,000.00 
$500,000.00 		$599,999.00 	968 +1.58 per M in excess of 	$500,000.00 
$600,000.00 		$699,999.00 	1,126 +1.54 per M in excess of 	$600,000.00 
$700,000.00 		$799,999.00 	1,280 +1.50 per M in excess of 	$700,000.00 
$800,000.00 		$899,999.00 	1,430 +1.46 per M in excess of 	$800,000.00 
$900,000.00 		$999,999.00 	1,576 +1.42 per M in excess of 	$900,000.00 
$1,000,000.00 		$1,099,999.00 	1,718 +1.38 per M in excess of 	$1,000,000.00 
$1,100,000.00 		$1,199,999.00 	1,856 +1.34 per M in excess of 	$1,100,000.00 
$1,200,000.00 		$1,299,999.00 	1,990 +1.30 per M in excess of 	$1,200,000.00 
$1,300,000.00 		$1,399,999.00 	2,120 +1.26 per M in excess of 	$1,300,000.00 
$1,400,000.00 		$1,499,999.00 	2,246 +1.22 per M in excess of 	$1,400,000.00 
$1,500,000.00 		$1,999,999.00 	2,368 +1.20 per M in excess of 	$1,500,000.00 
$2,000,000.00 		$2,499,999.00 	2,968 +1.18 per M in excess of 	$2,000,000.00 
$2,500,000.00 		$2,999,999.00 	3,358 +1.16 per M in excess of 	$2,500,000.00 
$3,000,000.00 		$3,499,999.00 	4,138 +1.12 per M in excess of 	$3,000,000.00 
$3,500,000.00 		$3,999,999.00 	4,698 +1.08 per M in excess of 	$3,500,000.00 
$4,000,000.00 		$4,999,999.00 	5,238 +1.04 per M in excess of 	$4,000,000.00 
$5,000,000.00 		$5,999,999.00 	6,278 +1.00 per M in excess of 	$5,000,000.00 
$6,000,000.00 		$7,999,999.00 	7,278 + .96 per M in excess of 	$6,000,000.00 
$8,000,000.00 		$10,999,999.00 	9,198 + .92 per M in excess of 	$8,000,000.00 
$11,000,000.00 		$13,999,999.00 	11,958 + .88 per M in excess of 	$11,000,000.00 
$14,000,000.00 		$57,999,999.00 	14,598 + .84 per M in excess of 	$14,000,000.00 
$58,000,000.00 		$91,999,999.00 	51,398 + .76 per M in excess of 	$58,000,000.00 
$92,000,000.00 		Over $92MM 	77,398 + .60 per M in excess of 	$92,000,000.00 

(d)	Schedule D. If gross receipts are: 
More Than	But	Less Than		
$0.00 		$99,999.00 	100 	
$100,000.00 		$199,999.00 	211 +1.72 per M in excess of 	$100,000.00 
$200,000.00 		$299,999.00 	383 +1.47 per M in excess of 	$200,000.00 
$300,000.00 		$399,999.00 	530 +1.38 per M in excess of 	$300,000.00 
$400,000.00 		$499,999.00 	668 +1.35 per M in excess of 	$400,000.00 
$500,000.00 		$599,999.00 	803 +1.32 per M in excess of 	$500,000.00 
$600,000.00 		$699,999.00 	935 +1.28 per M in excess of 	$600,000.00 
$700,000.00 		$799,999.00 	1,063 +1.25 per M in excess of 	$700,000.00 
$800,000.00 		$899,999.00 	1,188 +1.22 per M in excess of 	$800,000.00 
$900,000.00 		$999,999.00 	1,310 +1.18 per M in excess of 	$900,000.00 
$1,000,000.00 		$1,099,999.00 	1,428 +1.15 per M in excess of 	$1,000,000.00 
$1,100,000.00 		$1,199,999.00 	1,543 +1.12 per M in excess of 	$1,100,000.00 
$1,200,000.00 		$1,299,999.00 	1,655 +1.08 per M in excess of 	$1,200,000.00 
$1,300,000.00 		$1,399,999.00 	1,763 +1.05 per M in excess of 	$1,300,000.00 
$1,400,000.00 		$1,499,999.00 	1,868 +1.02 per M in excess of 	$1,400,000.00 
$1,500,000.00 		$1,999,999.00 	1,970 +1.00 per M in excess of 	$1,500,000.00 
$2,000,000.00 		$2,499,999.00 	2,470 + .98 per M in excess of 	$2,000,000.00 
$2,500,000.00 		$2,999,999.00 	2,960 + .97 per M in excess of 	$2,500,000.00 
$3,000,000.00 		$3,499,999.00 	3,445 + .93 per M in excess of 	$3,000,000.00 
$3,500,000.00 		$3,999,999.00 	3,910 + .90 per M in excess of 	$3,500,000.00 
$4,000,000.00 		$4,999,999.00 	4,360 + .87 per M in excess of 	$4,000,000.00 
$5,000,000.00 		$5,999,999.00 	5,230 + .83 per M in excess of 	$5,000,000.00 
$6,000,000.00 		$7,999,999.00 	6,060 + .80 per M in excess of 	$6,000,000.00 
$8,000,000.00 		$10,999,999.00 	7,660 + .77 per M in excess of 	$8,000,000.00 
$11,000,000.00 		$13,999,999.00 	9,970 + .73 per M in excess of 	$11,000,000.00 
$14,000,000.00 		$57,999,999.00 	12,160 + .70 per M in excess of 	$14,000,000.00 
$58,000,000.00 		$91,999,999.00 	42,960 + .63 per M in excess of 	$58,000,000.00 
$92,000,000.00 		Over $92MM 	64,380 + .50 per M in excess of 	$92,000,000.00 

(e)	Schedule E. If gross receipts are: 
More Than	But	Less Than		
$0.00 		$99,999.00 	100 	
$100,000.00 		$199,999.00 	170 +1.33 per M in excess of 	$100,000.00 
$200,000.00 		$299,999.00 	303 +1.17 per M in excess of 	$200,000.00 
$300,000.00 		$399,999.00 	420 +1.11 per M in excess of 	$300,000.00 
$400,000.00 		$499,999.00 	531 +1.08 per M in excess of 	$400,000.00 
$500,000.00 		$599,999.00 	639 +1.05 per M in excess of 	$500,000.00 
$600,000.00 		$699,999.00 	744 +1.03 per M in excess of 	$600,000.00 
$700,000.00 		$799,999.00 	847 +1.00 per M in excess of 	$700,000.00 
$800,000.00 		$899,999.00 	947 + .97 per M in excess of 	$800,000.00 
$900,000.00 		$999,999.00 	1,044 + .95 per M in excess of 	$900,000.00 
$1,000,000.00 		$1,099,999.00 	1,139 +.92 per M in excess of 	$1,000,000.00 
$1,100,000.00 		$1,199,999.00 	1,231 + .89 per M in excess of 	$1,100,000.00 
$1,200,000.00 		$1,299,999.00 	1,320 + .87 per M in excess of 	$1,200,000.00 
$1,300,000.00 		$1,399,999.00 	1,407 + .84 per M in excess of 	$1,300,000.00 
$1,400,000.00 		$1,499,999.00 	1,491 + .81 per M in excess of 	$1,400,000.00 
$1,500,000.00 		$1,999,999.00 	1,572 + .80 per M in excess of 	$1,500,000.00 
$2,000,000.00 		$2,499,999.00 	1,972 + .79 per M in excess of 	$2,000,000.00 
$2,500,000.00 		$2,999,999.00 	2,367 + .77 per M in excess of 	$2,500,000.00 
$3,000,000.00 		$3,499,999.00 	2,752 + .75 per M in excess of 	$3,000,000.00 
$3,500,000.00 		$3,999,999.00 	3,127 + .72 per M in excess of 	$3,500,000.00 
$4,000,000.00 		$4,999,999.00 	3,487 + .69 per M in excess of 	$4,000,000.00 
$5,000,000.00 		$5,999,999.00 	4,177 + .67 per M in excess of 	$5,000,000.00 
$6,000,000.00 		$7,999,999.00 	4,847 + .64 per M in excess of 	$6,000,000.00 
$8,000,000.00 		$10,999,999.00 	6,127 + .61 per M in excess of 	$8,000,000.00 
$11,000,000.00 		$13,999,999.00 	7,957 + .59 per M in excess of 	$11,000,000.00 
$14,000,000.00 		$57,999,999.00 	9,727 + .56 per M in excess of 	$14,000,000.00 
$58,000,000.00 		$91,999,999.00 	34,367 + .51 per M in excess of 	$58,000,000.00 
$92,000,000.00 		Over $92MM 	51,707 + .40 per M in excess of 	$92,000,000.00 

(f)	Schedule F. If gross receipts are: 
More Than	But	Less Than		
$0.00 		$99,999.00 	100 	
$100,000.00 		$199,999.00 	129 +1.03 per M in excess of 	$100,000.00 
$200,000.00 		$299,999.00 	232 + .88 per M in excess of 	$200,000.00 
$300,000.00 		$399,999.00 	320 + .83 per M in excess of 	$300,000.00 
$400,000.00 		$499,999.00 	403 + .81 per M in excess of 	$400,000.00 
$500,000.00 		$599,999.00 	484 + .79 per M in excess of 	$500,000.00 
$600,000.00 		$699,999.00 	563 +.77 per M in excess of 	$600,000.00 
$700,000.00 		$799,999.00 	640 +.75 per M in excess of 	$700,000.00 
$800,000.00 		$899,999.00 	715 + .73 per M in excess of 	$800,000.00 
$900,000.00 		$999,999.00 	788 + .71 per M in excess of 	$900,000.00 
$1,000,000.00 		$1,099,999.00 	859 + .69 per M in excess of 	$1,000,000.00 
$1,100,000.00 		$1,199,999.00 	938 + .67 per M in excess of 	$1,100,000.00 
$1,200,000.00 		$1,299,999.00 	995 + .65 per M in excess of 	$1,200,000.00 
$1,300,000.00 		$1,399,999.00 	1,060 + .63 per M in excess of 	$1,300,000.00 
$1,400,000.00 		$1,499,999.00 	1,123 + .61 per M in excess of 	$1,400,000.00 
$1,500,000.00 		$1,999,999.00 	1,184 + .60 per M in excess of 	$1,500,000.00 
$2,000,000.00 		$2,499,999.00 	1,484 + .59 per M in excess of 	$2,000,000.00 
$2,500,000.00 		$2,999,999.00 	1,779 + .58 per M in excess of 	$2,500,000.00 
$3,000,000.00 		$3,499,999.00 	2,069 + .56 per M in excess of 	$3,000,000.00 
$3,500,000.00 		$3,999,999.00 	2,349 + .54 per M in excess of 	$3,500,000.00 
$4,000,000.00 		$4,999,999.00 	2,619 + .52 per M in excess of 	$4,000,000.00 
$5,000,000.00 		$5,999,999.00 	3,139 + .50 per M in excess of 	$5,000,000.00 
$6,000,000.00 		$7,999,999.00 	3,639 + .48 per M in excess of 	$6,000,000.00 
$8,000,000.00 		$10,999,999.00 	4,599 + .46 per M in excess of 	$8,000,000.00 
$11,000,000.00 		$13,999,999.00 	5,979 + .44 per M in excess of 	$11,000,000.00 
$14,000,000.00 		$57,999,999.00 	7,299 + .42 per M in excess of 	$14,000,000.00 
$58,000,000.00 		$91,999,999.00 	25,779 + .38 per M in excess of 	$58,000,000.00 
$92,000,000.00 		Over $92MM 	38,699 + .30 per M in excess of 	$92,000,000.00 

(g)	Schedule G—Utilities. Amount of license is state regulated. See Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-129. For those utilities covered, the license shall not exceed an amount equal to three percent of the gross receipts of the business transacted in the municipality for the previous year. 
(h)	Schedule H—Beer, wine and liquor. Amount of license is state regulated, as shown in the following table: 
State of Alabama Code	Classification	Amount	Licensing Notes
040 (Beer on- and off-premises) 	312121 	$75.00 	
050 (Beer off-premises only) 	312122 	$50.00 	
060 (Table wine on- and off-premises) 	312131 	$75.00 	
070 (Table wine off-premises only) 	312131 	$75.00 	
010 (Lounge retail liquor Class I) 	312121 	$75.00* 	*All three codes are part of the package plus the business license code 
	312141 	$650.00* 	
	312131 	$75.00* 	
011 (Package store liquor Class II) 	312122 	$75.00* 	*All three codes are part of the package plus the business license code 
	312141 	$650.00* 	
	312131 	$75.00* 	
020 (Restaurant retail liquor) 	312121 	$75.00* 	*All three codes are part of the package plus the business license code 
	312141 	$650.00* 	
	312131 	$75.00* 	
032 (Club liquor Class II) 	312121 	$75.00* 	*All three codes are part of the package plus the business license code 
	312141 	$650.00* 	
	313131 	$75.00* 	
110 (Wholesale table wine and beer) 	312132 	$275.00* 	*Distributors license 

(i)	Schedule I—Peddlers.
Daily rate 	Issued for single day sales activity 	$10.00 
Weekly rate 	Issued for weeklong sales activity 	$25.00 
Monthly rate 	Issued for month long sales activity 	$50.00 
Yearly rate 	Issued for annual sales activity 	$100.00 

(j)	Schedule J—Taxicabs and limousines. In addition to the license thereto, there shall be a decal affixed to each taxicab or limousine and the cost of said decals shall be according to the following table: 
Single taxicab or limousine 	$50.00 per each 
All taxicabs or limousines over 1 	$25.00 per each 

(k)	Schedule K—Telephones and telecommunications. Refer to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-128 for telephones and establish other rates and/or schedules for various other telecommunications businesses. 
(l)	Schedule L—Special events licenses. Special events organized for profit by a non-educational or non-religious organization such as outdoor concerts, organized sales, etc., shall pay a $100.00 license, plus issuance fee. All special events must be approved by the city council prior to advertisement or conduction of the event. Once approval has been granted a security plan must be presented to the chief of police. Security of the special event will be the responsibility of the organization conducting the special event. All applicable sales taxes must be collected and remitted to the revenue department. 
(m)	Schedule M—Fortune tellers. Annual license rate is $1,000.00.00 and rate is reduced by $25.00 each year until such time as the annual rate reaches $500.00 and that becomes the minimum rate thereafter. 
(n)	Schedule N—Vending.
(1)	One to five machines vending any type merchandise or product other than fuel shall be at a rate of $20.00 each. 
(2)	All vending machines that exceed the first five shall be at a rate of $10.00 each, in addition to the cost of the first five vending machines. 
(o)	Schedule O—Billiard and/or pool tables. In addition to the license thereto, there shall be a decal affixed to each machine and the cost of said decals shall be according to the following table: 
For 1 to 2 billiard or pool tables 	$50.00 each 
All billiard or pool tables over 2 	$25.00 each 

(p)	Schedule P—Amusement devices. In addition to the license thereto, there shall be a decal affixed to each machine and the cost of said decals shall be according to the following table: 
For the first 10 machines 	$25.00 each 
All machines over 10 	$10.00 each 

(q)	Schedule Q—Buses, trucks and other equipment. In addition to the license thereto, there shall be a decal affixed to each piece of equipment and the cost of said decals shall be according to the following table: 
From 1 to 2 buses, trucks or other equipment 	$50.00 each 
From 2 to 5 buses, trucks or other equipment 	$25.00 each 
Over 5 buses, trucks or other equipment 	$10.00 each 

(r)	Schedule R—Number of employees.
R-1 	Where personnel are from 1 to 2 people 	$100.00 
R-2 	Where personnel are from 3 to 5 people 	$250.00 
R-3 	Where personnel are from 6 to 10 people 	$400.00 
R-4 	Where personnel are from 11 to 20 people 	$550.00 
R-5 	Where personnel are from 21 to 50 people 	$700.00 
R-6 	Where personnel are from 51 to 75 people 	$850.00 
R-7 	Where personnel is from 76 to 100 people 	$1,000.00 
R-8 	Personnel over 100 to be $1,000.00 + $50.00 per person over 100 	

(s)	Schedule S—Square feet.
S-1 	From zero 	to 	5,000 square feet 	$100.00 
S-2 	From 5,000 	to 	10,000 square feet 	$200.00 
S-3 	From 10,000 	to 	20,000 square feet 	$300.00 
S-4 	From 20,000 	to 	30,000 square feet 	$400.00 
S-5 	From 30,000 	to 	40,000 square feet 	$500.00 
S-6 	From 40,000 	to 	50,000 square feet 	$600.00 
S-7 	From 50,000 	to 	60,000 square feet 	$700.00 
S-8 	From 60,000 	to 	70,000 square feet 	$800.00 
S-9 	From 70,000 	to 	80,000 square feet 	$900.00 
S-10 	From 80,000 	to 	90,000 square feet 	$1,000.00 
S-11 	From 90,000 	to 	100,000 square feet 	$1,200.00 
S-16 	From 100,000 up—$1,200.00 plus $0.01 per square foot over 100,000 			

(t)	Schedule T—Retail fuel sales. Retail fuel sales should not be included with the gross receipts, but rather on the number of units metering the fuel that is being dispersed. Retail fuel sales shall be computed based on the vending fuel selections. Rates shall be as shown below. The cost shall be $10.00 per selection per nozzle. Example: If the retail fuel vendor has one nozzle that distributes 3 types of fuel, then this shall constitute 3 vending units. 
(u)	Schedule U—Banks/savings and loans.
Bank ATM location 	$10.00 
Bank branch location 	$10.00 
Bank main office facility 	$125.00 
Savings and loan ATM location 	$10.00 
Savings and loan branch location 	$10.00 
Savings and loan mail office facility 	$125.00 

(v)	Schedule V—Delivery license. The rate for the delivery license is established in section 16-262 and is $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 23, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-265. Exchange of information.
(a)	The license officer may exchange tax returns, information, records, and other documents secured by the municipality, with other municipalities adopting similar ordinances for the exchange of taxpayer information, or with county or state authorities. The license officer may charge a reasonable fee for providing such information or documents. Any tax returns, information, records, or other documents so exchanged shall remain subject to the confidentiality provisions, restrictions, and criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure as provided under state or municipal law. 
(b)	Any such exchange shall be for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)	Collecting taxes due. 
(2)	Ascertaining the amount of taxes due from any person. 
(3)	Determining whether a person is liable for, or whether there is probable cause for believing a person might be liable for, the payment of any tax to a state, county, or municipal agency. 
(c)	Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of tax returns or tax information by the municipality in the proper administration of any matter administered by the license officer. The license officer may also divulge to a purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor of a business or stock of goods the outstanding sales, use, or rental tax liability of the seller for which the purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor may be liable pursuant to the Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-23-25, 40-23-82 or 40-12-224. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 24, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-266. License fees in police jurisdiction.
Any person, firm, association, or corporation engaged in any business outside the municipality but within the police jurisdiction hereof shall pay one-half of the amount of the license imposed for like business within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 25, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-267. Previous years gross receipts required if business is sold.
Where an existing business is taken over by new owners or operators, and the license is based on gross receipts, the amount of license shall be computed on the basis of gross receipts of the preceding year, regardless of whether present owner was owner and/or operator during such preceding year. The transfer of ownership shall in no way void, exempt or alter the obligation of licensee to pay the city license as shown in the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 26, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-268. Non-issuance or non-renewal stipulation for unpaid taxes or license fees.
No business license shall be issued or renewed whenever any one or more of the following circumstances exists: 
(1)	The applicant or licensee owes an unpaid license fee or tax of any kind to the city for which a final assessment has been issued and for which all direct appeals have been exhausted. 
(2)	The applicant or licensee has an outstanding obligation to file a license or tax return or report to the city and is delinquent in filing the return or report. 
(Ord. No. 0-005-2007, § 27, 11-5-2007)
 
Secs. 16-269—16-299. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE X. PRIVATE SECURITY GUARDS AND PRIVATE DETECTIVES 
 
Sec. 16-300. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means and includes any person paid by, retained, supervised, employed or under the control of any private detective or private security guard as defined herein, for the discharge of any of the duties or responsibilities of a private detective or a private security guard. 
Private detective means any person who accepts employment for hire, fee, or reward to furnish or supply information as to the personal character or actions or identity of any person or as to the character or kind of business or occupation of any person. The term "private detective" does not include within its meaning a private investigator employed exclusively for one employer in connection with a business of a collection agency, nor any officer belonging to any official enforcement agency of the U.S., the state, the town, or of any state, county or city, while such officer is engaged in official activities or in his official capacity. The term "private detective" includes a private investigator or detective agency as defined by the ordinances and codes of the city or the state. 
Private security guard means any person who accepts employment for hire, fee, or reward to furnish or supply security services for the protection of any person, or any property either real or personal by placement of guards, guard dogs, periodic patrols or otherwise. The term "private security guard" includes a private security guard agency as defined by ordinances and codes of the city or the state. 
(Ord. No. 0-32-79, § 1, 6-11-1979)
 
Sec. 16-301. License required.
No person shall operate as a private detective, a private security guard, or an employee (as defined herein) of either of them in the city without first obtaining a state license. No person shall employ a private detective, a private security guard, or an employee (as defined herein) without determining that said person is properly licensed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 0-32-79, § 2, 6-11-1979)

 
Secs. 16-302—16-320. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XI. ANTIQUE JEWELRY AND PRECIOUS METALS
 
Sec. 16-321. Registration with chief of police required.
Any person, firm or corporation purchasing or otherwise dealing in antique, used or scrap jewelry and precious metals, including, but not limited to, gold and silver, where the purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk, shall be required to register with the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 0-40-80, § 1, 9-22-1980)
 
Sec. 16-322. Information required at registration.
At the time of such registration the following information shall be supplied: 
(1)	Name of the business, if other than an individual. 
(2)	Name of the individual responsible for the operation of the business. 
(3)	Location and hours of operation of the business. 
(4)	Residence address of person responsible for operation. 
(5)	Permanent location for firm or corporation operating the business. 
(6)	Names of each employee intended to be engaged in the business. 
(Ord. No. 0-40-80, § 2, 9-22-1980)
 
Sec. 16-323. Investigation by chief of police.
The chief of police shall investigate each applicant and employee. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offenses of buying or receiving stolen goods, burglary, robbery, embezzlement or theft. 
(Ord. No. 0-40-80, § 3, 9-22-1980)
 
Sec. 16-324. Licenses required; fees, taxes to be paid.
Any person authorized to operate under this article shall in addition procure all licenses necessary to operate the business and pay all taxes and fees to the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-40-80, § 4, 9-22-1980)
 
Sec. 16-325. Items purchased by dealers to be held 120 hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation engaging in the activity described in section 16-321 to sell, exchange, barter or remove from the place in which said business is conducted, or to change the form of any of said items by remounting, melting, cutting up or otherwise changing the form of any of said items for a period of 120 hours from the date of said purchase. 
(Ord. No. 0-40-80, § 5, 9-22-1980)
 
Sec. 16-326. Record of transactions to be kept by dealers; copy of record to be transmitted to chief of police.
Every person, firm or corporation engaging in the activity described in section 16-321 shall keep a record containing a clear and accurate description of any and all items purchased (including specifically any identifying marks such as words, names or initials), the date and amount of money paid for each item, the name of the seller, the social security or driver's license number of the seller, and the residence address (not general delivery or post office box, but including the box number if on any rural route) and telephone number of the seller. The seller and purchaser shall both sign the record of each transaction. On each day the purchaser transacts business of the type described herein he shall deliver to the chief of police a duplicate copy of the record concerning that day's business. This record shall be delivered by noon of the day following the date of said transaction and by noon on Monday for all transactions since the preceding Friday. The record shall be carefully preserved without any alteration and shall be at all times available for inspection by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 0-40-80, § 6, 9-22-1980)
 
Secs. 16-327—16-355. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XII. TOBACCO 
 
Sec. 16-356. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Containers means the original boxes from which cigars are customarily sold at retail and the individual packages or cans in which cigarettes and tobacco products are customarily sold at retail. 
Dealer means any wholesale dealer, retail dealer or storer as herein defined. 
Retail dealer means any person, other than a wholesale dealer, who sells, offers for sale, or delivers tobacco products within the municipality or its police jurisdiction, any tobacco products irrespective of quantity or amount, or the number of sales and all persons operating under a retail dealer's license. 
Retail price means the retail-selling price of the tobacco products before adding the amount of the tax assessed herein or any other tobacco tax imposed under the laws of the state. 
Sold and sale mean any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration of any agreement therefore, including rewards, prizes or premiums of tobacco products given as a result of operation of punch boards, shooting galleries, or other activities. 
Store and stored mean and refer to the storage or warehousing of tobacco products in any manner, or the withdrawal or use of the same for any purpose other than the resale or reshipment outside the municipality or its police jurisdiction. 
Storer means a person who stores tobacco products in the municipality or its police jurisdiction. 
Tobacco products mean cigarettes, cigars, and smoking tobacco, smokeless tobacco, any form of tobacco product, or any of them. 
(Ord. No. 0-210-01, § 2, 12-10-2001)
 
Sec. 16-357. Tax imposed in corporate limits, amount.
(a)	In addition to all other taxes now imposed by law, every wholesaler, jobber, dealer or distributor who sells, stores or delivers any tobacco products for sale within the city shall pay a license tax to the city and every retailer who sells, stores or delivers any tobacco products for sales within the city that were not purchased through a wholesaler, jobber, dealer, or distributor who sells, stores or delivers tobacco products for sale within the city shall pay a license tax to the city and a license tax is hereby fixed and levied, which license tax shall be in the following amounts for the sale, storage and/or delivery of the following named tobacco products in the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)	Cigarettes. All cigarettes made of tobacco or any substitute thereof: $0.04 for each 20 cigarettes or fraction thereof. 
(2)	Cigars. All cigars made of tobacco or any substitute thereof: $0.04 for each. 
(3)	Each package of smoking tobacco: An amount equal to $0.04 per individual package. 
(4)	Each package of snuff: An amount equal to $0.04 per individual package. 
(5)	Each package of chewing tobacco: An amount equal to $0.04 per individual package. 
(b)	All other forms of tobacco including granulated, plug, cut, crimp, ready rubbed and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such a manner as to be suitable for smoking, chewing, dipping and/or sniffing, $0.04 for each individual package. 
(Ord. No. 0-210-01, § 3, 12-10-2001)
 
Sec. 16-358. Tax imposed in police jurisdiction amount.
In addition to all other taxes now imposed by law, every wholesaler, jobber, dealer or distributor who sells stores or delivers any tobacco products for sale within the police jurisdiction of the city shall pay a license tax to the city and every retailer who sells, stores or delivers any tobacco products for sale within the police jurisdiction of the city that were not purchased through a wholesaler, jobber, dealer, or distributor who sells, stores or delivers tobacco products for sale within the city or its police jurisdiction, shall pay a license tax to the city and a license tax is hereby fixed and levied, which licensee tax shall be in an amount equal to $0.04 as levied for such sale, storage or delivery of tobacco products within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-210-01, § 4, 12-10-2001)
 
Sec. 16-359. Required records and reports.
Every wholesaler, jobber, dealer or distributor shall, at the time of selling or delivering any tobacco products within the city limits and police jurisdiction of the city have an invoice and duplicate thereof, which shall show full and complete details of the sale or delivery of such tobacco products and shall give said duplicate invoice to the retailer dealer. Every such wholesaler, jobber, dealer, distributor, and retail dealer shall retain these invoices and all other records of the purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of tobacco products for a period of two years after each transaction. All such invoices, all canceled checks and other records pertaining to any such purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of tobacco products shall be subject to inspection by an agent of the city upon request. Said agent shall have power and authority to enter upon the premises of any wholesaler, jobber, dealer or distributor at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining such invoices, canceled checks or other records. 
(Ord. No. 0-210-01, § 5, 12-10-2001)
 
Sec. 16-360. Monthly statement and payment.
The tax levied hereunder on all tobacco products shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrued. If said tax is not paid by said due date, and then an additional sum (a late charge) equal to ten percent of said tax shall also be due. On or before the 20th day of each month, every wholesaler, jobber, dealer or distributor who sells, stores or delivers any tobacco products for sale within the city and every retailer who sells, stores, or delivers any tobacco products for sale within the city that were not purchased through a wholesaler, jobber, dealer, or distributor who sells, stores or delivers tobacco products for sale within the city shall: 
(1)	File with the city clerk a true and correct monthly statement in writing (on a form approved by the city clerk) of all tobacco products sold or delivered during the preceding month, for which he is or shall be liable for the payment of the license tax; 
(2)	In each and every instance, upon the filing of said statement, furnish the city clerk such additional information, in writing, as the clerk may require as to the sale or delivery of any tobacco products covered by such statement; and 
(3)	At the time of making such statement, pay to the city clerk the amount tobacco license tax for the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 0-210-01, § 6, 12-10-2001)
 
Sec. 16-361. Violation of article, punishment.
(a)	Any of the following shall constitute a violation of this article: 
(1)	The omission or failure to timely file any monthly statement required by section 16-360(1). 
(2)	The omission or failure to timely provide any information requested pursuant to section 16-360(2). 
(3)	Any false information included in the monthly statement required by section 16-360(1) or with the other information requested pursuant to section 16-360(2). 
(4)	The failure to pay the amount of tax due under this article on the date the same is due. 
(b)	Any act or omission declared above to be a violation of this article shall be a continuing offense or violation of the article and each day during which such act or omission continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)	Any person who commits an act or omission declared to be a violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and/or may be sentenced to jail for a period not exceeding six months, at the discretion of the court. Subsequent offenses shall carry twice the amount of the amount set forth on the first offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-210-01, § 7, 12-10-2001)
 
Sec. 16-362. Construction of article.
(a)	This article shall not be construed to tax interstate commerce or any business of the U.S. government or any branch thereof. 
(b)	This article shall not be construed to apply to tobacco products stored for the purpose of resale of reshipment outside the municipality and its police jurisdiction and which are actually so resold or reshipped. 
(c)	This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license codes of the municipality but shall be held to be cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 0-210-01, § 8, 12-10-2001)
 
Sec. 16-363. Effective date.
The ordinance from which this article is derived shall become effective January 1, 2002. Wholesalers, jobbers, dealers or distributors may continue to use the tobacco stamps they have on inventory until they deplete their supply. Once their supply is depleted then the vendor must start filing a monthly tobacco tax return. No refunds on tobacco stamps will be given for stamps that have already been purchased from the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-210-01, § 10, 12-10-2001)
 
Secs. 16-364—16-384. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XIII. YARD SALES
 
Sec. 16-385. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Neighborhood garage sale means a sale conducted by two or more families at the same location. 
Personal property means property which is owned, utilized, and maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. The term "personal property" does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
Yard sale and/or garage sale means and includes all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises, for the purpose of disposing of personal property, and includes sales conducted by a religious, charitable, civic or service organization for the sale of goods donated to the organization. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2007, § 1, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-386. Regulations.
Yard sales shall be permitted in the city subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	A maximum of one yard sale may be held at the same location during any 60-day period. One or more items offered for sale shall constitute a yard sale. If one or more items are offered for sale, this shall constitute one of the permitted sales during the 60-day period. 
(2)	No yard sale shall be conducted for a period of more than two consecutive days. 
(3)	No yard sale shall be conducted on Sunday. 
(4)	It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, under authority granted by this article, any property other than personal property. 
(5)	Yard sales shall be permitted during the hours of 7:00 a.m. until sunset. 
(6)	Items offered for sale at any yard sale shall not be displayed on the right-of-way of any public roadway. 
(7)	It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale in a place or manner which blocks or obstructs vehicular traffic or in any way causes or creates a hazardous driving condition. Vehicle parking in the vicinity of any yard sale shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. The person conducting any yard sale shall not permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any public roadway. 
(8)	Signs advertising the yard sale may be placed only in the yard where the sale is being conducted and shall be removed immediately after completion of the sale. Where the sale is conducted in a building, signs shall be permitted only on the premises. Persons who post signs at locations other than their yard could be cited under the offense of littering. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2007, § 2, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-387. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article are enforceable by any duly sworn police officer or by any appropriate representative of the inspections services department of the city or as otherwise allowed by law for prosecution of offenses. Said enforcement officials shall have the authority to cease the operation of any yard sale which blocks or obstructs vehicular traffic; or, in any way causes or creates a hazardous driving condition; or, in any way causes or creates conditions which are detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare; or, is otherwise conducted in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2007, § 3, 11-5-2007)
 
Sec. 16-388. Violators.
If deemed necessary, the enforcing officer shall have the authority to require violators and/or repeat violators to appear before the city council if the violators fail to adhere to the guidelines of this article. Violations could result in suspension to yard sale participants for a period of time deemed necessary by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2007, § 4, 11-5-2007)
 
Secs. 16-389—16-419. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XIV. DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATIONS
 
Sec. 16-420. Defining door-to-door solicitation requirements.
This article is enacted to regulate the practice of going in and upon private property of the residences of the city for lawful business/commercial purposes in an effort to advance the public's interest by protecting residents' privacy and preventing fraudulent and criminal activity while recognizing the right to freedom of speech protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 1, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-421. Solicitation application and registration requirements.
Any person or representative of a group, business, or other entity desiring to go door-to-door in an area within the corporate limits of the city for business/commercial purposes (hereinafter the "solicitor," as in one person) shall first make application and register through the city's business office for a permit. Information required to be provided by each solicitor shall include, but not be limited to, name, address, phone number, legal identification with current photograph, vehicle registration, current vehicle insurance information, a certified background search record paid for by the applicant, state the purpose for the solicitation, area to be canvassed and time frame covering the solicitations. The permit is limited to a maximum of 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 2, 11-9-2009; Ord. No. 0-002-2018, § 1, 4-23-2018)
 
Sec. 16-422. Solicitation application and permit fee.
Each solicitor shall pay an application fee upon submission of his application for permit to cover the administrative costs of processing the application and registration. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. This fee is due at the time the application is submitted to the business office and is nonrefundable and/or nontransferable. The solicitation permit is limited to maximum of 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 3, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-423. Applicants requirement for notification to the police department.
Before commencing door-to-door canvassing, each solicitor shall provide the following information to the office of the chief of police. A certified background search record paid for by the applicant along with the copy of the solicitor's permit issued by the city business office, a description of the nature and/or purpose of the solicitation, the area or neighborhood where the solicitor will be conducting solicitation and the time frame within which the solicitor will canvass the designated area/neighborhood. The solicitor's current legal identification with current photograph must be presented along with a current vehicle registration form for the vehicle that will be used in the process of the door-to-door solicitation and a copy of current vehicle insurance information. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 4, 11-9-2009; Ord. No. 0-002-2018, § 2, 4-23-2018)
 
Sec. 16-424. Display of permit.
A solicitor shall display his permit at all times while canvassing door-to-door. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 5, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-425. Residential "No Soliciting" notices.
(a)	Any occupant of a residence or occupants of a multifamily dwelling who desire not to have solicitors call on said residence shall give notice of the desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a clearly visible weatherproof placard no smaller than 16 square inches and no larger than 94 square inches stating "No Soliciting," which shall be posted on or near the main entrance of the private property and not within the public right-of-way. 
(b)	Residents of a residential subdivision may indicate their desire not to have solicitors call on any residences in that subdivision by giving notice of the desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a clearly visible weatherproof placard no smaller than 16 square inches and no larger than 94 square inches stating "No Soliciting," which shall be posted on or near the main entrance of the subdivision on private property and not within the public right-of-way. 
(c)	The display of said placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to invite solicitors. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 6, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-426. Times of solicitation.
Permitted solicitors shall canvass door-to-door only between the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., except that an occupant/resident may schedule an appointment with a solicitor to occur during otherwise prohibited hours. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 7, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-427. Sales and use taxes.
Any sales made by the permitted solicitor shall be subject to all applicable sales and use taxes by local, county and state agencies. Sales tax remittance forms will be given out at the time the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 8, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-428. Exemptions from registration.
(a)	The registration provisions of this article do not apply to the following: 
(1)	Persons making solicitations solely for a church, religious organization or charitable organization, including any unincorporated association or corporation under the supervision and control of any church, a charitable organization or religious organization, if the church or organization is tax exempt under the provisions of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)	Students soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular academic, social, athletic, artistic, scientific, or cultural programs, provided that the solicitation and its purpose have been approved by the principal, president, or chief administrator of the school that the students attend and said approval has been filed in writing with the city. 
(3)	Persons canvassing for the purpose of distributing political literature or materials on behalf of a political party, candidate, or public issue or introducing themselves as supporters of a candidate, political party, cause, or issue. 
(4)	Persons making solicitations solely for a nationally recognized youth organization such as the YMCA, YWCA, scouting, or boys' and girls' clubs. 
(b)	Exempted agencies must notify the police department prior to solicitation. All other provisions of this article apply to those who qualify for an exemption. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 9, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-429. Deceptive soliciting practices prohibited.
(a)	No solicitor or canvasser shall intentionally or recklessly make any materially false or fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting. 
(b)	No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other than his true, correct, and legal name. 
(c)	No solicitor shall represent, directly or by implication, that the city or any other governmental entity endorses the solicitation or that the granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement of the solicitor's product or service or of the individual solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 10, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-430. No registration of felons.
No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a federal or state felony. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 11, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-431. Penalties.
Any violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article may result in a fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00, together with cost of proceedings, and a sentence of up to 180 days in the county jail, with the cost of incarceration taxed to the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 12, 11-9-2009)
 
Sec. 16-432. Revocation of certificate.
Any solicitation permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city if the registrant is convicted of a violation of this article, if the registrant has falsified the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration. Notice of revocation shall be given to the registrant by personal service or by certified mail to the address listed on the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void and shall remain so unless the revocation is ordered rescinded by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2009, § 13, 11-9-2009)
 
Secs. 16-433—16-462. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XV. WRECKER SERVICES 
 
Sec. 16-463. Operation of system; requirements for participation.
(a)	Requirements. Wreckers may participate in the rotation system if they meet the following requirements: 
(1)	The applicant must have and maintain in good condition at least one three-quarter-ton-capacity vehicle designed for or adapted to the purpose of a vehicle wrecker or towing service business. 
(2)	The applicant must maintain a storage lot that can accommodate a minimum of ten vehicles, with a storage lot space enclosed by an appropriately designed fence, at least six feet high, under lock and key, to protect the disabled vehicle and the contents thereof towed in by the wrecker. 
(3)	During the entire time a wrecker is on the rotation list, the wrecker shall be capable of furnishing ample equipment to service an accident involving one vehicle. 
(4)	The applicant must maintain 24-hour, seven-day-a-week service. Any operator who develops a pattern of failing to respond when requested may be removed from the rotation list. 
(5)	The applicant must purchase and maintain a city business license in compliance with city ordinances, to include a certificate of insurance. 
(6)	Wrecker or towing services must have all wreckers with wheel lift capabilities. 
(7)	Two-way communication equipment between the tow truck and the wrecker's dispatcher is required. 
(8)	Wrecker services may use a flatbed, roll-back or slide-back carrier to answer a rotation call when authorized by the city dispatcher. If a wrecker service appears on the scene without proper and sufficient equipment to perform the required service, the officer on the scene shall direct such service to cease operation and another wrecker service shall be dispatched to the scene. 
(9)	Each wrecker business will furnish the police department with one telephone number to be used for requests for service during the day and one number for nights and weekends or a 24-hour telephone number. Answering services will be allowed at the discretion of the chief of police. No pagers are permitted. 
(10)	No wrecker operator shall respond to a call when he has consumed alcohol in any amount or has ingested either prescription or nonprescription drugs that may impair motor skills. 
(11)	No owner or operator shall be on the rotation list who has been convicted of grand larceny, theft of property, or similar felony or misdemeanor offenses involving force, violence or moral turpitude, if the conviction occurred within the preceding ten years. 
(12)	No owner or operator shall be on the rotation list unless the driver or owner is proficient and competent in operation of such wrecker. 
(13)	No person shall operate or be allowed to operate any wrecker for hire unless such operator has a valid Alabama driver's license or commercial driver's license and applicable bond on the vehicle being used for towing purposes. 
(14)	At no time will a tow truck attach to a vehicle which, by its size and/or weight, would make towing such vehicle an unsafe movement. 
(15)	Separate rotation lists will be maintained for both large and small wreckers. 
(16)	The wrecker service is required to respond with its own wreckers and shall not send another wrecker service in response to a service call. The wrecker operator may be assisted by another wrecker service. 
(17)	Every wrecker must display a current license plate of the proper classification for the wrecker's size and towing capacity, without exception. 
(18)	A schedule showing the charges or rates to be made by the applicant for towing service and for storage and an agreement that the applicant will comply substantially with such charges or rates shall be submitted. This schedule of rates may be changed only after notifying the chief of police in writing a minimum of 30 days prior to the proposed rate changes. It shall be unlawful to tow, remove or store a vehicle unless the current rates charged for towing and storage are posted in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises of the wrecker doing the towing. 
(19)	Any vehicle pulled by a wrecker on a rotation list call shall be stored only at the wrecker's storage lot, unless the owner or operator of the vehicle authorizes or directs the wrecker to take it to or store it at another site. The wrecker's storage lot shall be accessible during normal business hours to any person who wishes to recover a vehicle from the lot. The wrecker operator may respond to calls for service at the storage lot after normal business hours, but is not required to respond except during those hours, provided that the wrecker operator may charge a fee of up to $25.00 for responding to a call to go to a storage lot after normal business hours. Accessibility, for purposes of this subsection, means that an attendant will be present on the premises of the storage lot during normal business hours and a telephone number will be prominently posted on the premises for contact during other times. Normal business hours mean the weekday period between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, a designated hour on Saturday and does not include official federal, state or local holidays unless the wrecker operator is otherwise open for business on those holidays. 
(20)	Wreckers granted rotational acceptance under this article may participate in the rotation system for large wreckers if the applicant has and maintains in good condition at least one vehicle of a capacity of a 25-ton lifting capacity, factory rated and properly licensed. 
(21)	Wreckers meeting the requirements of this article shall be placed on a rotation list to be maintained by the chief of police. A request to the police department for a wrecker, when the operator or owner does not request a particular wrecker, shall be filled according to the rotation schedule by the next wrecker on the schedule. It shall be the duty of the wrecker who is scheduled to respond when called to provide the service requested. If a wrecker cannot provide the service requested within 20 minutes, the next wrecker on the rotation list shall be called. No wrecker shall accept a request for service unless a tow truck is immediately available to perform the requested service. Repeated tardiness will result in a suspension from the rotation list. 
(22)	Wreckers meeting the requirements of subsection (a)(20) of this section shall be placed on a separate rotation list for large wreckers to be maintained by the chief of police. A request to the police department for a wrecker for a heavy vehicle or large equipment, when the operator or owner does not request a particular wrecker, shall be filled according to this rotation schedule. It shall be the duty of the wrecker who is scheduled to respond to calls next to provide the service requested. If a wrecker cannot provide the required service within 30 minutes, the next wrecker on the rotation list shall be called. No wrecker shall accept a request for service unless a tow truck is immediately available to perform the requested service. Repeated tardiness will result in a suspension from the rotation list. 
(b)	Procedure for placement on list.
(1)	Filing of request. Each wrecker desiring to be placed on the rotation list shall file a written request with the chief of police. A copy of the current city business license and certificate of insurance shall accompany the filing of request to be put on placement list. 
(2)	Furnishing of copies of regulations. The chief of police will furnish each wrecker a copy of this article pertaining to the operation of wreckers on the rotation list. 
(3)	Authority to inspect tow trucks. The chief of police shall have the right to inspect any tow truck operated by a wrecker on the rotation list at any time to ensure it is maintained for safety and all equipment that is required is on the tow truck and in proper operating order. 
(4)	Placement on list. When the police department is satisfied that the wrecker business is qualified, the chief of police will place the applicable wrecker service on the rotation list. 
(5)	Recommendation of service by police prohibited. Police officers will not make recommendations as to a particular wrecker service but will ask the vehicle's operator if he has a preference as to which wrecker to send or notify communications to go by rotation. 
(6)	Notification of newly acquired wreckers. Each wrecker company on the rotation list shall give notice to the chief of police of any wreckers acquired after the wrecker service is placed on the rotational list. The requirements of this article must be met and the police department may require an inspection of the wrecker to determine if it meets all the requirements are satisfied to be placed on the rotation list. 
(7)	Suspension and/or removal from rotational list. The police chief may, for good cause, suspend any approved rotational wrecker that has been granted placement on the list. The chief of police will inform the owner of the suspended wrecker service in writing as to any suspension, the duration of the suspension and the reason therefor. The police chief may, for good cause, remove any approved rotational wrecker that has been granted placement on the list. The chief of police will inform the owner of the wrecker service identified for removal in writing. The owner of the wrecker service recommended for removal will have 30 days from the receipt of notification to file with the chief of police in writing any dispute for their removal. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2015, § 1, 2-23-2015)
 
Sec. 16-464. Rates for rotation calls.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for wreckers participating in the rotation system for non-consensual calls to charge the registered owner or other authorized person in control of a vehicle fees for any service other than those reasonably related to the towing and/or storage of vehicles which are actually towed and/or stored. 
(b)	A fee shall be charged for towing a vehicle within the city and shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. If the call for a wrecker is made by city dispatch between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the next day, a fee shall be charged. If the vehicle is towed from an area off the roadway which requires additional time and labor above and beyond that normally associated with a tow such that the vehicle must be winched up onto the roadway, then the wrecker may charge an hourly rate for the additional time involved or may charge a flat rate of no more than $100.00. 
(c)	A daily fee shall be charged for storage of a vehicle. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for a wrecker on rotation to charge a rate in excess of those provided in this section on non-consensual calls, and this shall be grounds for suspension or removal from the rotation list. This does not prohibit the wrecker from charging a different fee for consensual calls. 
(e)	The fees charged for towing a vehicle or storage of a towed vehicle shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2015, § 2, 2-23-2015)
 
Sec. 16-465. Operation generally.
(a)	Soliciting business at scene of accident. No wrecker shall proceed to the scene of a collision or accident without being requested to do so by the police department or the owner or person in charge of the vehicle. No wrecker shall solicit business at the scene of a collision or accident. 
(b)	Caution light. Each vehicle designed for or adapted for the purpose of a vehicle wrecker or towing service business shall be equipped with a flashing amber caution light properly installed. Such caution light shall be operated at the scene of a wreck or collision and while a disabled vehicle is being towed, but shall not be operated while proceeding to the scene of a wreck or collision unless the dispatcher in the police department authorizes use of such light in a particular case because of an emergency situation. 
(c)	Report of unclaimed vehicle. If the wrecker service maintains a storage lot and a towed vehicle remains unclaimed for a period of 30 days, the wrecker service operator shall comply with the requirements of Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-8-84(c), for reporting the vehicle to the state department of revenue. The wrecker service operator shall file this report whether or not the name and address of the owner of the vehicle are known. The wrecker service operator shall request current title and registration information and pay the fee required by Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-8-6, for that information. Upon receipt of that information the wrecker service operator shall notify any lienholder that it is storing the vehicle. Before reclaiming the vehicle, the lienholder must reimburse the wrecker service operator for that fee as well as accumulated towing and storage charges before reclaiming the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2015, § 3, 2-23-2015)
 
Sec. 16-466. Standard equipment to be maintained upon rotational wreckers.
Each wrecker shall maintain the following standard equipment on every tow truck: 
(1)	A power winch, winch line and boom with lifting capacity of 8,000 pounds, factory rated, dual line capacity. 
(2)	One sling and stay bar or other similar device capable of protecting a disabled vehicle while being towed. 
(3)	Safety chains. 
(4)	Fire extinguisher. 
(5)	One four-foot pry bar or wrecker bar capable of prying open doors. 
(6)	One broom. 
(7)	One axe. 
(8)	One shovel. 
(9)	One set of road flares. 
(10)	Emergency flasher system capable of emitting two amber lights to the front and two red lights to the rear of the vehicle, which shall flash simultaneously. 
(11)	One dolly. 
(12)	Oil dry or other absorbent material to remove potentially hazardous fluids spilled on the roadway by a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2015, § 4, 2-23-2015)
 
Chapter 18 NUISANCES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 18-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means any motor vehicle which: 
(1)	Is in a wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded or otherwise inoperable condition; or 
(2)	Does not have affixed thereto an unexpired license plate, and has been parked, stored or left, whether attended or not, upon any public or private property in the city for a period of time in excess of seven business days. 
The term "abandoned vehicle" includes any boat which is in a wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded or otherwise inoperable condition. The term "abandoned vehicle" does not include any motor vehicle that is: 
(1)	Enclosed within a building on private property; 
(2)	Held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city on property zoned for a junkyard, vehicle repair facility or vehicle storage yard; 
(3)	In operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways; or 
(4)	Retained primarily as an antique collector's item and registered under state law as an antique vehicle. 
Building nuisance means any nuisance condition involving a residential or nonresidential structure, including remains from demolition, remains from a fire, parts of buildings and parts of uninhabitable structures. 
Enforcing official means any official of the city building department or any other city employee designated by the mayor as the person to exercise the authority and perform the duties delegated by this chapter to the enforcing official. For a grass and weed nuisance the enforcing official may also be any organization (including its employees) or individual with which the city may contract to provide such service. 
Grass or weed nuisance means any abundance of overgrown grass or weeds within the city which is injurious to the general public health, safety and general welfare by providing breeding grounds and shelter for rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes and other vermin, insects and pests; or attaining such heights and dryness so as to constitute serious fire threat or hazard; or bearing wingy or downy seeds that, when mature, cause the spread of weeds and, when breathed, irritation to the throat, lungs and eyes of the public, or hiding debris, such as broken glass or metal, which could inflict injury on any person going upon the property; or being unsightly; or any growth of grass or weeks, other than ornamental plant growth, which exceeds 12 inches in height. 
Improved subdivision means a division of a tract of land/or acreage into tracts or parcels, and the improvement thereof by construction of streets, water lines and, where applicable, sewer lines to serve the subdivided property. 
Natural condition means uncultivated and unseeded land, still in a state of nature. But any growth on land, once it has been cleared or plowed, is not a natural condition, even though it has not been planted or cultivated by anyone. 
Nuisance means anything that unlawfully causes hurt, inconvenience or damage; that class of wrongs that arises from the unreasonable, unwarrantable or unlawful use by a person of such person's own property, either real or personal, or from such person's own improper, indecent, unsightly or unlawful personal conduct, working an obstruction of or injury to the right of another or of the public, and producing material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to another person or to the general public; anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of another. 
Owner of property means and includes legal title holder, lessee, occupant of property, or agent of legal title holder or lessee, in charge, possession or control of said property. For a building nuisance only, the term "owner of property" includes any mortgage holder of record. 
Unsafe building means any building or structure that has any of the following conditions, such that the life, health, property or safety of its occupants or of the general public is endangered: 
(1)	Any means of egress or portion thereof which is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic. 
(2)	Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic. 
(3)	The stress in any material, member or portion thereof due to all imposed loads, including dead load, exceeds the stresses allowed in the adopted International Building Code for new buildings. 
(4)	The building, structure or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to the damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the adopted International Building Code for new buildings. 
(5)	Any exterior appendage or portion of the building or structure is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the adopted International Building Code for new buildings. 
(6)	For any reason the building, structure or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(7)	The building, structure or portion thereof, as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation, is likely to fully or partially collapse. 
(8)	The building, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the construction codes or of a city, county or state law. 
(9)	Any building, structure or portion thereof is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(10)	Any building, structure or portion thereof is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life or in relation to existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 1, 12-28-1992; Ord. No. 0-006-2008, § 1, 6-23-2008)
 
Sec. 18-2. Nuisance declared unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on any property under such person's ownership or control. Property under a person's ownership and control includes those areas referred to in section 18-3. A person with a duty to abate any nuisance is liable for separate and distinct offenses for each day the nuisance is allowed to remain after it has become such person's duty by notice of the enforcing official to abate it. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 2, 12-28-1992)
 
Sec. 18-3. Duties of owner.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any real property located within the city to maintain any grass or weeds growing upon said property in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance. The duties and obligations of the owner extend to and include any real property situated within a dedicated right-of-way or easement burdening the property, except to the extent that it may be impracticable to do so because of public facilities located thereon. Such rights-of-way and easements must be maintained by the owner in a manner consistent with the maintenance of the owner's remaining property and within the requirements in this chapter, except to the extent it may be impracticable to do because of public facilities located thereon. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 3, 12-28-1992)
 
Sec. 18-4. Maintenance practices of the city.
The dedication and existence of a right-of-way for a public road or of an easement for drainage or for public utilities represents the grant of only a limited interest in property and does not change the actual ownership of the property upon which the right-of-way or easement is located. The public authority maintains rights-of-way and easements only to the extent necessary to maintain the public facility and to maintain safety. The owner of the burdened property continues to control the property, except to the extent that such control interferes with the public use. The public authority does not cut grasses, weeds, and other growth upon rights-of-way or easements, except to the extent necessary for operations and safety purposes. All other maintenance is the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the right-of-way or easement is located. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 4, 12-28-1992)
 
Sec. 18-5. Grass or weed nuisances; exceptions.
(a)	General. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance, in violation of this section, for the owner of any real property situated within the corporate limits of the city to allow such real property to become overgrown with tall grass, or with any weed or plant such as jimson, burdoc, ragweed, cocklebur or other weed of like kind, or any weed or plant bearing wingy or downy seeds, or any weed or plant that is otherwise noxious, dangerous, harmful or poisonous. Overgrown means a height of 12 inches or more. 
(b)	Exceptions. Excepted from such grass and week nuisance requirements are: 
(1)	Any property which is in its natural condition. 
(2)	Any property which is located outside any improved subdivision and is located more than 100 feet from any boundary of any lot or parcel of real estate upon which any dwelling is located, and more than 100 feet from any commercial enterprise. For good cause the enforcing official may reduce the area subject to this section to a lesser distance. 
(3)	Cultivated row crops and garden plants in their respective growing seasons. This exception applies only to growing crops and garden plants and shall not be construed to permit any crops or gardens to become overgrown with grass and weeds in violation of the remaining terms of this chapter. 
(4)	Ornamental shrubbery and ground cover, provided that such uses are part of landscaping theme and not associated with a general deterioration of the property. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 5, 12-28-1992)
 
Sec. 18-6. Nuisance conditions generally.
An accumulation or storage of debris, refuse, rubbish, brush, used building materials, parts of buildings, remains from building demolition, parts of untenantable or uninhabitable structures, used machinery, used tires, used vehicles, parts of vehicles, abandoned vehicles, or any other materials which may provide a breeding place for mosquitoes, harmful insects, rodents or snakes, or is so unsightly as to be offensive to the surrounding area is a nuisance in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 6, 12-28-1992)
 
Sec. 18-7. Notice.
(a)	Whenever in the opinion of the enforcing official a nuisance exists, the official shall order the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located to abate the condition. 
(b)	The enforcing official shall give the owner written notice in person or by first class mail. The notice shall require the owner to comply with this chapter within the time stated in the notice or to request an administrative hearing before the director of planning or other person designated by the mayor to determine whether there has been a violation. The notice shall apprise the owner of the facts of the alleged nuisance and shall name the particular date, time and place for such hearing if requested. For a building nuisance, the notice shall contain the names of all owners and lienholders of the property, a legal description of the property and the nature of the proceeding. 
(c)	The notice shall be sent to that person shown by the records of the county tax collector to have been the last person assessed for payment of ad valorem tax on the property where the nuisance is situated. It shall be the responsibility of that person to promptly advise the enforcing official of any change of ownership or interest. The enforcing official shall cause a copy of each building nuisance notice to be recorded in the office of probate judge. 
(d)	The notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, preferably within three feet of an entrance to the building or structure. If there is no entrance or no structure, notice may be posted at any location on the property. 
(e)	The notice shall require the owner to complete abatement of the nuisance with the following periods, provided the enforcing official may stipulate additional time, but in no case more than a total of 150 days: 
(1)	For a grass and weed nuisance: 14 days from the date of notice. 
(2)	For a building nuisance: 120 days from the date of notice. 
(3)	For any other type of nuisance, including, but not limited to, burned structures and abandoned vehicles: 30 days from the date of notice. 
(f)	The notice may also require the immediate vacation of a building or structure ad prohibit its occupation until the required repairs and improvements have been completed, inspected and approved by the enforcing official. In such cases the enforcing official shall post at each entrance to the building or structure a sign stating "This structure is unsafe. Its use or occupancy has been prohibited by the City of Southside," or words of similar import, and shall be signed and dated. The sign shall remain until the required repairs and improvements have been made or the structure has been demolished and removed. The sign shall not be removed without permission of the enforcing official whose name is affixed thereon. No person shall enter the structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or demolishing the structure. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 7, 12-28-1992)
 
Sec. 18-8. Hearing.
A hearing before the director of planning must be requested within five days of the date of the notice by the enforcing official. The enforcing official shall notify the owner by personal service or by first class mail of the determination of the hearing official. If the hearing official determines that a nuisance exists, the owner must comply with the initial order to abate issued by the enforcing official, with such modifications as may be made by the hearing official. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 8, 12-28-1992)
 
Sec. 18-9. Failure to comply with notice to abate.
(a)	If the owner fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to abate the nuisance, the enforcing official may proceed to prosecute said person for a violation of the provisions of this Code. The enforcing official may issue a summons and complaint as provided to the owner of the property, requiring the owner to appear in municipal court to answer charges for the violation of this chapter. The summons and complaint shall name the party charged, the address of the property where the alleged violation is located, and the nature of the offense or violation. It shall also apprise the owner of the date, time and place at which to appear for court. The summons and complaint, returnable to the municipal court, shall be served on the owner by any enforcing official, who shall forthwith appear and make oath as to the alleged offense before a judge or magistrate of the municipal court. This provision for the issuance of a summons or complaint to municipal court shall not prevent any enforcing official from appearing before a municipal court judge or magistrate and making oath as to the facts and applying for a warrant with respect to any alleged offense, in lieu of issuing a summons and complaint. 
(b)	All violations of the provisions of the chapter shall be punishable by: 
(1)	A fine in the minimum sum of $250.00, up to a maximum of $500.00; 
(2)	Imprisonment in the county jail for a tern not to exceed six months; 
(3)	Both such fine and imprisonment; and 
(4)	An order to abate the nuisance. 
(c)	The enforcing official may institute the enforcement procedure set forth in subsection (a) of this section and those set out below. The institution of one procedure does not preclude the subsequent or simultaneous institution of the other procedure, provided the criminal procedure is not used to collect any outstanding civil assessments against the subject property. 
(d)	If the owner fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to abate a grass or weeds nuisance, the enforcing official shall cause the cutting of the offending grass or weeds. 
(e)	If the owner fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to abate any other type of nuisance, there shall be a public hearing before the city council. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the owner at least five days in advance by personal service or by first class mail. 
(f)	After the public hearing, the city council may by resolution order the enforcing official to proceed with the work specified in such notice or may order such nuisance demolished or removed or may find that no nuisance exists. If the owner appears at the public hearing, no further notice of the order of the city council shall be required. If the owner fails to appear, notice of the order of the city council shall be mailed to such person's last known address and shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(g)	Upon the expiration of seven days from the date of the resolution, the enforcing official shall proceed to carry out the decision of the council. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 9, 12-28-1992)
 
Sec. 18-10. Assessment of cost.
(a)	Upon completion of the abatement work performed by the city (including work by contractors employed by the city), the enforcing official shall compute the actual expense, including, but not limited to, total wages paid, value of the use of equipment, advertising expense, postage and materials purchased which were incurred by the city as a result of such work. An itemized statement of such expenses shall be given by first class mail to the last known address of the owner of the property. This notice shall be sent at least five days in advance of the time fixed by the city council to consider the assessment of the cost against the property. 
(b)	At the time fixed for receiving and considering the statement, the council shall hear the same, together with any objections which may be raised by the owner whose property is liable to be assessed for the work and thereupon make such modifications in the statement as they deem necessary, after which a resolution may assess the cost. The cost stated in the resolution shall constitute a lien on said property for the amount of the assessment. After adoption of the resolution, a copy shall be turned over to the city clerk-treasurer who is charged with the collection of assessments. The city clerk-treasurer shall charge the assessments against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes. Thereafter, said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal assessments are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal assessments. 
(c)	The city clerk-treasurer shall cause a certified copy of the resolution assessing the cost of abatement to be filed for recording in the office of the judge of probate and shall forward a copy to the county revenue commissioner. Upon a filing, the tax collector shall add the amount of the lien to the ad valorem tax bill on the property and shall collect the amount as if it were a tax, using all methods available for collecting ad valorem tax, and remit the amount to the city. 
(d)	If legislation is enacted to allow assessment as taxes and collection by the county revenue commissioner, the city clerk-treasurer shall forward appropriate documents to obtain collection in that manner. 
(e)	Satisfaction of liens. Upon payment of the itemized accounts arising under this chapter, any liens or assessments filed hereunder may be marked "satisfied" and "paid in full" by the city clerk-treasurer or by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2008, § 1, 6-23-2008)
 
Sec. 18-11. Assessment against property sold to state for nonpayment of taxes; effect of subsequent redemption or sale by state on lien.
The city shall have the power to assess the costs authorized herein against any lot or parcel of land purchased by the state at any sale for the nonpayment of taxes, and where an assessment is made against a lot or parcel of land, a subsequent redemption thereof by a person authorized to redeem, or sale thereof by the state, shall not operate to discharge or in any manner affect the lien of the city for the assessment, but a redemptioner or purchaser at a sale by the state of any lot or parcel of land upon which an assessment has been levied, whether prior to or subsequent to a sale to the state for the nonpayment of taxes, shall take the same subject to the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2008, § 1, 6-23-2008)
 
Sec. 18-12. Construction of chapter.
This chapter shall be construed to contain all power granted to municipalities under Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-40-10, 11-45-9, 11-47-117, 11-47-131, 11-47-140, 11-48-1 through 11-48-106, 11-53A-21 through 11-53A-26 and 11-67-41 through 11-67-44, providing for controlling nuisances, sanitation and good public health, safety conditions and for assessments of public improvement liens. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 11, 12-28-1992; Ord. No. 0-006-2008, § 1, 6-23-2008)
 
Sec. 18-13. Preexisting nuisances.
The adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not invalidate any preexisting nuisance abatement enforcement actions. The assessment procedure that adopted herein may be utilized for all ongoing enforcement actions that have reached that point in the proceedings. For initial enforcement actions the enforcing official may proceed under the prior law or may reinstitute proceedings under the provisions of this chapter. If this chapter will be followed, notice of the change must be given to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 0-129-92, § 14, 12-28-1992; Ord. No. 0-006-2008, § 1, 6-23-2008)
 
Secs. 18-14—18-44. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. NOISES
 
Sec. 18-45. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Major holidays means New Year's Day, Independence Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas. 
Noise disturbance means any sound which may do the following: 
(1)	Causes annoyance or disturbs humans or which has any adverse psychological/physiological effects on humans; 
(2)	Endangers or injures the health or safety of humans and animals; 
(3)	Or causes annoyance or disturbance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
(4)	Endangers or injures personal or real property. 
Real property boundary means a line along the ground surface and its vertical extension which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person. 
Residential area means an area designated for any residential use under the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2005, § 1, 10-10-2005)
 
Sec. 18-46. Noise prohibitions.
(a)	It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continue any loud, unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary or excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the comfort, health or safety of others. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit any such noise to be made in or upon any house or premises owned or possessed by him or under his management or control. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2005, § 2, 10-10-2005)
 
Sec. 18-47. Special violations.
The following shall be declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful: 
(1)	To operate or play any radio, musical instrument or similar device whether from a motor vehicle or by a pedestrian in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person other than the player or operator of the device at a distance of 20 feet in the case of a motor vehicle or 30 feet in the case of a pedestrian. 
(2)	To operate or play any radio, television, musical instrument or similar device or to produce live music, sound or noise in any manner which produces or reproduces sound or noise, whether from a business, residence or any other premises, in such a manner as to be plainly audible outside of the real property boundary of such business, residence or other premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the following morning at 9:00 a.m. 
(3)	To keep any animal or bird, which by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any ordinary person in the vicinity. 
(4)	To load, unload, open, close or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the following morning at 6:00 a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(5)	To operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning on weekdays and Saturdays or at any time on Sundays or major holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, except for emergency work or public service utilities. 
(6)	To operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool used outdoors, in an open garage/shop in residential areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning so as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(7)	To operate a motor vehicle or any internal combustion engine, which is excessively loud so as to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons across a residential real property boundary. This includes excessive noise levels as the result of a defective or modified exhaust system or as a result of an unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration, engine revving or tire squealing. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2005, § 3, 10-10-2005)
 
Sec. 18-48. Exceptions.
The following shall be not be declared or considered an unlawful nuisance that is in violation of this article: 
(1)	Special performances by a band/or orchestra after permits have been obtained from the city government. 
(2)	Ringing of bells or chimes by churches in the city. 
(3)	Any noises or sounds produced by police, fire, rescue or other emergency vehicles or personnel. 
(4)	Organized school-related programs, activities and other events. 
(5)	Organized public programs, activities, events, and parades or other public programs, activities or events authorized by city government. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2005, § 4, 10-10-2005)
 
Sec. 18-49. Penalties.
It shall be unlawful to violate any of the terms and provisions of this article. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the said terms and provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by fines as follows: 
(1)	For the first offense: $50.00 plus court cost. 
(2)	For the second offense, within 12 calendar months: $200.00 plus court cost. 
(3)	For any subsequent offense, within 12 calendar months: $500.00 plus court cost. 
(4)	The violation of this article or any part thereof on more than one day shall each constitute separate offenses. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2005, § 5, 10-10-2005)
 
Sec. 18-50. Summons and complaint in lieu of arrest warrant.
Pursuant to Act 92-588, codified as Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-9.1, which authorizes municipalities to issue summons and/or complaints in lieu of arrest warrants for violation of certain municipal ordinances: 
(1)	Any law enforcement officer of the city may issue a summons and/or complaint to any person charged with committing the offense of nuisance unreasonable noise, in violation of the noise control ordinance of the city and release such person from custody upon his written promise to appear in court at the designated time and place as evidenced by his signature on the summons and/or complaint. 
(2)	Anyone charged with this offense may elect to appear before the municipal court magistrate within the time specified in the summons and/or complaint, and, upon entering a plea of guilty and executing a notice of waiver of rights form, may pay their fine and court cost. The fine and cost assessed shall be based on the aforementioned schedule. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2005, § 6, 10-10-2005)
 
Sec. 18-51. Authority of this article.
This article shall take precedence over any neighborhood covenants. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2005, § 7, 10-10-2005)
 
Chapter 20 OFFENSES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 20-1. Destruction of street signs.
(a)	It shall be unlawful and be a crime against the city, for any person to destroy any street sign, including, but not limited to, stop signs, road signs designating the names of roads or streets, or any other traffic control sign, within the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(b)	Any person destroying any such sign, whether by an intentional or a negligent act, shall pay the actual cost of replacing said sign, including the cost of the sign and the cost of replacing the said sign. 
(c)	Any person who is convicted in the municipal court of failing to pay the cost reasonably imposed for destroying either willfully or negligently any of the above-stated signs, shall be punished by fine, not to exceed $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 0-19-77, §§ 1—4, 12-12-1977)
 
Sec. 20-2. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
(a)	Any person who fires, or discharges or causes to be fired or discharged, any firearms, including any pistol, gun, cannon, anvil or any other like thing of like kind or character in a commercial or residential area or within 300 yards of any inhabited dwelling or within 300 yards of any public thoroughfare within the city limits and its police jurisdiction, shall be guilty of an offense. This shall not apply to the firing or discharging of firearms at a licensed firing or skeet range within the city. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to peace and police officers. There is also special exception to be made for self-protection of person, family or personal property involved in the protection thereof. 
(Ord. No. 0-182-99, §§ 1—6, 11-8-1999)
 
Sec. 20-3. Offenses against the city.
(a)	Any person or corporation committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a misdemeanor, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)	Any person or corporation committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(c)	Any person or corporation committing within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, an offense as defined by section 13A-1-2 of the Alabama Criminal Code, which offense is not declared by a law of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a felony, misdemeanor or violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-36-79, §§ 1—7, 12-21-1979)
 
Sec. 20-4. Curfew.
(a)	It is believed that the health, safety, order, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the city will be better maintained, preserved and protected by restricting the presence of minors under 19 years of age upon the public streets, alleys, or other public places in the nighttime after the hour of 11:00 p.m. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any minor under 19 years of age, without just cause or good excuse, to loaf or loiter upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or parkways, or other public places or public buildings, or vacant lots within the city or the police jurisdiction thereof, in the nighttime after the hour of 11:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 0-74-84, §§ 1—5, 10-22-1984)
 
Sec. 20-5. Placement of political campaign advertisements or material.
It shall be unlawful to place political campaign signs or advertisements on any city-owned property and/or to place any campaign materials in any city owned facility. Any political sign or advertisement placed in any fashion whatsoever on city owned property shall be promptly removed by the city for proper disposal. 
(Ord. No. 0-233-04, 4-26-2004)
 
Secs. 20-6—20-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. SMOKING 
 
Sec. 20-31. City hall smoking policy.
The smoking, dipping or chewing of tobacco products of whatever kind shall be prohibited in the interior of the city hall, including all departments, and the city clerk is hereby directed to prominently post "No Smoking, Dipping or Chewing" signs conspicuously at all entrances and in various places throughout the building. 
(Ord. No. 0-148-95, §§ I—III, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 0-151-95, §§ I—III, 4-10-1995)
 
Sec. 20-32. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; to address and abate a form of air pollution caused by the smoking of tobacco, a positive danger to health and a material public nuisance; and to afford nonsmokers the right to breath smoke-free air in public places and in places of employment. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2018, § 1, 9-10-2018)
 
Sec. 20-33. Smoking in public places and places of employment.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit; including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
Cigar bar means a licensed establishment in which the primary activity is the sale, manufacture or promotion of cigars or cigar accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Common area means a hallway, corridor, lobby, aisle, water fountain area, restroom, stairwell, interior and/or exterior public entryway or exit, refreshment areas, or restroom. 
E-cigarette facility means a business that sells the following, any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substances, and the use of inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term "e-cigarette" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
Employee means a person who works for an employer, whether in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or as a volunteer. 
Employer means a person, association, trust, or a business, including a municipal corporation, with one or more employees. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded on at least two sides by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent and whether or not containing openings of any kind. 
Flow line means the face of the curb and gutter, or if no curb and gutter, the edge of the payment. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentist, and all specialists within these professions. The term "health care facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employment lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employment cafeterias, hallways, construction sites, temporary offices, and employment vehicles. The term "place of employment" does not include a private residence, unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building, or portion thereof, used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities, requires applications to be filled out for membership, and maintains membership records that show the date of application, admission, name and address for each member, and serial number of the membership card issued. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501. 
Public place means an area to which the public is permitted. The term "public place" does not include a private residence, unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means any person, government, or entity licensed to sell tobacco products to individuals for personal consumption, or who operates a facility where self-service displays of tobacco products are permitted. 
Service line means an indoor or outdoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including, but not limited to, ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoke or smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, e-cigarette or other tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. 
Sports arena means a place where people assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events, including sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, and bowling alleys. 
Tobacco retailer means any person, government, or entity who sells tobacco products to individuals for personal consumption, or who operates a facility where self-service displays of tobacco products are permitted. 
(b)	Public places. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(2)	Banks. 
(3)	Bars and lounges. 
(4)	Bingo facilities. 
(5)	Child care and adult day care facilities. 
(6)	Convention facilities. 
(7)	Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(8)	Elevators. 
(9)	Gaming facilities, including bingo facilities. 
(10)	Health care facilities. 
(11)	Hotels and motels. 
(12)	Laundromats. 
(13)	Lobbies, hallways, and other indoor common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(14)	Polling places. 
(15)	Private clubs. 
(16)	Professional offices. 
(17)	Public transportation vehicles, including buses, and taxicabs, under the authority of the city and ticket, boarding, and enclosed waiting areas of public transportation facilities, including bus, train, and airport facilities. 
(18)	Restaurants and retail food production. 
(19)	Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, waiting rooms, hallways, and other indoor common-use areas. 
(20)	Retail service establishments. 
(21)	Retail stores. 
(22)	Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, and other enclosed areas and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city. 
(23)	Service lines. 
(24)	Shopping malls. 
(25)	Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas. 
(26)	Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances. 
(c)	Regulation of smoking in places of employment.
(1)	Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas of places of employment located within the city, including, but not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employment lounges, stairs and restrooms. 
(2)	This prohibition also applies to rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, and other enclosed areas and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city including areas under the control of an agency, board, commission, or committee of the city, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(3)	This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(d)	Regulation of smoking in residential facilities. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following residential facilities: 
(1)	All private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes. 
(2)	All hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests. 
(e)	Regulations of smoking in outdoor public places. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places: 
(1)	In and within 20 feet outside of front public entrances, windows, and ventilation systems of buildings where smoking is prohibited, so as to prevent tobacco smoke from entering those buildings. However, the 20-foot requirement shall not apply to entrances which are not intended for public use. 
(2)	In and within outdoor seating or serving areas of restaurants and bars located in a public place. However, smoking shall be allowed in outside areas designated as a smoking area, but service of food or beverage shall not be provided. 
(3)	In all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters. Smoking shall also be prohibited in and within 20 feet of bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other public events. 
(4)	In and within 20 feet of all outdoor public transportation stations, platforms, and shelters under the authority of the city. 
(5)	In all outdoor service lines. 
(f)	Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempted from the provisions of this section: 
(1)	Smoking shall not be prohibited in private residences, except when used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(2)	E-cigarette facility. 
(g)	Designation of an establishment or outdoor area as nonsmoking. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, and owner or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a no-smoking sign is posted. 
(h)	Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or customer because that employee, applicant or customer exercises any rights afforded by this section or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this section. Notwithstanding subsection (k) of this section, violation of this provision shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
(i)	Enforcement.
(1)	This section shall be enforced by any duly sworn police officer employed by the city. 
(2)	Notice of the provisions of this section shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(3)	Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this section may initiate enforcement with an entity responsible for enforcement, such as the police department. 
(4)	Any owner, manager, operator, or employee of an area regulated by this section shall direct a person who is smoking in violation of this section to extinguish the product being smoked. If the person does not stop smoking, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall refuse service and shall immediately ask the person to leave the premises. If the person in violation refuses to leave the premises, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall contact a law enforcement agency. 
(5)	In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the city or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this section may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in the municipal court. 
(j)	Violations and penalties.
(1)	A person who violates this article commits a violation, punishable by a fine of $50.00 for each violation. A charge of violation shall be treated in the same manner as a traffic violation. Any law enforcement officer may issue a citation pursuant to this section. 
(2)	Except as otherwise provided in subsection (h)(4) of this section, a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense, punishable by: 
a.	A fine of $100.00 for a first violation. A charge of violation shall be treated in the same manner as a traffic violation. 
b.	A fine of $200.00 for a second violation within one year. A charge of violation shall be treated in the same manner as a traffic violation. 
c.	A fine of $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. A charge of violation shall be treated in the same manner as a traffic violation. 
(3)	In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this section by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(4)	Violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city by a restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided by law, and the entity or person seeking abatement may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(5)	Each day on which a violation of this section occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(k)	Other applicable laws. This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2018, § 2, 9-10-2018)
 
Sec. 20-34. Public education.
The city may publish a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-004-2018, § 3, 9-10-2018)
 
Chapter 22 SOLID WASTE 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 22-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the solid waste disposal ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-1, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-2. Findings.
The city council has ascertained and does find, determine and declare as follows: 
(1)	That the removal, storage, transportation, utilization and disposal of solid waste are matters of serious public concern affecting the public health and welfare; 
(2)	That the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city require efficient waste removal and disposal service and proficient utilization of acceptable waste, with such removal, disposal and utilization being under controlled conditions. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-2, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-3. Statutory authorization.
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is adopted pursuant to the statutory authority in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-45-1, 11-45-9, 11-47-130, 11-47-131, 22-27-3 and 22-27-5. The city has the power under existing law (including, without limitation) Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-7-1 et seq., to regulate the storage, removal, collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-3, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-4. Purpose.
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public health, welfare and safety; preventing the spread of disease; preventing the creation of nuisances; preserving natural resources; and protecting the city's water, air and land resources. Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be construed to supersede or interfere with the authority of the state department of environmental management, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or any other public agency that may have jurisdiction over the subject matter of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-4, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-5. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
ADEM means the state department of environmental management. 
Appliance means any household device processed for recycling by the city. The devices or items currently processed are as follows: washers, dryers, stoves, hot water heaters, air conditioners, refrigerators, freezers and any like devices. The devices utilizing or containing freon shall be designated as hazardous. 
Approved container means a refuse container or commercial container supplied by a private hauler or any other person other than the city which has been approved for refuse collection by the public works supervisor or his designated representative. Residential customers must use the containers supplied by the contractor. 
Ashes mean the solid residue from burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material used for heating or from incineration of solid waste but excepting solid residue the storage or disposition of which is controlled by other agencies. 
Bulky items mean discarded nonputrescible waste of a size and form which cannot be easily deposited in or removed by contractor personnel from containers provided by the contractor for the collection and disposal of solid waste, including, but not limited to, the following items: furniture, carpet, mattresses and clothing. The term "bulky items" does not include white goods, any motor vehicle or any subassembly, component or part thereof. 
City means the city acting through its council or other officials designated by it; and includes the city limits and along the water routes outside of the city limits. 
City garbage collection system means the method, procedures and policies whereby the city provides and makes available to certain premises within the city routine garbage collection services. 
Construction and demolition waste means lumber, roofing and sheathing scraps, dirt, stones, bricks, ceramics, rubble, broken concrete, plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation, carpet or carpet padding, gutters, sheetrock, siding, HVAC, etc. 
Contractor means the individual, corporation, partnership or other agency engaged in the collection and disposal of solid waste as franchised, licensed and supervised by the city, the state department of public health and the county health department under the provisions of the Solid Waste Disposal Act as heretofore adopted by the state and set out in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-3. 
Curbside means and refers to the area in front of the premises and immediately behind the curb of the street, and where there is no curb, the area in front of the premises nearest and most convenient to the travelled portion of the street, the use of which will not block, hinder or obstruct vehicular, pedestrian or other traffic lawfully using the street or sidewalk. 
Curbside collection means the method by which the contractor collects refuse from approved 95-gallon roll-out carts or containers. Such containers will be serviced by the contractor on scheduled collection days at the curbline in front of the residence where it has been placed prior to collection by the resident and removed after collection by the resident. 
Disposal charges means the tipping fee charged at the landfill or transfer station based on the tonnage of solid waste delivered for disposal. 
FEMA means the Federal Environmental Management Agency. 
Garbage means the putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including waste from markets, storage facilities, handling and sale of produce and other food products and, in general, from food from human consumption; provided, however, the term "garbage" shall not include any such materials that may be serviced by garbage grinders and handled as household sewage, livestock or poultry waste, hazardous waste or materials and properly disposed of or unprotected medical waste, dead animals or the carcasses of deer or other large animals, ashes, trash, street or highway cleans, abandoned automobiles or appliances or industrial waste. 
Garbage and trash means all waste and discarded materials, including rubbish and debris, waste and discarded food, animal and vegetable matter (but not including liquid waste), waste paper, cans, glass, crockery, rags, ashes, cinders, brush, grass, weeds, and cuttings from trees, lawns, gardens, etc. Tree cuttings shall be less than six inches in diameter and five feet in length. Lawn cuttings and leaves must be contained in a sturdy bag for easy removal from curb right-of-way. The term "garbage and trash" does not include construction or demolition material. 
Garbage service charge fee means the amount due to the city by any person for services rendered in connection with the collection of garbage, trash or other refuse. 
Hazardous wastes include, but are not limited to, wastes resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use), pathological wastes, explosives, radioactive materials, and like dangerous or toxic materials that should not be handled in the manner prescribed for normal wastes. 
Health department means the state or county health department having jurisdiction over the particular activity or geographical area involved. 
Landfill means a method of compaction and earth cover of solid wastes other than those containing garbage or other putrescible wastes, including, but not limited to, tree limbs, stumps, demolition materials, incinerator residues, and like materials not constituting a health or nuisance hazard where cover need not be applied on a per day basis. 
Multifamily unit means a house, building, structure or any multiple or combination of the same on a premise, where there exists four or more family units. 
Nonresidential unit means any lot, property, building, premises or structure within the city generating garbage that is not a family unit or multifamily unit as herein described. Nonresidential units shall include, but not be limited to, businesses, commercial establishments, public buildings, churches and nonprofit organizations and any building, structure or part thereof used in connection with or for the foregoing, including the purpose of carrying on any business, trade, occupation or profession for which a business license is required by the city. 
Plastic bag orplastic container means a plastic bag or holder of trash of sufficient fitness and strength to be lifted and loaded without tearing or leaking and being capable of being securely closed or tied shut, utilized for the purpose of containing trash only. 
Premises means any dwelling, residential home, apartment, flat, house, hospital, nursing home, school, hotel, motel, club, restaurant, boardinghouse, roominghouse, trailer, mobile home, eating establishment, shop, church, place of business, manufacturing establishment, courthouse, jail, city hall, post office, or any other public or private building, together with the lot upon which the same is situated, or vacant lots and unimproved property. 
Public works department means that department of the city charged with the responsibility of constructing, improving and maintaining the city's infrastructure and public properties. The department is organized in divisions which are responsible for providing specific services. 
Public works supervisor means a person designated by the mayor to perform duties within the city's public works department ascribed in this chapter to the sanitation division. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste), including garbage and waste. 
Refuse container or container means a watertight plastic molded refuse cart provided by the contractor with a 95-gallon capacity, equipped with an attached, hinged, close-fitting lid. Such 95-gallon containers are to be equipped with handle and wheels for roll-out service at the curb. Containers are resistant to disturbance by animals and insects. Residential customers must use the containers supplied by the contractor. 
Residence means an occupied dwelling (whether a single-family dwelling, or an individual condominium, townhouse, or apartment unit) within the limits of the county. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and non-combustible waste. Combustible rubbish includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar materials. Non-combustible rubbish includes glass, crockery, metal cans, metal furniture and like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (not less than 1,600 degrees Fahrenheit). 
Sanitary landfill ortransfer station means a controlled area of land upon which solid waste is deposited and is compacted and covered with compacted earth each day as deposited, with no on-site burning of waste and so located, contoured and drained that it will not constitute a source of water pollution as determined by the state water improvement commission. 
Sanitation division means that division of the public works department charged with the responsibility of operating the city's solid waste collection and disposal system in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter and other city policies. 
Solid waste means all decayed and nondecayed discarded materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street and highway cleanings, dead animals including offal, abandoned automobiles, yard waste or trash, debris, white goods, construction and demolition waste, other discarded material or refuse and such industrial wastes as are not controlled by other agencies. To exclude household sewage, livestock waste and any other type of animal waste. 
Special event cart means refuse carts that may be placed at special events with 48 hours' notice. 
Trash means all tree and lawn trimmings, leaves, pine straw, trash that has been burned, rocks, bricks, dirt, ashes, lumber, concrete, bushes and demolition type waste generated by family units, except the term shall expressly not include any paper, cartons, cardboard, refuse, garbage, litter, rubbish, sludge, liquids or toxic or hazardous waste. The term "trash" includes only those items of waste that are capable of being collected by equipment of the city utilized for that purpose and accepted for deposit at the landfill. 
Vehicles mean any car, truck, tractor, wagon, or any other piece of mechanized equipment. 
Waste means any paper, cartons or other refuse thrown away or rejected for further use. 
Water route means the premises which lie outside of the city limits but along water line routes. 
White goods means refrigerators, freezers, stoves, dishwashers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, water heaters, air conditioners, other large appliances, etc. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-5, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-6. Authority to promulgate rules and regulations/variances.
(a)	The mayor or his designated representative is authorized to promulgate and issue any rules, regulations and/or policies not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, and in furtherance of and reasonably necessary to facilitate the administration and collection of garbage, refuse, trash and other waste within the corporate limits of the city. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the mayor and his designated representative is specifically authorized to place, post and/or affix notices to any premises, structure or business within the corporate limits of the city regarding the administration of municipal ordinances and departmental policies pertaining to garbage, recycling, refuse, litter and/or trash collection, disposal and management. 
(b)	In those isolated instances in which the mayor determines that a strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the method and manner of collection will, due to the physical or topographic circumstances, render strict adherence to all of the provisions of this chapter impossible or otherwise impair or impeded the efficient collection activities of the city, then he may authorize a variance from the provisions hereof, but only to the limited extent necessary or required. All the other provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. All variances granted by the mayor shall be in writing, documenting the reasons and justifications therefore, identifying the location and specific regulation to which the variance applies, be signed and authorized by the mayor, kept on file by the department and a copy forwarded to the city council. The mayor shall have the right to approve or disapprove the granting of the variance. A variance may be repealed, amended or modified pursuant to the same procedure. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-6, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-7. Penalties.
(a)	Any person who violates or fails or refuses to obey or comply with any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished, as provided by the court, as follows: 
(1)	For a first conviction: A fine of not less than $100.00. 
(2)	For a second conviction: A fine of $200.00. 
(3)	For a third conviction: A fine of $300.00. 
(4)	For a fourth and subsequent conviction: A fine in an amount not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment of not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, at discretion of the municipal judge trying the case. 
(5)	Each day of violation of this chapter is a separate offense. 
(b)	Any person who has been charged with the violation of any provision of this chapter, except for a fourth or subsequent violation, may pay the fine prescribed above to the municipal court magistrate who is hereby authorized and instructed to receive such amount. Voluntary settlement shall not be permitted to any person who has been thrice convicted of the same offense prior to the date of the instant alleged offence and such person shall be required to stand trial in the municipal court. Offenses not settled as provided in this section prior to the court appearance date shown on the notice of violation will be disposed of in the same manner as any case appearing on the regular municipal court docket. Court costs will apply, at the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-7, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-8. Presumption.
If any article of solid waste bearing a person's name is discovered on any public property not designated for the throwing, dumping or depositing of solid waste, including public streets, sidewalks, gutters, alleys, bodies of water, drainage ditches, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, or other property over or with respect to which the city has an easement, or on private property of another without such person's permission, a rebuttable, prima facie presumption shall arise that the person whose name appears on the article threw, dumped, attached, placed, deposited or otherwise caused the article to be thrown, dumped, attached, placed or deposited at the place where it was found; however, this presumption, if unrebutted at trial, shall not serve as a basis for a conviction for a violation of this chapter in absence of other evidence of such nature and degree as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-8, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-9. Maintenance of premises.
(a)	All persons, firms and corporations within the corporate limits of the city are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from accumulation of solid wastes. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any premises where garbage, rubbish or other nonputrescible solid waste is created or accumulated, at all times to keep or cause to be kept a sufficient number of garbage cans or other containers for deposit or cause to be deposited therein of such, and the lids or covers of such garbage cans shall be kept tightly closed thereon at all times other than when garbage is being deposited therein, to prevent the spreading or scattering of such refuse upon said premises. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge or control of any premises to keep, cause to be kept, or allow the keeping on any premises within the corporate limit or water routes of the city of solid wastes in such a manner that it will become offensive or deleterious to health or likely to cause disease and the same is hereby declared a public nuisance. The health department of the county and their authorized representative or such other duly authorized inspector may be designed by the city council is hereby authorized to inspect any premises in the city for the purpose of seeing that the requirements of this section are being complied with and it shall be unlawful for any person whomsoever to resist or interfere with such representative by word, deed or act in the performance of such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-9, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-10. Litter and dumping.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump, place, leave or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dumped, placed, left or otherwise deposited, litter, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, brush, tree removal debris, boxes, tools, scrap iron, machinery, construction or demolition waste, scraps or waste material, or other trash or debris, on public property within the city limit or within the police jurisdiction of the city, including, but not limited to, a city right-of-way, road or other public thoroughfare, or on private property within the city, irrespective of whether such private property is owned by such person; provided, however, the owner or person in control of such private property may utilize authorized private containers in such a manner that such material will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements onto any street, sidewalk or other public place or private property. Such material shall be permitted on such public or private property when it is properly placed for collection, as provided by this chapter. It shall be unlawful to dump solid waste at any point in the city limits. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person in control of any private property within the city to fail to maintain the premises free of litter, scrap or waste material. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of any persons owning or occupying a building or lot within any business district of the city to sweep or clean the sidewalks and alleys adjacent to such building or lot so as to remove all solid waste or filth and to maintain the cleanliness of the premises. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump, place, leave, deposit or dispose of solid waste at any site other than a facility permitted by the ADEM to accept the type of waste being offered for disposal or to store, collect, transport, process, dispose of, sell or offer for sale solid waste or disposal materials so as to create a nuisance or unless properly licensed to perform this type of work. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-10, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-11. Depositing solid waste on streets and gutters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, cast or otherwise deposit or cause to be swept, thrown, cast or otherwise deposited any paper, garbage or rubbish, containers, either glass, metal, plastic or paper, or any other substance of any kind in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, sidewalk, curb, gutter, alley, park or parking lot, or property of another person or property which is in the possession of another person within the corporate limits of the city, vacant or occupied, except as permitted elsewhere in this Code or other city ordinances, or to permit any solid waste or any other material or article to accumulate in such a manner that it may be carried and deposited into or on any of the above places by action of rain, wind or snow or that would tend to impede the flow of water in such gutters or along such streets, sidewalks, alleys or other property; to clog the storm drainage system; or to be an obstruction to traffic or pedestrians. It shall also be unlawful to deposit personal garbage, building debris, roofing, etc., into a city dumpster without prior permission from the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-11, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-12. Depositing solid waste in ditches or sewers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, sweep, dump or otherwise deposit into any stream, public water drain, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, receiving basin or in or around the public drainage ditches within the corporate limits of the city any solid waste or any other article or material that would tend to impede the flow of water or would tend to clog such ditches, storm sewers or sanitary sewers or permit same to accumulate in such a manner that it may be carried and deposited into or on any of the above by action of the rain, wind or snow. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-12, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-13. Litter in bodies of water.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, sweep, dump or otherwise deposit in or around any public lake, stream or body of water of the city any solid waste or other article or material that would tend either to impede the flow of water or clog such bodies of water or otherwise detract from the environmental quality or aesthetics of the area. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, dump or deposit litter or any foreign material in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to a public park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-13, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-14. Throwing litter from vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter from a vehicle onto public or private property or for the driver and/or owner (if present in the vehicle) to allow litter from the vehicle to be thrown or deposited onto public or private property. The fact that litter comes from a vehicle shall create a presumption that the driver and/or owner failed to take reasonable measure to prevent such action. For the purpose of this section, the owner of a rented or leased vehicle shall be the person who has rented or leased it. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-14, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-15. Demolition and construction waste.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any construction or demolition contractor to fail to provide on-site containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building material, and other trash produced by those working on the site. The public works supervisor or his designee shall have the authority to determine the number of containers necessary to provide proper containerization. 
(b)	Building debris such as scrap lumber, plaster, roofing, concrete, excess dirt or rock, mud or similar materials resulting from the construction, repair or demolition of any building structure, whether located upon public or private property, will not be removed by the city and shall be removed on a continuing basis as produced on the premises or in relation to a demolition or construction project; and in no case, shall such waste remain on or near the premises or in relation to a demolition or construction project for a period longer than 30 days. Construction sites and demolition and construction materials and waste on such sites shall be kept in a clean, litter-free and orderly condition at all times. The occupant or property owner of such premises or the contractor of a construction or demolition project shall collect and remove or arrange for the collection and removal of all demolition and construction waste produced on such premises or in relation to a demolition or construction project. In cases where the occupant or property owner or contractor arranges for the collection and removal of demolition and construction work, such collection and removal must be conducted by a solid waste collector utilizing a solid waste collection vehicle licensed by the city for such collection. Such demolition and construction waste shall be disposed of at a facility permitted by the ADEM to accept the type of waste being offered for disposal, whether such facility is operated by the city or privately. Any solid waste collector licensed for the purpose of offering collection service for demolition and construction waste may offer such services in accordance with the schedule of charges such collector determines to be appropriate. No person shall transfer responsibility or financial liability for the disposal of demolition and construction waste by depositing the waste upon any public street or other public place or private parcel, lot premises, litter receptacle or refuse receptacle, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)	All construction and demolition debris shall be contained in a manner so as to prevent blowing or scattering. 
(d)	Building contractors must collect, transport and dispose of all refuse generated from the work. All construction and demolition debris shall be hauled by a licensed commercial hauler, or by the person generating the waste. The building contractor must safely transport such waste and properly dispose of such waste in an approved landfill. The contractor must keep a copy of the disposal ticket provided by the landfill and provide a copy of the ticket to the city upon request. A certificate of occupancy for a newly constructed or renovated building will not be issued until all refuse and litter caused by the construction or remodeling is removed from the site. 
(e)	No construction or demolition debris shall be deposited on any roadway. 
(f)	No construction or demolition debris shall be deposited on any real property within the city without a permit from the state department of environmental management. 
(g)	No construction or demolition debris shall be burned. 
(h)	No person shall operate or permit the operation on his property of a disposal site in the city for the disposal of solid waste from construction or demolition activities unless such person shall have first applied for and received a permit from the state department of environmental management. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-15, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-16. Prohibited acts and practices.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed, any waste upon any street, highway, road, right-of-way, waterway, stream or other body of water, or upon public or private property except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any acid, explosive material, flammable liquids, motor oil or any dangerous or highly corrosive material in any container which might cause harm or injury to any person. Special handling arrangements for such items shall be made pursuant to the rules and regulations of the state department of environmental management and the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to bury, burn or dispose of waste, except by use of a garbage disposal unit, or in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or as permitted by the state department of environmental management and the EPA. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any solid waste from any garbage can or other container within the corporate limits of the city other than his own, after it has been placed therein, except by employees of the sanitation department, law enforcement officials or employees and agents of a service company contracted out to pick up solid waste for removal. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-16, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-17. Depositing building material on streets.
(a)	All applications for the use of street, or other public spaces of the city for the purpose of depositing building materials thereon, shall be made to the public works supervisor describing the grounds and the desired periods of occupation. Permits for the use of streets and other public spaces for the deposit of building material shall not be granted, in the first instance, for a longer time than four months but may be renewed from time to time at the discretion of the public works supervisor for not more than one month at any one time. 
(b)	The permit shall not authorize the preparation in the streets or spaces belonging to the city of materials which can be prepared elsewhere; material shall not be deposited in or over the gutter so as to prevent a free passage of water, nor extend beyond the middle of the street. The permit shall specify the ground to be occupied which must be in front of the premises to be built upon unless more space is absolutely necessary. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-17, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-18. Entry powers.
Municipal employees of the city are authorized and permitted to aid and assist the county health department, the state board of health, ADEM or EPA and their authorized representative, if requested to lend assistance. The mayor of the city, in order to protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city, may designate police officers or such other duly authorized municipal employees, as having the power and authority, as allowed by law, to enter at any reasonable time in, or upon, public and private property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relative to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 2-18, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-19. Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to leave or allow anyone to leave an automobile, truck, tractor or any other vehicle parked, placed or otherwise left on a highway, street, right-of-way or within 20 feet of said right-of-way for more than seven days. If same is not claimed within 30 days after towing away and the towing fee and/or fine is not paid, a full loss of the vehicle may result. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 6, 11-13-2018)
 
Secs. 22-20—22-41. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. STORAGE AND COLLECTION
 
Sec. 22-42. Garbage collection systems, mandatory participation.
Every person in possession, charge or control of any premises within the city where solid waste is created or accumulated shall subscribe to and participate in a system of garbage collection and disposal pursuant to the provisions of this article, unless granted a certificate of exemption in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-3(g), or otherwise exempt by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 3-1, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-43. Residential garbage collection.
The city provides and makes available a contract garbage collection system, pursuant to the provisions of this section, within the corporate limits of the city. Except as otherwise provided in section 22-44, and as provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, every person in possession or control of any residential premises wherein solid waste is created or accumulated shall participate in and subscribe to the city garbage collection and disposal system pursuant to the provisions of this article and pay to the city such fees and charges for such services as established in this article. Except as provided herein, garbage removal from occupied single-family residential units shall be made exclusively by the contractor. Participation in the city's removal or collection by single-family residential customers is mandatory for all residents of the city. Once weekly, the contractor will collect from each such residential premises garbage deposited in one or more 95-gallon refuse carts and properly placed for collection in accordance with the provisions of this article. Fees for garbage collection are assessed for the availability of the service. No commercial firm engaged in garbage collection within the corporate limits of the city shall collect garbage from residential premises as herein defined, except those to whom the city does not make available garbage collection services. 
(1)	Persons disposing of their own solid waste pursuant to the Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-3(g), shall cause all such materials to be placed in approved receptacles. 
(2)	An owner or property management company (or their agent) in possession, charge or control of any premises designed or intended for multiple occupancy where waste is created or accumulated and which contracts with licensed private haulers shall cause all such material to be placed in approved receptacles. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 3-2, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-44. Multifamily garbage collection.
(a)	The owners, occupants and/or residents of all multifamily residential units must participate in and subscribe to either the city garbage collection system in accordance with the provisions of this article, including all applicable fees and charges assessed by this article or a garbage collection system provided by a private garbage collection firm duly licensed by the city for the collection and disposal of garbage. The public works supervisor shall determine the best method of service for multifamily units and shall have sole discretion to require service by a private hauler. The number, type and size of the containers will be determined by the public works supervisor. The use of refuse containers serving more than one residential unit shall be limited to duplexes, apartments or other multifamily dwellings. The determination of such shall be at the sole discretion of the public works supervisor. 
(b)	The owners, occupants and/or residents of all nonparticipating multifamily residential units as herein defined within the corporate limits of the city shall not be provided garbage collection services by the city, but rather participate in and subscribe to a garbage collection system provided by a duly licensed commercial firm, which utilizes dumpster containers. Such dumpster containers shall be placed in reasonable proximity to said multifamily units in accordance with all city ordinances and policies. The residents of such multifamily units shall place garbage only in the dumpster containers for collection and disposal. It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for any owner, occupant or resident of a nonparticipating multifamily unit to utilize or place for collection at curbside or anywhere else upon the public right-of-way any garbage can, box, cart, bag or receptacle containing garbage and/or for any person, firm or corporation to collect or attempt to collect such garbage so placed or containerized. Commercial firms engaged in garbage collection within the corporate limits of the city shall collect garbage from multifamily units only in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 3-3, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-45. Commercial and other nonresidential premises garbage collection.
(a)	All nonresidential premises, including churches, nonprofit premises, commercial or business establishments, public buildings or any other premises within the corporation limits of the city where solid waste is created or accumulated shall participate in and subscribe to a garbage collection system provided by a private commercial collection firm duly licensed by the city for the collection and disposal of garbage. No large containers for bulk collection of garbage and refuse shall be allowed on public streets or sidewalks of the city but must be located on private property at the rear of the establishment at a place easily accessible to the garbage collection or adjacent to a public or private alley commonly used to serve such establishment. All commercial and other nonresidential refuse generators shall maintain their alleys and the area surrounding the refuse carts or containers free from refuse and other potential hazards to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)	All garbage dumpsters, rubbish containers and other refuse for collection from commercial establishments shall be placed at a place to be designated by the contractor on the days and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 3:00 p.m., as designated by the city. The city reserves the right to adjust times of pick-up due to inclement weather or holidays. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 3-5, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-46. Industrial service.
The city does not provide refuse collection services to any industrial establishment. The owner, operator, person in charge and/or manager of an industrial premises shall participate in and subscribe to a refuse collection system provided by a duly licensed commercial firm. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 3-6, 11-13-2018)
 
Secs. 22-47—22-65. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. CITY GARBAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM; PLACEMENT AND HANDLING OF TRASH
 
Sec. 22-66. Garbage containers, use and placement, etc.
(a)	Mandatory use of containers. The owners or occupants of every residence participating in the city's garbage collection system in accordance with the provisions of this article shall utilize only the containers as herein defined. Only containers properly maintained and in good working order may be utilized for garbage collection. The contractor will not collect garbage from any other type or kind of garbage container or receptacle, can, bag or box, etc. (nonconforming receptacles). The use or placement of such nonconforming receptacles for the collection of garbage by the contractor is unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance which shall be abated in accordance with the law. 
(b)	Curbside collection of containers. The owner or occupant of any premises participating in the city's garbage collection system shall deposit garbage in the approved container with the lid firmly closed and place the container at curbside as herein provided on the date and at the time established by the city or its' designee for garbage collection in the area. All garbage containers for collection from residences by the contractor shall be placed at a point not more than 20 feet from any driveway, public alley or street right-of-way line at a point conveniently accessible to collection crews prior to being collected by contractor. Collection time shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. daily. The city reserves the right to adjust times of pick-up due to inclement weather or holidays. All vicious animals shall either be confined, or garbage receptacles placed at a point where collectors may empty same without attack from such animals. Residents who habitually have overflowing carts will be provided a second residential cart at a per month charge in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. After each scheduled garbage collection in that area, the containers shall be removed from curbside and city right-of-way by the owner or occupant of the premises. It shall be unlawful and create a public nuisance for any person, firm or corporation participating in the city's garbage collection system to allow or permit a container to remain at curbside or upon the city right-of-way. All garbage cans must be placed curbside for garbage pick-up within 24 hours of the garbage scheduled pick up date and the garbage cans must be removed within 24 hours after the garbage has been picked up. Garbage cans shall be stored on either the side or rear yard of residences and/or businesses. 
(c)	The contractor will not collect any garbage placed outside of the enclosed container provided for the collection of garbage. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-1, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-67. Service not provided by city.
The city does not provide service for the removal or collection, from any premises, of: 
(1)	Construction and demolition waste or materials resulting from the construction, demolition or removal of buildings or structures, such as earth, gravel, rocks, sand, plaster, mortar and roofing materials. All building materials shall be unacceptable for collection; 
(2)	Materials resulting from commercial-related activities, work performed by a contractor, or work requiring a building permit; 
(3)	Tree limbs and trimmings resulting from land clearing or from tree service contractors or other commercial workers; 
(4)	Rocks, dirt or other debris resulting from a commercial landscaping or construction; 
(5)	Hazardous materials or other waste that are determined by law or by the solid waste division to be hazardous to the health or safety of collection personnel; 
(6)	Dangerous materials or substances such as ashes, cinders, poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials and explosives and other similar noxious matter; 
(7)	Any solid waste resulting from industrial processes; 
(8)	Material which cannot be reduced by compaction, such as iron, automobile engines and tires; 
(9)	Trees with a diameter that is greater than six inches. The city's public works supervisor will quote a rate to remove such trees or the customer shall contract with a private licensed hauler to remove said trees; 
(10)	White goods. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-2, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-68. Loading containers/carts.
Containers and/or carts shall only be utilized for the disposal of garbage as defined herein subject to the limitations of this article. Refuse carts and containers shall not be loaded with concrete, bricks, dirt, scrap metal, rocks or other heavy waste or demolition-type material and in no event shall a container be loaded to exceed 200 pounds. Refuse carts and containers may be utilized for depositing of trash for collection by the contractor if such trash is in compliance with all requirements set out in this article. Garbage that will not fit in the cart should not be placed outside the cart. Only materials stored inside the cart will be collected. All garbage must be contained within the cart, with lid closed. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-3, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-69. Placement location.
It shall be unlawful to place containers for collection of garbage, refuse, trash or other waste at any place other than immediately adjacent to the curb (or the edge of the roadway on non-curb streets) in front of the premises where such waste was accumulated unless prior approval is, upon showing of need, obtained from the public works supervisor for placement at some other location. Refuse carts and containers should be placed within two feet of the street and must not be placed within five feet of a vehicle, mailbox or other obstruction as determined by the public works supervisor. After each scheduled garbage collection in the area, refuse carts and containers shall be removed from curbside to the owner's, occupant's or resident's side yard, carport, garage, backyard or screened area so that the cart or container is not visible from the street. Customers who fail or refuse to remove cart or container from the curb or street within the time period specified in sections 22-66(b) and 22-70 shall be issued a warning for the first occurrence. After the initial warning, city personnel will remove the refuse cart or container from the curb or street as specified in this section and the customer shall be assessed a service charge for this service. The service charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. To fail to comply with these provisions after notification by the public works department will cause service to be discontinued until correction has been made. At no time will collection personnel enter houses, buildings or fences for the purpose of the collection of garbage, refuse, trash or other waste. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-4, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-70. Placement time; removal time.
It shall be unlawful and create a public nuisance for any person, firm or corporation participating in the city's garbage collection system to allow or permit a container to remain at curbside or upon the city right-of-way. All garbage cans must be placed curbside for garbage pick-up within 24 hours of the garbage scheduled pick up date and the garbage cans must be removed within 24 hours after the garbage has been picked up. Garbage cans shall be stored on either the side or rear yard of residences and/or businesses. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-5, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-71. Bulky items.
All bulky items to be removed by the public works department from private residences shall be placed adjacent to the curb (or the edge of the roadway on non-curbed streets) or in an accessible place approved by the public works department. Bulky items shall be collected weekly as scheduled by the public works supervisor. All such waste not collected by the city must be delivered by the owner to an authorized receiving facility. Placement location in section 22-69 shall apply to bulky items. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-6, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-72. Contractor residential garbage collection.
The contractor will provide residential garbage collection services once a week in accordance with the provisions of this article and pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the city. Participation in the city residential garbage collection system is mandatory. The accumulation of garbage or other debris by the occupants of any premises within the city is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-7, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-73. Public works trash collection.
The public works department will be the point of contact to arrange for the pick-up of bulky items. The public works supervisor will schedule weekly collections. The following rules are hereby established pertaining to the method, placement and handling of bulky items and trash, as herein defined, on the curbside for pick-up by the public works department: 
(1)	All trash items capable of being containerized, such as grass clippings, leaves, shrubbery trimmings and loose trash that may be blown away shall be bagged in adequate strength plastic bags securely closed and tied shut and shall be placed on the curbside in front of the premises on the scheduled collection day. All plastic bags so placed shall be in good condition without tears or leaks and securely tied or fastened. All Styrofoam must be bagged or boxed. The city will not collect trash which is not bagged or containerized as required in this section. 
(2)	Limbs, brush, shrubbery and other wood items not capable of being bagged as provided in subsection (1) of this section shall be cut in lengths not exceeding five feet and widths no greater than six inches in diameter. Limbs, brush, shrubbery and other wood items shall be placed on curbside in front of the premises. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful to blow, place, dump or deposit leaves or another loose yard waste on the street surface. Residential customers who fail or refuse to bag grass and shrubbery trimmings will be issued a warning for the first occurrence and will be assessed a service charge for each occurrence thereafter. The service charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(4)	The city will only collect tree trimmings and other yard waste from within 100 feet of the house and only in the maintained area of the yard. Tree trimmings and other yard waste must be placed on the right-of-way for pick-up. Waste from outside the maintained area of the yard will be treated as special trash and yard waste as described in section 22-78. 
(5)	Section 22-69 shall apply to residential trash collection. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-8, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-74. Nonresidential and commercial trash collection.
(a)	Except as provided in this section, no collection of trash shall be made by the city from any commercial or nonresidential premises. 
(b)	The owners and persons in possession, charge or control of commercial and other nonresidential premises are responsible for the removal of all trash and bulky items from such premises and for its delivery to an authorized receiving facility. 
(c)	The owners and persons in possession, charge or control of commercial and nonresidential premises can contract with a private commercial collection firm for the collection and removal of trash. 
(d)	The city public works department can collect and remove trash and bulky items from commercial and nonresidential premises on an as needed basis for a per load charge plus disposal charges. The per load charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. Quotes will be given on any loads less than a full load. The decision to utilize city services to remove trash and bulky items from commercial and nonresidential premises will be made by the mayor, in consultation with the public works supervisor. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for the owners and the persons in possession, charge or control of any commercial or nonresidential premises to place or deposit trash and bulky items at curbside or within ten feet of the street for collection by the city. 
(f)	Section 22-69 shall apply to nonresidential and commercial trash collection. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-9, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-75. Improper use of public trash receptacles.
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any place of business in the city who is required by this article to keep an approved container on or about his premises, or for any employee, servant or agent of such person, to place or deposit garbage, trash, paper, rubbish or other waste material in any trash basket or waste receptacle provided and maintained by the city on a public street or sidewalk for the use of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-10, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-76. Removal of dead animals.
Dead domestic animals in the corporate limits of the city not exceeding 50 pounds in weight, which die in the normal course of community activity, excluding condemned animals or animals from a slaughterhouse, shall be removed by the public works department upon request. In no event shall any person having a dead animal on the premises occupied by or under the control of said person allow it to remain un-disposed of for a period of longer than 48 hours. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-11, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-77. Cleanliness and orderliness of container site.
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any premises to allow or permit garbage or trash containers to be open or uncovered, and it shall be unlawful for such person to permit or allow an accumulation of garbage, trash or litter in the vicinity of any garbage or trash container serving such premises. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-12, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-78. Special trash and yard waste.
Waste that has not been containerized, cut to proper lengths or stored that has been authorized for collection in accordance with the provisions of this article may be collected by the public works department by making arrangements for a special collection or other means of disposal. Residents disposing of building or construction debris (which is not the result of commercial-related activity and which does not result from the work of a general contractor) which is determined by the public works supervisor to be impractical to contain may arrange for a special collection. In cases where no arrangements for special collection have been made with respect to waste that has not been containerized, cut to proper length or stored and is authorized for collection in accordance with the provisions of this article, such waste may be collected by the public works department and shall be considered a special collection. Fees for these special collections are in addition to the customer's normal monthly rate for containerized service. Materials resulting from the repair or replacement of driveways or concrete slabs are excluded from special collections. The city public works department will collect and remove special trash and yard waste for per load charge. The per load charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-13, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-79. Segregation of garbage from other waste.
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of the customer to segregate uncollectable waste from garbage, yard waste and other permitted household and commercial refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited waste unacceptable for collection in any approved refuse cart or container provided or intended for garbage waste. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of the customer to segregate yard waste from garbage and other permitted household and commercial refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person to combine yard waste and garbage in any approved container provided or intended for garbage collection. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-14, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-80. Solid waste rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations are hereby established pertaining to the handling of garbage, trash and recycling as herein defined: 
(1)	Commercial garbage service.
a.	Commercial and all nonresidential premises are required to subscribe to a garbage collection system provided by a private commercial collection firm duly licensed by the city for the collection and disposal of garbage, as set forth in section 22-45. 
b.	Except as provided in section 22-74, no collection of trash shall be made by the city from any commercial or nonresidential premises. 
c.	If containers are frequently overflowing, the city may require an additional or larger container. 
(2)	Residential garbage service.
a.	Lids on carts must be closed if possible. If overloading the cart becomes a recurring problem and the public works supervisor determines a second cart is required, the resident will be charged for the second cart. The per month charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
b.	All waste placed inside the 95-gallon cart shall be bagged to help minimize litter on city streets. No boxes shall be placed in the carts unless they have been broken down or cut up, so they will not cause the garbage to become stuck in the cart when the cart is being picked up. 
c.	Residents will be responsible to keep their carts washed and cleaned. 
d.	Cars or other objects blocking carts will be the responsibility of the resident. If carts are blocked, they will not be serviced. 
(3)	Trash/yard waste.
a.	Tree parts shall not exceed six inches in diameter or five feet in length. 
b.	The city is not required to pick up any tree parts exceeding six inches in diameter or five feet in length. Trees exceeding six inches in diameter or five feet in length, cut down by residents and placed at the curbside, will be charged as provided for in section 22-74(d). Residents may contract with a private hauler if desired. 
c.	Tree removal/trimming companies are required to remove all their waste from the residence. 
d.	All trash items capable of being containerized, such as grass clippings, leaves, shrubbery trimmings and loose trash that may be blown away shall be bagged in adequate strength plastic bags securely closed and tied shut and shall be placed on the curbside in front of the premises on the scheduled collection day. All plastic bags so placed shall be in good condition without tears or leaks and securely tied or fastened. All Styrofoam must be bagged or boxed. The city will not collect trash which is not bagged or containerized as required in this section. 
e.	All trash shall be placed within three feet of the curb or edge of the road. No loose trash should be thrown into any storm sewer, gutter, sidewalk or street within the city. 
f.	Rubbish/trash will be collected by the city if proper fees have been paid in advance and rubbish/trash has been placed in a proper location for removal by the city. 
(4)	Other.
a.	Any charges for additional services must be paid in advance at the direction of the public works supervisor. 
b.	Cars blocking garbage or trash shall be the responsibility of the residential or commercial customer. 
c.	No liquids, such as paint, are allowed in the garbage or trash. Paints or other liquids must be solidified by using sand, oil dry or kitty litter before placing in garbage cart. Residents should first check with the store where they purchased the paint to see if the paint retailer will accept the unused paint. 
d.	It shall be unlawful to place in any garbage or rubbish container any hazardous liquids, acids, paint, pesticide, poison or other dangerous liquids or substances which could cause injury to employees of the contractor engaged in removing solid waste. Leaking and defective garbage cans with sharp or ragged edges likely to injure employees of the contractor engaged in removing solid waste will not be serviced and the contractor shall cause to be placed on such can a tag marked "condemned." 
e.	It shall be unlawful to place in any garbage or rubbish container any medical waste and/or medically used needle that could harm the employees who pick up garbage without proper containment. Personal use medical waste must be disposed of in a safe manner. Diabetic needles and/or medical needles must be placed in a sealed container upon disposal in the garbage. Business medical waste must be picked up by a medical waste provider. 
f.	The owners, operators, lessees and employees of any fast food restaurant, restaurant, grocery, gas stations or other mercantile establishment which engages in drive-through services or makes delivery of goods to customers parked in areas adjacent to the streets of the city shall see to it that the wrappings, containers and other papers which enclosed or accompany such goods are not thrown, discarded or allowed to blow upon his premises and the streets of the city. If wrappings, containers, napkins, straws, paper or trash shall accidentally fall or blow upon the streets of the city, the owners, lessees, and employees of such establishment shall be jointly or severally responsible with the customer thereof for the immediate removal of the debris from the street or parking area. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-15, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-81. Discontinuation of garbage and trash collection services; posting of notices.
(a)	The public works supervisor may refuse to collect on any occasion and/or permanently discontinue garbage and/or trash services from any premises within the city where the owner, occupant or other person in control thereof fails or refuses to comply with any provisions of this article, or any other ordinance of the city or policy of the department in regard to the collection, storage, handling of garbage or refuse at such premises. 
(b)	Prior to a discontinuance of such services to any premises, the public works supervisor shall give the owner or occupant thereof as indicated by the records of the city, at least five days' written notice of the city's intention to discontinue service. The public works supervisor and/or his designated representative is authorized to post and attach and/or affix notices to the premises or structures located thereon regarding any such failures to comply and/or to mail or otherwise notify such persons in violation of such city regulations concerning the collection, storage or handling of garbage, trash or refuse. After the lapse of the period specified in the written notice, if the account has not been paid in full, the city, notwithstanding any deposit as referred to in section 22-157, may then discontinue service without further notice. 
(c)	At any time prior to 4:30 p.m. on the day preceding the discontinuation of service date, the customer may request in writing an administrative hearing before the public works director or his designee. No hearing shall be necessary if the customer does not request a hearing in writing. Upon such request, the public works director or his designee shall, as soon as practicable, fix a day and time for the administrative hearing. In any event, all disputes shall be heard by the public works director or his designee before the customer's service is discontinued. The hearing shall offer the customer reasonable opportunity to be heard on any dispute concerning the amount of his bill or any other matter relating to the termination of the customer's service. The customer may appear at the hearing in person or through a designated representative. The final decision of the public works director or his designee shall be made in writing, and a copy of the decision shall be delivered to the customer either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the decision shall be to terminate the customer's service, the date of termination shall be stated therein. All such decisions shall be final and binding upon the parties, subject, however, to such remedies as any aggrieved party might have in law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 4-16, 11-13-2018)
 
Secs. 22-82—22-105. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 22-106. Solid waste fees established.
There are established for the collection, hauling and disposal of acceptable solid waste by the city fees, rates and charges as prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 5-1, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-107. Billing procedures.
Billing for garbage service will be due and payable during the month in which service is rendered. Statements will be mailed by the city water works and sewer board on its regular billing for water and sewer. Payment shall be made to the city water works and sewer board located at 3001 Highway 77, Southside, Alabama, 35907. If there are persons or firms that are not customers of the city water works and sewer board, a separate billing will be made by them. All late fees and interest incurred by the non-timely payment of garbage fees shall be payable to the city water works and sewer board. Any person who fails to pay the garbage fees as billed by city water works and sewer board shall be incurred a late fee and/or interest as set forth by the city water works and sewer board policy regarding late payments. All garbage collection late fees and/or interest paid by customers shall be retained by the city water works and sewer board for expenses incurred during the collection process. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 5-2, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-108. Service charges and fees mandatory.
(a)	Service charges for the availability of solid waste collection services are mandatory. Failure to pay the charges prescribed in this article shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be unlawful. Solid waste collection service, as provided for in this chapter, is mandatory for all residential premises, occupants or persons in the city upon which garbage or other refuse or rubbish is produced or accumulated and the occupant or other persons, as the case may be, shall pay to the city, in accordance with the provisions of this article, monthly service charges for solid waste collection services rendered or made available by the city for the collection of garbage and other refuse from such premises. 
(b)	No person, occupant, family unit or other entity that is required by this chapter to receive and pay for garbage collection services by the city as herein provided shall be permitted to refuse such services by the city and the failure of any person, occupant or other entity to receive such service by reason of such refusal or otherwise shall not exempt any of the aforesaid from payment of the service charges or fees provided for in this article; provided, however, that such mandatory service and fees shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Commercial, nonresidential and industrial premises utilizing the services of a private solid waste collection firm duly licensed and permitted under this chapter. 
(2)	A household, business or any property owner having obtained a certificate of exemption pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-3 or amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 5-3, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-109. Duty to pay when contractor fails to render service.
The failure of the contractor to collect garbage or other refuse from any premises, which failure results from the violation, by the owner or occupant of such premises, of any provision of this article or any rule or regulation of the governing body governing the storage, preparation, handling or disposal of garbage and other refuse, shall not relieve such owner or occupant of the duty to pay the garbage service charges imposed by this article; nor shall an inadvertent or temporary failure or omission on the part of the contractor or any of its employees to make any collection of garbage or refuse relieve any person from the duty to pay such charges. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 5-4, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-110. Deductions not allowed for interruption of service beyond contractor's control.
No deduction for monthly charges provided for in this article shall be made or allowed by reason of any failure of the contractor to make collection of garbage as frequently as provided, due to anything beyond the control of the contractor or due to stoppage of work by employees of the contractor or due to weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 5-5, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-111. Delinquencies; discontinuance of service for nonpayment.
Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-5(e), or other applicable law, if the fees, charges and rates imposed by this article for garbage and refuse services of the city are not paid within 90 days after the same shall be due and payable, the city may, at the expiration of said 90-day period, suspend such services and may proceed to recover the amount of such delinquency with interest in a civil action. The city public works department shall give the customer at least five days' written notice of its intention to discontinue service. After the lapse of the period specified in the written notice, notwithstanding any deposit referred to in section 22-157, if the account has not been paid in full, the city public works department may then discontinue service without further notice. At any time prior to 4:30 p.m. on the day preceding the discontinuance of service date, the customer may request in writing an administrative hearing pursuant to the provisions of section 22-81(c). The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of section 22-81(c). 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 5-6, 11-13-2018)
 
Secs. 22-112—22-135. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. RESIDENTIAL SERVICE CHARGES
 
Sec. 22-136. Residential charges and fees.
(a)	For each single and multifamily residential dwelling unit, there is a mandatory minimum charge which will be set forth in the contract awarded by the city to the vendor for the collection of residential garbage. A copy of the effective contract will be maintained by the city and the public works department. The effective rate shall be paid monthly to the city water and sewer board by every residential customer for the collection, hauling and disposing of refuse. The city water and sewer board will remit collected payments to the city. 
(b)	Changes in the residential charges and fees may occur pursuant to the schedule contained in the effective contract or with the negotiation of a new contract. The city will announce any changes in the effective rate before the change occurs. 
(c)	Additional 95-gallon refuse carts may be requested and/or required for the second and each additional such refuse cart. Residential charges for the additional cart shall be a per month charge. The per month charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 5-7, 11-13-2018)
 
Secs. 22-137—22-155. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS CHARGES AND SERVICES
 
Sec. 22-156. Commercial and business charges and fees.
The city does not offer collection services to commercial, business or other nonresidential premises. All nonresidential premises must subscribe to a garbage collection system provided by a private commercial collection firm, as set forth in section 22-45. 
(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 5-8, 11-13-2018)
 
Sec. 22-157. Miscellaneous rates and charges.
There is hereby adopted by the city the following schedule of miscellaneous rates and charges: 
Miscellaneous Rates and Charges
Failure to remove refuse cart or container from curb as prescribed in sections 22-66(b) and 22-70	$10.00 service charge 
Failure to bag grass, shrubbery clippings or loose trash as prescribed in section 22-73(3) 	$10.00 service charge 
Excess volumes of trash as prescribed by sections 22-71 and 22-78	$40.00 service charge 
Removal of trash and bulky items from commercial and nonresidential premises on as-needed basis as prescribed by section 22-74(d). Quotes will be given on loads less than a full load 	$75.00/load plus disposal charges 

(Ord. No. 0-006-2018, § 5-9, 11-13-2018)
 
Chapter 24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
 
Sec. 24-1. General provisions.
(a)	Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to: 
(1)	Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the city and the public health, safety and the general welfare of the citizens of the city, by controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the city. 
(2)	Enable the city to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and applicable regulations, 40 CFR 122.26, for stormwater discharges. 
(3)	Allow the city to exercise the powers granted in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-89C-1 et seq., pursuant to Act No. 97-931. 
(b)	Administering entity. The departments of building, zoning and engineering of the city shall administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § I, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
As built plan means drawings depicting conditions as they were actually constructed. 
Best management practices orBMPs means physical, structural, and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water, that have been approved by the city and that have been incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set out therein. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically. 
Community water means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the city. 
Contaminant means any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water. 
Design storm event means a hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency interval and duration, used in the analysis and design of a stormwater facility. 
Discharge means to dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means, including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Easement means an acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person, party, firm, corporation, city or other legal entity has in the land of another. 
Erosion means the removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction with or promoted by anthropogenic activities or effects. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a written plan (including drawings or other graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
Hot spot (priority area) means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Illicit connection means illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the municipal separate stormwater system whether or not such connections result in discharges into that system. 
Illicit discharge means any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically exempted under section 24-3(c). 
Land disturbing activity means any activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography on property. Land disturbing activities include, but are not limited to, development, re-development, demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation. 
Maintenance means any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in good working order so as to function as designed. The term "maintenance" includes complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters. The term "maintenance" also includes the correction of any problem on the site property that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility. 
Maintenance agreement means a document recorded in the land records that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), municipal separate stormwater system means the conveyances owned or operated by the city for the collection and transportation of stormwater, including the roads and streets and their drainage systems, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm drains. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit orNPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to 33 USC 1342. 
Off-site facility means a structural BMP located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
On-site facility means a structural BMP located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
Peak flow means the maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular point resulting from a storm event. 
Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm or association and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
Priority area means a hot spot as defined in this section. 
Runoff means that portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is discharged from the area into the municipal separate stormwater system. 
Sediment means solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below sea level. 
Sedimentation means soil particles suspended in stormwater that can settle in streambeds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream. 
Soils report means a study of soils on a subject property with the primary purpose of characterizing and describing the soils. The soils report shall be prepared by a qualified soils engineer, who shall be directly involved in the soil characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly supervising employees. 
Stabilization means providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that will prevent erosion from occurring. 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff, street wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration and drainage. 
Stormwater management means the programs to maintain the quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels. 
Stormwater management facilities mean the drainage structures, conduits, ditches, combined sewers, sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of which stormwater is collected, transported, pumped, treated or disposed of. 
Stormwater management plan means the set of drawings and other documents that comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels. 
Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
Structural BMPs means devices that are constructed to provide control of stormwater runoff. 
Surface water includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially, including, but not limited to, streams, other watercourses, lakes and reservoirs. 
Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
Watershed means all the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point along a waterway. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § II, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-3. Land disturbance permits.
(a)	When required. Every person will be required to obtain a land disturbance permit from the city unless the activity disturbs less than one acre of land. A land disturbance permit is required for all land disturbance activity, regardless of the size of the area disturbed, which occurs within a subdivision development with waterfront property or within a defined floodway. 
(b)	Building permit. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained a land disturbance permit where the same is required by this chapter. 
(c)	Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the permit requirement: 
(1)	Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
(2)	Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(3)	Any logging or agricultural activity that is consistent with an approved farm conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the state department of environmental management. 
(4)	Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures. 
(d)	Application for a land disturbance permit.
(1)	Each application shall include the following: 
a.	Name of applicant; 
b.	Business or residence address of applicant; 
c.	Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property of record in the office of the assessor of property; 
d.	Address and legal description of subject property including the tax reference number and parcel number of the subject property; 
e.	Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any subcontractor who shall perform the land disturbing activity and who shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan; 
f.	A statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land disturbing activity including the size of the area for which the permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land disturbing activity; 
g.	Where the property includes a sinkhole, the applicant shall obtain from the state department of environmental management appropriate permits; 
h.	The applicant shall obtain from any other state or federal agency any other appropriate environmental permits that pertain to the property. However, the inclusion of those permits in the application shall not foreclose the city from imposing additional development requirements and conditions, commensurate with this chapter, on the development of property covered by those permits. 
(2)	Each application shall be accompanied by: 
a.	A sediment and erosion control plan as described in section 24-5(e). 
b.	A stormwater management plan as described in section 24-5(d), providing for stormwater management during the land disturbing activity and after the activity has been completed. 
c.	Each application for a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied by payment of a land disturbance permit in an amount as determined from time to time by the mayor and city council, and such other stormwater management fees as may be set by resolution. 
(e)	Review and approval of application.
(1)	The city will review each application for a land disturbance permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the city shall provide one of the following responses in writing: 
a.	Approval of the permit application; 
b.	Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
c.	Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason for the denial. 
(2)	If the city has granted conditional approval of the permit, the applicant shall submit a revised plan that conforms to the conditions established by the city. However, the applicant shall be allowed to proceed with his land disturbing activity so long as it conforms to conditions established by the city. 
(3)	No development plans will be released until the land disturbance permit has been approved. 
(f)	Permit duration. Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced within 180 calendar days of issuance, or is not complete within 18 months from the date of the commencement of construction. 
(g)	Notice of construction. The applicant must notify the city ten working days in advance of the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by a QCI (qualified credentialed inspector) provided by the contractor. Erosion control measures shall be inspected according to program requirements after any rainfall event in excess of three-fourths of an inch during a 24-hour period. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)	The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)	Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)	Variations from the approved construction specifications; 
(4)	Any violations that exist. 
(h)	Performance bonds.
(1)	The city may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or performance bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security or performance bond shall be the total estimated construction cost of the structural BMPs approved under the permit plus any reasonably foreseeable additional related costs, e.g., for damages or enforcement. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. The applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate complete with unit prices which shall be subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the city. Alternatively the city shall have the right to calculate the cost of construction cost estimates. 
(2)	The performance security or performance bond shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state that the structural BMP has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this chapter. The city will make a final inspection of the structural BMP to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this chapter. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security or performance bond based on the completion of various development stages can be made at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § III, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-4. Waivers.
(a)	General. Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this chapter, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the city for approval. 
(b)	Conditions for waiver. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
(1)	It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter. 
(2)	Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the city. 
(3)	Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility must be in place and designed to provide the level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices. Further, the facility must be operated and maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to continue the operation and maintenance of the facility. 
(c)	Downstream damage, etc., prohibited. In order to receive a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the waiver will not lead to any of the following conditions downstream: 
(1)	Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(2)	Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
(3)	Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)	Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property. 
(d)	Land disturbance permit not to be issued where waiver requested. No land disturbance permit shall be issued where a waiver has been requested until the waiver is granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must be resubmitted with a stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § IV, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-5. Stormwater system design and management standards.
(a)	Stormwater design or BMP manual.
(1)	Adoption. The city adopts as its stormwater design and best management practices (BMP) manual the 2009 Alabama Handbook for Erosion Control, Sediment Control, and Stormwater Management on Construction Sites and Urban Areas, prepared by the state department of environmental management. The handbook is incorporated by reference in this section as if fully set out herein. 
(2)	This manual includes a list of acceptable BMPs including the specific design performance criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the city council, upon the recommendation of the chief building official, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with these BMP criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(b)	General performance criteria for stormwater management. Unless granted a waiver or judged by the city to be exempt, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)	All site designs shall control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with design storms of two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year intensity and reduce the generation of post construction stormwater runoff to pre-construction levels. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)	To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the BMP manual. 
(3)	Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(4)	Stormwater discharges from hot spots may require the application of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices. 
(5)	Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for land disturbance permits shall consult with the city to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(6)	The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the BMP manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater facilities. 
(c)	Minimum control requirements.
(1)	Stormwater designs shall meet the multi-stage storm frequency storage requirements as identified in the BMP manual unless the city has granted the applicant a full or partial waiver for a particular BMP under section 24-4. 
(2)	If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(d)	Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to allow the city to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. To accomplish this goal the stormwater management plan shall include the following: 
(1)	Topographic base map. A scale no greater than one-inch equals 100 feet topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 50 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates: 
a.	Existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, sink holes, wetlands and the type, size, elevation, etc., of nearest upstream and downstream drainage structures; 
b.	Current land use, including all existing structures, locations of utilities, roads, and easements; 
c.	All other existing significant natural and artificial features; 
d.	Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, drainage patterns, locations of utilities, roads and easements and the limits of clearing and grading; 
e.	Proposed structural BMPs; 
f.	A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
(2)	Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in the BMP manual. These calculations must show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter and the guidelines of the BMP manual. Such calculations shall include: 
a.	A description of the design storm frequency, duration, and intensity where applicable; 
b.	Time of concentration; 
c.	Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including assumed soil moisture conditions; 
d.	Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; 
e.	Infiltration rates, where applicable; 
f.	Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other stormwater conveyance capacities; 
g.	Flow velocities; 
h.	Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the BMP manual; and 
i.	Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(3)	Soils information. If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
(4)	Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued performance. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. A permanent elevation benchmark shall be identified in the plans to assist in the periodic inspection of the facility. 
(5)	Landscaping plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. Where it is required by the BMP, this plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect licensed in the state. 
(6)	Maintenance easements. The applicant must ensure access to the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed. These easements must be binding on the current property owner and all subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded in the land record. 
(7)	Maintenance agreement. The owner of property to be served by an on-site stormwater management facility must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement that shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the current property owner and all subsequent property owners. 
a.	The maintenance agreement shall: 
1.	Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater facility to the owner of the property upon which the facility is located and be recorded as such on the plat for the property by appropriate notation. 
2.	Provide for a periodic inspection by the property owner for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the purpose and requirements of this chapter. The property owner will arrange for this inspection to be conducted by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state who will submit a sealed report of the inspection to the city. It shall also grant permission to the city to enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the stormwater facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained. 
3.	Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include, but are not limited to, the removal of silt, litter and other debris, the cutting of grass, grass cuttings and vegetation removal, and the replacement of landscape vegetation, in detention and retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes and any other stormwater facilities. It shall also provide that the property owner shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the BMP manual. 
4.	Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner, on a schedule to be determined by the city. 
5.	Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within the prescribed schedule, the city shall perform the maintenance and repair at its expense and bill the same to the property owner. The maintenance agreement shall also provide that the city's cost of performing the maintenance shall be a lien against the property. 
b.	The city shall have the discretion to accept the dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets the requirements of this chapter, and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient areas, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. Any stormwater facility accepted by the city must also meet the city's construction standards and any other standards and specifications that apply to the particular stormwater facility in question. 
(8)	Sediment and erosion control plans. The applicant must prepare a sediment and erosion control plan for all construction activities that complies with subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)	Sediment and erosion control plan requirements. The sediment and erosion control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and potential for off-site damage. The plan shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the state. The plan shall also conform to the requirements found in the BMP manual, and shall include at least the following: 
(1)	Project description. Briefly describe the intended project and proposed land disturbing activity including number of units and structures to be constructed and infrastructure required. 
(2)	A topographic map with contour intervals of two feet or less showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing activity. 
(3)	All existing drainageways, including intermittent and wet weather, including any designated floodways or floodplains. 
(4)	A general description of existing land cover. Individual trees and shrubs do not need to be identified. 
(5)	Stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved upon project completion, specifying their general location on the property. Differentiation shall be made between existing trees to be preserved, trees to be removed and proposed planted trees. Tree protection measures must be identified, and the diameter of the area involved must also be identified on the plan and shown to scale. Information shall be supplied concerning the proposed destruction of exceptional and historic trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist. Complete landscape plans may be submitted separately. The plan must include the sequence of implementation for tree protection measures. 
(6)	Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling. 
(7)	Approximate flows of existing stormwater leaving any portion of the site. 
(8)	A general description of existing soil types and characteristics and any anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from existing characteristics. 
(9)	Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation control improvements. 
(10)	Proposed drainage network. 
(11)	Proposed drain tile or waterway sizes. 
(12)	Approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating water run-off mitigation measures. The evaluation must include projected effects on property adjoining the site and on existing drainage facilities and systems. The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the development: when water is concentrated, what is the capacity of waterways, if any, accepting stormwater off-site; and what measures, including infiltration, sheeting into buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the scouring of waterways and drainage areas off-site, etc. 
(13)	The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage and sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other major items of construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and including the construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or any other structural BMPs. 
(14)	Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation run-off. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used; stabilization measures including vegetation and nonvegetation measures, both temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a maintenance schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan. 
(15)	Specific details for the construction of rock pads, wash down pads, and settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points; eliminating or keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at a level acceptable to the city. Soil, sediment, and debris brought onto streets and public ways must be removed by the end of the workday by machine, broom or shovel to the satisfaction of the city. Failure to remove the sediment, soil or debris shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(16)	Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures or development on the site. 
(17)	A description of on-site measures to be taken to recharge surface water into the groundwater system through infiltration. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § V, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-6. Post construction.
(a)	As-built plans. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any structures located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. A final inspection by the city is required before any performance security or performance bond will be released. The city shall have the discretion to adopt provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security or performance bond on the completion of various stages of development. In addition, occupation permits shall not be granted until corrections to all BMPs have been made and accepted by the city. 
(b)	Landscaping and stabilization requirements.
(1)	Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared by present or past development activities shall be revegetated according to a schedule approved by the city. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts: 
a.	All sites shall have at least ten percent green vegetated areas. 
b.	Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over 90 percent of the seeded area. 
c.	Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
d.	Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of 75 percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum 75 percent survival for one year is achieved. 
(2)	In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(c)	Inspection of stormwater management facilities. Periodic inspections of facilities shall be performed as provided for in section 24-5(d)(7)a.2. 
(d)	Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of all maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at least 13 years after substantial completion of the stormwater facility. These records shall be made available to the city during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(e)	Failure to meet or maintain design or maintenance standards. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards required for stormwater facilities under this section, the city, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify in writing the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 14 calendar days, or such additional time as the city engineer shall determine to be reasonably necessary to complete the action, to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective action is not undertaken within that time, the city may take necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the city under this section shall be charged to the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § VI, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-7. Existing locations and developments.
(a)	Requirements for all existing locations and developments. The following requirements shall apply to all locations and development at which land disturbing activities have occurred subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived: 
(1)	Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and guidelines specified in the BMP manual and on a schedule acceptable to the city. 
(2)	Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation and/or retaining walls constructed. 
(3)	Drainageways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with rip-rap, channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion. 
(4)	Trash, junk, rubbish, etc., shall be cleared from drainageways. 
(5)	Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to prevent pollution of local waters. Current control measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.	Ponds.
1.	Detention pond. 
2.	Extended detention pond. 
3.	Wet pond. 
4.	Alternative storage measures. 
b.	Constructed wetlands.
c.	Infiltration systems.
1.	Infiltration/percolation trench. 
2.	Infiltration basin. 
3.	Drainage (recharge) well. 
4.	Porous pavement. 
d.	Filtering systems.
1.	Bio-retention area/rain garden. 
2.	Catchbasin inserts/media filter. 
3.	Sand filter. 
4.	Filter/absorption bed. 
5.	Filter and buffer strips. 
e.	Open channel.
1.	Swale. 
(b)	Requirements for existing problem locations. When the city becomes aware of a problem location, the city shall notify in writing the owners of existing locations and developments of specific drainage, erosion or sediment problem affecting such locations and developments, and the action required to correct those problems. The notice shall also specify a reasonable time for compliance. 
(c)	Inspection of existing facilities. The city may, to the extent authorized by state and federal law, establish inspection programs to verify that all stormwater management facilities, including those built before as well as after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, are functioning within design limits. These inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the city's NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other BMPs. 
(d)	Correction of problems subject to appeal. Corrective measures imposed by the city under this section are subject to appeal under section 24-11. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § VII, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-8. Illicit discharges.
(a)	Scope. This section shall apply to all water generated on developed or undeveloped land entering the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(b)	Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)	Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources: 
a.	Water line flushing or other potable water sources; 
b.	Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable water; 
c.	Diverted stream flows; 
d.	Rising groundwater; 
e.	Groundwater infiltration to storm drains; 
f.	Pumped groundwater; 
g.	Foundation or footing drains; 
h.	Crawl space pumps; 
i.	Air conditioning condensation; 
j.	Springs; 
k.	Non-commercial washing of vehicles; 
l.	Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
m.	Swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than one PPM chlorine); 
n.	Firefighting activities; and 
o.	Any other uncontaminated water source. 
(2)	Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)	Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the city has so specified in writing. 
(c)	Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1)	The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(2)	This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(d)	Reduction of stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the person's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(e)	Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials the person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify the city in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least 13 years after the release. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § VIII, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-9. Enforcement.
(a)	Enforcement authority. The departments of building, zoning, and engineering of the city shall have the authority to issue notices of violation and citations and to designate those persons who have enforcement authority. 
(b)	Notification of violation.
(1)	Written notice. Whenever an authorized employee of the departments of building, zoning and engineering of the city finds that any permittee or any other person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the employee may serve upon such person written notice of the violation. Within ten days of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the departments of building, zoning and engineering. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(2)	Consent orders. The authorized employees of the planning and engineering departments are empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (4) and (5) of this section. 
(3)	Show cause hearing. An authorized employee of the building, zoning and engineering departments may order any person who violates this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(4)	Compliance order. When an authorized employee of the building, zoning and engineering departments finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specific time period, adequate structures, devices, be installed or procedures implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring, and management practices. 
(5)	Cease and desist orders. When an authorized employee of the building, zoning and engineering departments finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the employee may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
a.	Comply forthwith; or 
b.	Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(6)	Conflicting standards. Whenever there is a conflict between any standard contained in this chapter and in the BMP manual adopted by the city under this chapter, the strictest standard shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § IX, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-10. Penalties.
(a)	Violations. Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take corrective action by the city, shall be guilty of a criminal offense. 
(b)	Penalties. Under the authority provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-9, the city declares that any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00 per day for each day of violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)	Recovery of damages and costs. The city may recover: 
(1)	All damages proximately caused by the violator to the city, which may include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and enforcing compliance with, this chapter, or any other actual damages caused by the violation; and 
(2)	The costs of the city's maintenance of stormwater facilities when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required by this chapter. 
(d)	Other remedies. The city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this chapter. The existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions. 
(e)	Remedies cumulative. The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive. It shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § X, 12-10-2012)
 
Sec. 24-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or damage assessment as provided by this chapter may appeal said penalty or damage assessment to the city council. 
(1)	Appeals to be in writing. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within 15 days after the civil penalty and/or damage assessment is served in any manner authorized by law. 
(2)	Public hearing. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city council shall hold a public hearing within 30 days. Ten days prior notice of the time, date, and location of said hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation. Ten days' notice by registered mail shall also be provided to the aggrieved party, such notice to be sent to the address provided by the aggrieved party at the time of appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(3)	Appealing decisions of the city council. Any alleged violator may contest a decision of the city council pursuant to the provisions of state law and court rules. 
(Ord. No. 0-010-2012, § XI, 12-10-2012)
 
Chapter 25 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 25-1—25-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. SMALL CELL TECHNOLOGY FACILITIES
 
Sec. 25-19. Findings.
(a)	The city council seeks to facilitate the availability of reliable, personal wireless services for its citizens and the public by permitting the placement of small cell technology facilities and associated support structures along the rights-of-way and on private properties in the city. 
(b)	The installation, expansion, and maintenance of small cell technology facilities and associated structures on or along the rights-of-way and on private properties might have significant impact upon: 
(1)	The aesthetic values and historical character of the city; 
(2)	Safe use and passage on or along the rights-of-way by the public; and 
(3)	Properties and property values in the city in areas where such structures are placed. 
(c)	The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (the "Act") and regulations promulgated with respect to the Act by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) authorize local governments to enact responsible regulations for the placement, expansion, height, and maintenance of small cell technologies facilities and associated support structures. 
(d)	As provided in this article, the city seeks to mandate, where feasible, the co-location of small cell technology facilities on existing poles and other support structures as opposed to installation of new structures. 
(e)	The above-noted co-location and other provisions of this article are intended to be consistent with the Act and its associated regulation. 
(f)	The adoption of the regulations, procedures, and requirements in this article will permit applicants and providers to enhance the provision of personal wireless service and protect the public welfare, health, safety and interests of the city's citizens. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2020, intro. ¶, 4-13-2020)
 
Sec. 25-20. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment orabandon means that, following the placement of small cell technologies facilities and associated accessory equipment or support structures in the city pursuant to a permit issued to a provider or an applicant, any of the following has occurred: 
(1)	For any reason the facilities cease to be used to transmit signals, data or messages or otherwise ceases to be used for their intended purposes for a period of 90 days; 
(2)	The city revokes the permit for placement and use of those facilities due to nonpayment of applicable fees, the failure of the provider or applicant to comply with conditions in the permit or in this article concerning them or other valid reason; or 
(3)	The provider or applicant fails to perform any of the responsibilities, obligations and requirements in this article or in a permit that relate to the installation, construction, maintenance, use or operation of the facilities, accessory equipment or support structures and that breach remains uncured for a period of 60 days after the city provides written notice of the breach to the provider or applicant. 
Accessory equipment means any equipment other than an antenna that is used in conjunction with small cell technology facility arrangements to offer or provide personal wireless services. Accessory equipment may be attached to or detached from a small cell technology wireless support structure, and includes, but is not limited to, cabinets, optical converters, power amplifiers, radios, DWDM and CWDM multiplexers, microcells, radio units, fiber optic and coaxial cables, wires, meters, pedestals, power switches, and related equipment on or in the immediate vicinity of a support structure. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals, is attached to a small cell technology wireless support structure and is used to communicate wireless service. 
Applicant means a personal wireless service provider, an entity that is authorized by a personal wireless service provider to apply for or receive a permit to install, construct, modify or maintain a small cell technology facility and related accessory equipment or support structure in the city, or an entity certificated by the state public service commission to provide telecommunication service. 
Application means a formal request submitted by a personal wireless service provider, provider, or entity authorized by a personal wireless service provider or provider, to the city for a permit to install, construct, modify or maintain a small cell technology facility and related accessory equipment or support structure. 
City engineer means the person appointed by the city council as the city engineer of the city. The city engineer includes any employee of the city or other person designated by the city council to perform the responsibilities of this article. 
Co-location means the placement or installation of a new small cell wireless technology facility or related accessory equipment on an existing pole or other support structure that is owned, controlled or leased by a utility, the city or other person or entity. 
Personal wireless service provider orprovider means an entity that provides personal wireless services, as defined in 47USC 332, to the public or citizens of the city on a commercial basis and is authorized by the FCC to provide those services. 
Private property means real property located within the corporate limits of the city that does not lie within the right-of-way. 
Provider. See Personal wireless service provider.
Right-of-way means the surface and space in, upon, above, along, across, over and below any public streets, avenues, highways, roads, courts, lanes, alleys, boulevards, ways, sidewalks and bicycle lanes, including all public utility easements and public service easements within those places, as the same now or may hereafter exist, that are within the city's corporate boundaries and under the jurisdiction of the city. The term "right-of-way" shall not include county, state, or federal rights-of-way or any property owned by any person or entity other than the city. 
Small cell technology facility orfacilities means and includes the following types of structures when used to offer or provide personal wireless services: 
(1)	Antenna; and 
(2)	Associated accessory equipment. 
Small cell technology wireless support structure, support structure or structure means a freestanding structure designed or used to support or capable of supporting small cell technology facilities, including, but not limited to, electric utility distribution poles, street light poles, traffic signal structures, rooftops, attics, or other enclosed or open areas of a building or accessory structure, a sign, or a flag pole. The terms "small cell technology support structure," "support structure" or "structure" do not include any electric utility transmission poles, or decorative and architecturally significant streetlight poles that are inappropriate for use as a support structure as determined by the city engineer. 
Stealth technology means one or more methods of concealing or minimizing the visual impact of a small cell technology facility (and associated accessory equipment) and support structure by incorporating features or design elements which either totally or partially conceal such facilities or equipment. The use of these design elements is intended to produce the result of having said facilities and associated structures blend into the surrounding environment and/or disguise, shield, hide or create the appearance that the facilities architectural component of the support structure. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2020, § 1, 4-13-2020)
 
Sec. 25-21. Permit required to place small cell technology facilities in rights-of-way.
(a)	A provider or applicant must obtain a permit from the city before placing, installing, or constructing any small cell technology facility (and associated accessory equipment) on any support structure that is located on the right-of-way, or substantially modifying the position or characteristics of any such existing facility thereon. 
(b)	The city engineer will review and administratively process any request for a permit to determine whether, in the exercise of the city engineer's reasonable discretion, it should be issued for the location and in the manner requested by the applicant. In this process, the burden is on the provider or applicant to demonstrate that the placement of the proposed small cell technology facility and associated accessory equipment or support structure on the right-of-way is the minimal physical installation which will achieve the goal of enhancing the provision of personal wireless service when considering all pertinent factors discussed in this section. Except as set forth in this section, this permitting process will be administrative and not require the approval of any city board or city official other than the city engineer. The factors, requirements and guidelines that the city engineer may consider and will apply when determining whether to issue a permit for placement of small cell technology facilities and associated structure on the right-of-way include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	The demonstrated need for placing the structures at the requested location and geographic area in order to deliver or enhance personal wireless service; 
(2)	The visual impact of placing the support structure or facilities in the subject area; 
(3)	The character of the area in which the structures are requested, including surrounding buildings, properties, and uses; 
(4)	Whether the appearance and placement of the requested structures is aesthetically consistent with the immediate area; 
(5)	Whether the structures are consistent with the historic nature and characteristics of the requested location; 
(6)	The applicant's or provider's network coverage objective and whether the applicant or provider should use available or previously unconsidered alternative locations to place the support structures or facilities; 
(7)	Co-location. To the extent practical, all facilities and associated accessory equipment that are placed in the city shall be attached to a preexisting support structure that is owned, controlled or leased by a utility, franchisee, the city or other entity. If the applicant demonstrates that no co-location opportunities exist in the area where a technologically documented need for a facility exists, the applicant may request that a new pole or other support structure be installed in that area for purposes of constructing the facilities. Before any new support structure is permitted, each of the following must occur: 
a.	The applicant must have provided the city written evidence that no practical co-location opportunity exists. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, affidavits, correspondence, or other written information that demonstrates that the applicant has taken all commercially reasonable actions to achieve co-location in the requested location or area, that the applicant has perused but been denied access to all potential co-location sites in the subject area (and the reasons for any such denial), and otherwise show that the applicant is unable to co-locate on an existing support structure; 
b.	The city engineer must recommend the placement of a new support structure in the right-of-way; and 
c.	The city council must approve the recommendation of the city engineer to issue a permit that includes the placement of a new support structure in the right-of-way. The city council will consider whether to approve any such new structures at a regular council meeting that will be conducted as soon as practical after the city engineer's recommendation is made; 
(8)	If a facility is attached to a utility pole or other support structure in the right-of-way, no antenna or other part of the facility shall extend more than five feet above the height of that structure, provided that, in the event that the applicant demonstrates that National Electrical Safety Code regulations or other factors create an undue hardship in complying with this height requirement, the city engineer may permit a facility to extend up to ten feet above the height of such support structure; 
(9)	The accessory equipment shall, if reasonably possible, be placed at least ten feet above the ground; 
(10)	The color of antenna and accessory equipment shall be compatible with that of the support structure; 
(11)	The facility (including the accessory equipment) shall not be illuminated; 
(12)	Whether the proposed installation could cause harm to the public or pose any undue risk to public safety; 
(13)	Whether the proposed installation may interfere with vehicular traffic, passage of pedestrians, or other use of the right-of-way by the public; and 
(14)	If the proposed installation will disturb conditions on the right-of-way, whether the applicant can demonstrate its ability and financial resources to restore the subject area to its pre-existing condition following installation. 
(c)	Application process. 
(1)	At a minimum, each application for a permit shall contain all of the following: 
a.	Engineering drawings depicting the type of facilities, support structure, and means and points at which such facilities and associated accessory equipment will be attached to a support structure. 
b.	Maps designating with specificity the locations of the requested facilities. 
c.	If the facilities will be located on a support structure on the right-of-way that is owned by any entity other than the city or the applicant, a copy of any license, lease, agreement or other documentation evidencing that the owner of that support structure authorizes the facilities to be attached thereto or agrees in principle to authorize that attachment, provided that if a representation is made to the city that the attachment has been authorized in principle by the owner of the support structure but the applicant subsequently fails to furnish the city documentation that finalizes any such agreement, the city may refuse to issue the requested permit until that documentation is provided, or, if the city issues the requested permit before receiving such final documentation, the subject permit may be revoked and any license to use that part of the right-of-way be rescinded. 
d.	If the applicant requests permission to place facilities on a new support structure, the substantiation therefor required by subsection (b)(7) of this section. 
e.	An application shall not be deemed complete until the applicant has submitted all documents, information, forms and fees specifically enumerated in this article that pertain to the location, construction, or configuration of the facilities or support structures at the requested location. Within 30 calendar days after an application for permit is submitted, the city shall notify the applicant in writing if any additional information is needed to complete that application or supplemental information is required to process the request. If the city does not notify the applicant in writing that the application is incomplete within 30 days following its receipt, the application is deemed complete. 
(2)	Time for processing application. Unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the city and the applicant, the city will have the following time periods to make its final decision to approve or disapprove an application for a permit required by this article and advise the applicant in writing of that determination: 
a.	Sixty calendar days from the date an application for a permit is filed with respect to a request to co-locate facilities on an existing support structure. 
b.	Ninety calendar days from the date an application for a permit is filed with respect to a request to attach facilities to a new support structure. 
c.	To the extent additional information is required to complete the application after it is filed, the applicable calendar day review period set forth in this subsection shall be tolled and not continue to run until the applicant has provided any missing or requested supplemental information, provided that tolling shall not occur if the city does not advise the applicant in writing of the incompleteness of a submitted application within 30 days after that submission. 
(3)	Reconsideration/appeal. Any applicant that desires reconsideration of an administrative diction by the city engineer to deny a request for a permit to place a facility or support structure on the right-of-way may seek review, modification or reversal of that decision by the city council by submitting a request for reconsideration with the city clerk within 21 calendar days following the city engineer's decision. That request for reconsideration will be considered by the city council at a regular council meeting that will be conducted as soon as practical after the request for reconsideration is made. If no request of reconsideration is submitted, the decision of the city engineer will be final. Additionally, the applicant, within 30 days following a decision by the city council to deny either a request for reconsideration or a decision by city council to not approve the placement of a new support structure on the right-of-way, may appeal either of those decisions by the city council to the circuit court of the county, as applicable. If no appeal of those decisions of the city council is made, those will be deemed final. 
(d)	Additional requirements. Any provider or applicant to whom a permit is issued and that places facilities and associated support structures on the right-of-way shall also comply with the following requirements as long as those facilities and support structures are on or under the right-of-way: 
(1)	Prior to installing the facilities or support structures, the applicant shall provide the city a certificate of insurance evidencing that it has obtained and will maintain the following types of insurance in connection with its operations on or use of the right-of-way: 
a.	General liability coverage insuring the risk of claims for damages to persons or property arising from or related to the installation, construction, maintenance, operation or any use of the facility or support structure placed on or along the right-of-way by the applicant (or any of their contractors) with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
b.	Workers compensation insurance as required by statute. 
c.	The general liability coverage shall list the city as an additional insured and may be provided through a combination of a primary and umbrella policies. All insurance policies shall be furnished by insurers who are reasonably acceptable to the city and authorized to transact business in the state. On an annual basis following initial installation, the applicant also shall furnish the city a certificate indicating that the above-noted coverage remains and will remain in effect. The city shall allow the applicant to provide a certificate of self-insurance in lieu of these provisions and must affirm adequate financial security on the part of the self-insured entity. 
(2)	All facilities and associated support structures shall be installed, erected, maintained and operated in compliance with applicable federal and state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, regulations of the FCC. 
(3)	Following the installation of any facilities and associated support structures, the provider or applicant, upon reasonable request and for good cause, shall furnish the city engineer a written certification from a licensed professional engineer in the state stating that those structures have been inspected and are being maintained, operated and used in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, including those of the FCC that pertain to the transmission of wireless communication signals. For purposes of this subsection, the term "good cause" means circumstances have arisen that indicate the facilities and associated support structures have been damaged, are not functioning in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, or otherwise pose a hazard to the public. If those support structures should fail at any time to comply with applicable laws and regulation, the provider or applicant, at either of their expense, shall cause those structures to be brought into compliance with said laws and regulations within 15 days of the date of any written notice to them from the city engineer of non-compliance, or cease all personal wireless service operations related to those structures until the applicant or provider comes into full compliance with said laws and regulations. 
(4)	The facilities and associated support structures must at all times be maintained in good and safe condition. On no more frequent than a triennial basis, the city engineer may request that the provider or applicant, at either of their expense, furnish certification from a professional engineer who is licensed in the state that the facilities and support structures are in sound condition. Should that engineer deem those structures unsound, the provider or applicant shall furnish to the city engineer a plan to remedy any unsafe conditions or structural defect and take that remedial action at the provider or applicant's expense. 
(5)	Each applicant or provider that applies for a permit to place facilities (including the accessory equipment) and support structures on the right-of-way and installs and utilizes those structures shall defend, indemnify and hold the city and its employees or officials, harmless from all demands, losses, expenses (including attorney's fees and court costs), claims for personal injury or property damage, judgments or liabilities of any type that may be asserted or claimed against the city (or its employees or officials) by any third person, firm or entity that arise out of or relate in any manner to the following: 
a.	The installation, construction, maintenance, use or operation of the permitted facilities, accessory equipment or any support structure on or about the right-of-way; and 
b.	The failure of the provider or applicant to perform any of their respective responsibilities, obligations, and permit requirements in this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provider or applicant shall not be obligated to indemnity the city for claims resulting from the sole negligence or willful acts of the city or its representatives. 
(e)	Permit and license fees. The applicant for a permit to place facilities and associated support structures on the right-of-way shall pay the following types of fees: 
(1)	An application and review fee to be paid in an amount as determined by the mayor and city council from time to time, when an application is submitted for: 
a.	Permits for the placement of communications facilities that are not poles; and 
b.	Permits for the placement of communications facilities that are poles. 
(2)	An annual license fee in an amount as determined by the mayor and city council from to time shall be as follows: 
a.	For new provider poles or ground mountings and any communications facilities initially installed thereon by provider, per year, per permit; 
b.	For attachments of communications facilities to third-party poles, per year, per permit; and 
c.	For communications facilities installed on any city-owned structure per site, per year, per permit. 
(f)	Removal, relocation or modification of small wireless facility in the right-of-way. 
(1)	Notice to remove, relocate or modify. Whenever the city reasonably determines that the relocation is needed as described in this subsection, then within 90 days following written notice from the city, the applicant shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any small wireless facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the city has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for (excluding beautification only projects), as follows: 
a.	The construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way; 
b.	If required for the construction, completion, repair, relocation, or maintenance of a city improvement or project in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way; 
c.	Because the small cell facility or its related equipment is interfering with or adversely affecting proper operation of any city-owned light poles, traffic signals, or other equipment in the public way; and/or 
d.	To protect or preserve the public health or safety. 
In any such case, the city shall use its best efforts to afford the applicant a reasonably equivalent alternate location. If the applicant shall fail to relocate any equipment as requested by the city within a reasonable time under the circumstances in accordance with this subsection, the city shall be entitled to relocate the equipment at the applicant's sole cost and expense, without further notice to the applicant. The applicant agrees that decorative streetlight poles may be required by the city in the future in the place of initially installed standard-design streetlight poles, in which replacement of the applicant's facilities and equipment on decorative streetlights that were initially installed standard-design streetlight poles shall be solely at the applicant's cost. Further, the applicant agrees that in such instances and at such time as replacement poles are installed, the city may reasonably require that the configuration and/or location of ground furniture (which references any equipment on the ground that is needed to supply power or backhaul services to the small cell facility) and/or pole-mounted equipment or equipment cages be changed (such as changing from pole-mounted equipment cages to ground furniture), in the discretion of the city. 
(2)	Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any small wireless facility or related structure located within the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall notify the applicant and provide the applicant an opportunity to move its own facilities, if possible, prior to cutting electrical service or removing a facility and shall notify the wireless provider after cutting or removing a small wireless facility. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2020, § 2, 4-13-2020)
 
Sec. 25-22. Placement of small cell technology facilities on private property.
(a)	A provider or applicant must obtain a permit from the city before placing, installing, or constructing any small cell technology facility and associated accessory equipment on any support structure that is located on private property, or substantially modifying the position or characteristics of any such existing facility thereon. 
(b)	The city engineer will review and administratively process any request for a permit to determine whether, in the exercise of the city engineer's reasonable discretion, it should be issued for the location and in the manner requested. In this process, the burden is on the applicant to demonstrate that the placement of the proposed small cell technology facility and associated accessory equipment or support structure on private property is the minimal physical installation which will achieve the technological goal of enhancing the provision of personal wireless services. Except as set forth in this section, this permitting process will not require the approval of any city board or city official other than the city engineer. The factors, guidelines and requirements that the city engineer may consider and will apply when determining whether to issue a permit for placement of facilities and any associated accessory equipment or support structure on private property include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	The factors and requirements set forth in section 25-21. 
(2)	Co-location. The guidelines in section 25-21 to utilize existing poles and support structures for the placement of facilities and accessory equipment are also applicable when considering whether to permit the installation of those facilities and support structures on private property, provided that city council approval is not required before a permit is issued to place a new pole or other support structure on private property if that action is appropriate. 
(3)	The provider or applicant shall use stealth technology when installing the facilities and associated accessory equipment on any building or accessory to that building that is located on private property. Further, stealth technology should be used when placing facilities on other types of support structures on private property unless the applicant can reasonably demonstrate that, given the nature of the requested application, the use of such technology is unnecessary or impractical. 
(4)	If facilities are placed on an existing or new building or accessory to that building, the following dimensional regulations shall apply: 
a.	Facade-mounted antennas shall not extend above the face of any wall or exterior surface of the building. 
b.	Roof-mounted antennas and accessory equipment may be permitted on buildings in accordance with the following table: 
Roof Mounted Antennas and Accessory Equipment
Height of Building	Maximum Height of Facility Above Highest Point of Roof	Required Setback from Edge of Roof of Building
Up to 15 feet 	8 feet, including antenna 	1 foot for every foot of height of equipment 
15-35 feet 	10 feet, including antenna 	1 foot for every foot of height of equipment 
More than 35 feet 	12 feet, including antenna 	1 foot for every foot of height of equipment 

c.	The antenna component of the facilities shall be limited to a maximum height of three feet and a maximum width of two feet, provided that authorization to install antenna up to six feet in height may be permitted if a showing of the technological need for such equipment is made and other requirements of this section are met. 
d.	Accessory equipment must be located in an equipment cabinet, equipment room in an existing building or in an unmanned equipment building. If the equipment building is freestanding, it shall conform to this Code with respect to building setbacks, that building shall not exceed 400 square feet, and its overall height shall be limited to 15 feet (if located on the ground) measured from the finished grade. Further, if an equipment building or cabinet is located in a residential zone, or the nearest adjoining property is in a residential zone, that building or cabinet shall be surrounded by landscaping to provide a screen of the same height as the building or cabinet. 
(5)	Application process. Except as provided this subsection, the same application process that is set forth in section 25-21(c) will be utilized when processing any request for a permit to place facilities or support structures on private property, except that: 
a.	City council approval to install a new support structure on private property is not a condition for a permit to place facilities thereon; and 
b.	If the facilities are located on private property that is not owned or exclusively used by the applicant, instead of providing the documentation required in section 25-21(c)(1)c, the applicant shall present a license, lease, agreement or other documentation indicating that the owner of said property authorizes the applicant the rights to place the facilities thereon and access thereto, or that such owner agrees in principle to grant the applicant those rights, provided that if a representation is made to the city that the owner of private property has agreed in principle to grant those rights but the applicant subsequently fails to furnish the city documentation that finalizes any such agreement, the city may refuse to issue the requested permit until the documentation is provided, or, if the city issues the requested permit before receiving such final documentation, the subject permit and license may be revoked. 
(6)	Additional requirements. Any provider or applicant to whom a permit is issued and that places facilities and associated support structures on private property also shall comply with the following requirements as long as those facilities and support structures are located thereon: 
a.	All facilities and support structures shall be installed, erected, and maintained in compliance with applicable federal and state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, regulations of the FCC, the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code and any policies and procedures required of support structure owners. 
b.	At least triennially following the installation of the facilities or associated support structures, upon reasonable request and for good cause, the applicant shall furnish the city engineer a written certification from a professional engineer licensed in the state indicating that those structures have been inspected and are being maintained, operated and used in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, including those of the FCC that pertain to the transmission of wireless communication signals, along with the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code, and the National Electrical Code as applicable. For purposes of this subsection, the term "good cause" means circumstances have arisen that indicate the facilities and associated support structures have been damaged, are not functioning in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, or otherwise pose a hazard to the public. If those structures fail at any time to comply with said laws, regulations and codes, the provider or applicant shall cause those structures to be brought into compliance with said laws, regulations and codes within 15 days of the date of any written notice to either of them of such non-compliance, or cease all personal wireless communications operations related to those structures until the provider or applicant comes into full compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(c)	The facilities and associated support structures on private property must be at all times maintained in good and safe condition. 
(d)	Permit and license fees. The provider or applicant for a permit to place facilities and associated support structures on private property shall pay the following types of fees that are enumerated in the city's officially adopted fee structure ordinance as amended: 
(1)	A permit application and review fee in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time, to be paid when an application is submitted; and 
(2)	A permit issuance fee in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time, per each support structure on private property contemplated for attachment. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2020, § 3, 4-13-2020)
 
Sec. 25-23. Abandonment of facilities on right-of-way.
If a provider or applicant abandons any facility, including the accessory equipment or an associated support structure (collectively "facilities" for purposes of this section) that is located on the right-of-way, the city may require the provider or applicant, at their expense, to remove and reclaim the abandoned facilities within 60 days from the date of written notice of abandonment given by the city to them and to reasonably restore the condition of the property at which the facilities are located to that existing before they were installed. If the provider or applicant fails to remove and reclaim its abandoned facilities within such 60-day period and the facilities are located on the right-of-way, the city shall have the rights to: 
(1)	Remove them and charge its expense of any such removal operation to the account of the provider or applicant; 
(2)	Purchase all abandoned facilities at the subject location from the provider or applicant in consideration for $1.00; 
(3)	At the city's discretion, either resell the abandoned facilities to a third-party or dispose and salvage them, provided that the proceeds of any resale of abandoned facilities by the city to a third-party shall be credited to the account of the applicant or provider that used those facilities before the abandonment; and 
(4)	Charge any expense incurred by the city to restore the right-of-way to the account of the provider or applicant. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2020, § 4, 4-13-2020)
 
Sec. 25-24. Co-location.
To promote the public interest that is served by co-locating facilities and associated accessory equipment on existing support structures and thereby mitigating the installation of additional support structures throughout the city, and to the extent permitted by 47 USC 224, no person or entity (including any provider or applicant) that utilizes an existing support structure located on a right-of-way or on private property in the city and has space available thereon may deny a provider or applicant the right to use or access an existing support structure for purposes of attaching facilities permitted by this article without sound operational, technological or other good reason. Nothing in this section shall be construed to grant mandatory access rights to any support structure to any provider or applicant where such access rights are not already granted by federal law. Nothing in this section shall affect or be construed to affect any pole attachment agreement between any applicant, provider or owner, lessor or controller of a support structure. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2020, § 5, 4-13-2020)
 
Sec. 25-25. Non-applicability.
(a)	The placement of an antenna, facilities or equipment related to the following types of wireless services are exempt from regulation under this article: 
(1)	Amateur radio service that is licensed by the FCC, if the facilities related thereto are not used or licensed for any commercial purpose; and 
(2)	Facilities used by any federal, state or local government or agency to provide safety or emergency services. 
(b)	Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to the attachments, equipment, facilities, or business activities of an electric utility regulated by the state public service commission. This article also does not apply to the attachments, equipment, facilities, or business activities of such electric utility's parents, affiliates, or subsidiaries when they are acting in support of the electric utility. 
(Ord. No. 0-003-2020, § 6, 4-13-2020)
 
Chapter 26 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 26-1. Adoption of traffic code.
The regulation and operation of motor vehicles and the rules of the road are adopted by reference in this chapter. In addition to all other provisions of this Code relating to the operation of motor vehicles in the city, there is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-5-1 et seq. and 32-5A-1 et seq., and all rules and regulations of the state highway department pertaining to the control of traffic and motor vehicles on highways that are misdemeanors under the state laws. A violation of such laws, rules and regulations in the city or its police jurisdiction shall be a violation of this Code, punishable as prescribed in this Code. 
 
Sec. 26-2. Traffic control devices.
The mayor and city council, or their designee, shall place and maintain official traffic control devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city from time to time, to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional official traffic control devices as deemed necessary to regulate, warn, or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or the state vehicle code. 
 
Sec. 26-3. Restricted parking.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Limited time parking zone means and includes any restricted street or portion of a street, upon which parking shall be designated to be a limited time only. 
(b)	Restricted parking, generally.
(1)	Official signs regulating or prohibiting the parking of vehicles shall be erected by the police department as directed by the city council. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful anywhere within the city for the owner or driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle in a zone lawfully marked "no parking," "no parking on this side" or "no parking anytime." 
(3)	It shall be unlawful anywhere within the city for the owner or driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle for a period of time in a time zone lawfully marked showing a certain time limit longer than the time so designated. 
(4)	Where parallel parking zones are designated, it shall be unlawful anywhere within the city for any owner or driver of any vehicle to fail to park such vehicle with both the right front and rear wheel parallel with the curbline; such wheels within 18 inches of such curbline. 
(5)	Where 45 degree parking zones are designated, it shall be unlawful anywhere within the city for the owner or driver of any vehicle to fail to park such vehicle within the parking lines painted on the street in these zones and the right front wheel against the curb or curbline. 
(c)	Parking in excess of 24 hours. It shall be unlawful anywhere within the city for the owner or driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle upon a street or highway for a period longer than 24 continuous hours. 
(d)	Prohibited parking in shopping malls or shopping centers:
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any shopping mall or shopping center in the city or its police jurisdiction: 
a.	In such a manner so as to block access to such mall or shopping center by emergency vehicles; 
b.	Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; or 
c.	In any designated fire lane. 
(2)	All such vehicles unlawfully parked will be subjected to being towed and impounded by the police department at the owner's expense. 
(e)	Obstructing fire hydrants. No person shall place or keep any fence growth, trash or other material near any fire hydrant that would prevent such hydrant from being immediately discernible or in any other manner that would hinder the fire department from gaining immediate access to a fire hydrant. 
(f)	Fire lanes on hospital approaches, authority to designate. The city council is authorized to declare and designate any driveways, alleyways, and other means of access connecting public roads to medical clinics/hospitals/nursing homes located within the city, as fire lanes in which the parking of motor vehicles shall be prohibited. The chief of the fire department shall be the authority to have signs manufactured and posted by the appropriate departments of the city to the end that such fire lanes will be clearly and obviously marked. 
(g)	Fire lanes on hospital approaches, parking therein. No person shall park, or allow to be parked, in fire lanes in roadways connecting medical clinics/hospitals/nursing homes to public streets or highways any vehicle which is either owned by such person or in such person's custody. The police department shall enforce the provisions of this subsection in the same manner that other parking regulations are enforced. 
(h)	Parking on bridge. It shall be unlawful anywhere within the city for the owner or driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle upon any bridge. 
(i)	Parking in traffic lane. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle in a traffic lane in the roadway of any street or highway for the purpose of waiting for a parking space to become vacant, loading or unloading passengers, or for any other purpose except to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals, or in obedience to the order of a law enforcement officer, or because of an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the driver of the vehicle. 
(j)	Loading zones.
(1)	Loading and unloading zones for commercial vehicles only within the city shall be designated by the city council. These zones may be removed or additions made as deemed necessary by the city council. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful anywhere within the city for the driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle in any zone lawfully marked for loading and unloading, unless such person is actually engaged in loading or unloading articles to be picked up or left at such location. 
(k)	Parking position for loading and unloading. No truck will be permitted to extend into the street from the curbline further than the width of the vehicle for loading or unloading purposes. Loading ramps will be permitted for this type of loading, provided they are removed when not in use. 
(l)	Parking truck tractor with trailer attached. It shall be unlawful anywhere within the city for the owner or driver of any vehicle classed as a truck tractor to park such vehicle with a trailer attached to it on any street or highway not designated as a truck route or a location used as a terminal unless such trailer is being lawfully loaded or unloaded. 
(m)	Parking, etc., stock automobiles in streets.
(1)	The term "stock automobile or motor vehicles" means, as used in this section, automobiles or motor vehicles which belong to the stock of goods of a dealer and which are kept for sale. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park stock automobiles or motor vehicles on the streets or highways. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any automobile or motor vehicle on the streets or highways when such automobile or motor vehicle is a stock car and is kept in stock for sale. 
(n)	Illegally parked vehicles may be towed away. If any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, such vehicle may be towed away by the police department at the owner's or driver's expense. 
(o)	Designation of parking spaces; parking within lines. The chief of police is hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in limited time parking zones, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street. Each space so marked, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. 
(p)	Parking times. In limited time parking zones, parking shall be lawful for a period of two hours only every day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except Sundays and holidays; provided, however, within the meaning of this subsection, the term "holiday" shall include the following days only: January 1, the Fourth of July, November 11, December 25, and the day designated and set aside by the president of the U.S. as the day of Thanksgiving. 
(q)	Designation of loading zones. The chief of police is hereby authorized to mark loading zones in the limited parking zones, said loading zones to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street. Each space so marked shall be used for the purpose of loading and unloading. 
(r)	Unauthorized use of handicapped parking place.
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person who does not have a distinctive handicapped decal or placard, or temporarily handicapped placard, to park a motor vehicle in a parking place designated for the handicapped at any place to which the general public is invited, even though located on private property, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined $50.00 per occurrence and if the offender attends city court he shall pay the cost of court. 
(2)	Any authorized municipal, county or state law enforcement officer may go onto private property to enforce the provisions of this subsection. 
(3)	The provisions of this subsection shall be held in pari materia with all other provisions of law related to illegal handicapped parking violations; provided, however, that all laws or parts of laws which conflict with the provisions of this subsection are hereby repealed. 
(s)	Violations. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any person: 
(1)	To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime, or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any limited time parking zone as herein described. 
(2)	To park any vehicle across any line or marking or parking space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. 
(t)	Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the chief of police and other police officers, or any other person so named by the city council, to check the parking spaces and report the violation of this chapter in the following manner: 
(1)	Keep an account of and report the location of each parking space where a vehicle has been parked in violation of any of this section, the date and hour of such violation, the make and the state license number of such vehicle, and other facts a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(2)	Attach to such vehicle notice stating that it has been parked in violation of this section and instructing the owner or operator to report at a certain designated time and place to the municipal court in regard to such violation. 
(u)	Penalty. The penalty for any parking violation of this section will be a fine of $15.00, except unauthorized use of handicapped parking place which will be $50.00, unless the offender appears in city court, at which time the cost of court would be paid. 
(1)	Parking violations; appearance or mailing fine authorized. Any motor vehicle operator who receives notice stating that a vehicle has been parked in violation of any provision of this section may within 48 hours after the time shown of the notice: 
a.	Appear in person at the office of the municipal court clerk and pay to the clerk or deputy as magistrate the fine stated in this section; or 
b.	Mail the notice and amount of the fine stated in said section to the municipal court clerk. 
(2)	Failure to make remittance. Remittance of the fine stated in this section shall constitute a guilty plea and waiver of trial. If the motor vehicle operator fails to pay the proper fine or pays an insufficient amount, a summons or warrant of arrest may be issued for the offender's arrest. 
(Ord. No. 0-134-93, §§ 1, 2, 5-10-1993; Ord. No. 0-159-96, 3-11-1996)
 
Sec. 26-4. Test to determine alcoholic content.
(a)	Pursuant to the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, the city does hereby designate and establish chemical analysis of the breath by the Draeger Alcotest 7110 MK III, to be the test administered by police officers of the city to determine the alcoholic content of the blood of any person lawfully arrested for any offenses arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the person was driving a motor vehicle on the public highways of this state while under the influence of intoxicating alcohol/liquor. 
(b)	That such a test is to be administered at the direction of any law enforcement officers having reasonable grounds to believe that the person to be subjected to the test had been driving a motor vehicle upon the public highways of this state while under the influence of intoxicating alcohol/liquor. 
(c)	Provided, however, that said test shall be administered only by officers holding a valid certification permit issued by the director of the department of forensic sciences and certified by the technical director of the department of forensic sciences. 
(Ord. No. 0-183-00, §§ 1—4, 1-10-2000)
 
Sec. 26-5. Fishing prohibited from Fowler's Ferry Road.
(a)	It shall be illegal for any person to fish from the road, roadside or public right-of-way of Fowler's Ferry Road in the city. 
(b)	Any person convicted of said fishing shall be fined $50.00 for each occurrence along with mandated municipal court cost of such proceeding. 
(c)	It shall be illegal for any person to permit or allow any trash or litter to be deposited on or along said road, roadside or public right-of-way of Fowler's Ferry Road. 
(Ord. No. 0-220-02, §§ 1—8, 11-12-2002)
 
Sec. 26-6. Fines for traffic offenses established.
Any person issued a traffic citation for the offenses listed in section 26-7 as having been charged with one of the said listed offenses, and who would like to plead guilty and pay the fine shall be authorized and empowered to pay a fine, either in person or by mailing the full amount as indicated to the municipal court magistrate of the city and the municipal court magistrate is hereby authorized to accept the fine and cost as indicated in section 26-7. This being if the defendant has not received two or more traffic citations within the last 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2009, § 1, 12-28-2009)
 
Sec. 26-7. Fines.
In accordance with rule 20 of the judicial administration rules approved by the state supreme court if the defendant elects to plead guilty the municipal court magistrate is authorized to accept the following amounts shown opposite the offense when the defendant elects to plead guilty to the listed offenses: 
Traffic Violation Fines
Driving on wrong side of road 	$30.00 
Failure to dim headlights 	$10.00 
Failure to use child restraint 	$25.00 
Failure to wear seat belt 	$10.00 
Failure to yield right-of-way 	$20.00 
Following too close 	$20.00 
Improper backing 	$20.00 
Improper brakes 	$20.00 
Improper lights 	$20.00 
Improper muffler 	$10.00 
Improper or no rearview mirror 	$20.00 
Improper passing 	$20.00 
Improper signal 	$10.00 
Improper expired tag 	$25.00 
Improper tires 	$20.00 
Improper turn 	$20.00 
Improper window tinting 	$20.00 
No helmet 	$10.00 
Running stop sign 	$20.00 
Running red light 	$20.00 
Speeding less than 25 mph over limit 	$20.00 
Speeding 25 or more over limit 	$40.00 plus $1.00 per mile 
over the posted limit 
Stopping on highway 	$30.00 
Driver's license restrictions 	$60.00 
Operating a vehicle without driver license 	$25.00 

(Ord. No. 0-007-2009, § 2, 12-28-2009)
 
Sec. 26-8. Penalties.
Any person charged with any of the foregoing offenses who does not elect to plead guilty and pay the fines as set out in section 26-7, must appear in court at the time shown on the traffic citation. Any person failing to appear in municipal court on the scheduled date, or if full payment does not reach the magistrate's office by the scheduled date, is subject to having his driver's license suspended and a warrant may be issued for his arrest. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2009, § 3, 12-28-2009)
 
Sec. 26-9. Failure to appear.
Pursuant to rule 20 of the state rules of judicial administration, if a defendant who has failed to appear for court comes to the magistrate's office prior to the service of a failure to appear warrant to pay off a traffic citation, the defendant shall pay an additional $40.00 fine in addition to the scheduled fine as shown in section 26-7, plus court cost for failure to appear on their original court date per order of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2009, § 4, 12-28-2009)
 
Sec. 26-10. Guilty of a misdemeanor.
Any person who willfully violates his written bond to appear or who fails to appear in court at the time shown on the traffic citation and/or after a failure to appear warrant has been issued and served shall be guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00 or by imprisonment in the county or municipal jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2009, § 5, 12-28-2009)
 
Sec. 26-11. Municipal court costs.
(a)	The municipal court cost at this time are set at: 
(1)	$113.00 for traffic violations; 
(2)	$163.00 for driver's license related offenses; 
(3)	$343.00 for offenses under Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191 (DUI type charges); 
(4)	$316.00 for drug related offenses; 
(5)	$176.00 for non-traffic offenses. 
(b)	From these court cost the amount to be retained by the city shall be: 
(1)	General fund: $17.00; 
(2)	Corrections fund: $30.50 for traffic and $60.00 for non-traffic. 
(c)	The municipal court magistrate is directed to collect these court costs in addition to any court cost as set forth by the state code, for respective state agencies. Court cost are to be collected in addition to the scheduled fines. The municipal court shall cause the court cost to increase when the district court of the county and/or the state increases their court cost without having to amend this section to do so. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2009, § 6, 12-28-2009)
 
Sec. 26-12. No personal or company checks.
The municipal court will not accept personal or company checks for payments of fines, cost and/or restitution. Forms of payment in the municipal court are cash, money order, certified check, Visa and/or Master Card. If paid by mail, money orders or certified checks will be accepted made payable to the city. No credit cards will be accepted over the phone. No two-party checks will be accepted. A $4.00 surcharge shall be charged on the use of debit or credit card pursuant to Resolution 0-027-2009 as adopted on September 28, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 0-007-2009, § 7, 12-28-2009)
 
Secs. 26-13—26-42. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. TRUCK ROUTES
 
Sec. 26-43. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deviating truck means a truck which leaves from, or enters, a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
Truck means any vehicle or combination of vehicles together including trailers and truck-tractors with trailers attached designed or operated for the transportation of property and whose transporting capacity is 2½ tons or more. 
Truck route means a way over certain streets, as is designated in this article, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city shall operate. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 1, 3-26-1979)
 
Sec. 26-44. Truck routes established.
There is hereby established within the city the following truck routes: 
(1)	Highway Number 77. 
(2)	Pilgrim's Rest Road. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 2, 3-26-1979)
 
Sec. 26-45. Operation of trucks—Generally.
All trucks in the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes established by this article and on other streets over which truck travel is permitted by the terms of this article. This section shall not prohibit: 
(1)	Operation on street of destination or origin. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a point of destination or origin until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point or originating point. 
(2)	Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
(3)	Public utility, etc., vehicles. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities or any contractor or materialman, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city. 
(4)	Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any detour established by the city in any case. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 3, 3-26-1979)
 
Sec. 26-46. Operation of trucks—Trips originating outside the city.
(a)	One inside destination point. All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed over only an established route and shall deviate at the intersection with a street nearest to the destination point upon which it is feasible for such vehicle to travel. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest feasible route. 
(b)	Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection of the street nearest to the first destination point, upon which it is feasible for such vehicle to travel. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest feasible direction. Upon leaving the last destination, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest feasible route. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 4, 3-26-1979)
 
Sec. 26-47. Operation of trucks—Trips originating in city.
(a)	Outside destination point. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed by the shortest feasible direction over streets to a truck route as established by this article. 
(b)	Inside destination points. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 5, 3-26-1979)
 
Sec. 26-48. Signs to be posted.
The chief of police shall cause all truck routes and those streets upon which truck traffic is not feasible to be clearly marked by signs posted to give notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 6, 3-26-1979)
 
Sec. 26-49. Weigh-in.
Any patrolman of the police department shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining the applicability of this article to such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 7, 3-26-1979)
 
Sec. 26-50. Loading and unloading.
No truck shall be permitted to extend into the street from the curbline further than the width of the vehicle for loading or unloading purposes. Loading ramps will be permitted for this type of loading; provided, that they are removed when not in use. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 8, 3-26-1979)
 
Sec. 26-51. Parking.
It shall be unlawful anywhere within the city for the owner or driver of any truck to park such vehicle with a trailer attached to it on any street or highway not designated as a truck route or a location used as a terminal unless such trailer is being loaded or unloaded. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 9, 3-26-1979)
 
Sec. 26-52. Illegally parked trucks may be towed away.
If any truck is found parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article, such vehicle may be towed away by the police department at the expense of the owner or driver. 
(Ord. No. 0-28-79, § 10, 3-26-1979)
 
Secs. 26-53—26-77. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. ONE-WAY STREETS
 
Sec. 26-78. Designations.
(a)	Upon those streets or parts of streets hereinafter described vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at each intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)	One-way street designations. Glenn Drive is one-way east from Highway 77 to New Haven Drive. 
(Ord. No. 0-55-82, § 1, 3-8-1982)
 
Sec. 26-79. Signs erected.
The police department shall cause to be erected at each intersection appropriate signs, or other devices, indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-55-82, § 2, 3-8-1982)
 
Sec. 26-80. Violation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of this article upon any street or parts of streets herein described in violation of this article, or in violation of such signs or other devices so placed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-55-82, § 3, 3-8-1982)
 
Secs. 26-81—26-103. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. SCHOOL ZONES
 
Sec. 26-104. Established.
The city council hereby establishes a school zone on Cedar Bend Road North. The official school zone hours will be 7:15 a.m. until 8:15 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. until 3:15 p.m. daily Monday through Friday while Southside High School is in regular session. 
(Ord. No. 0-001-2007, § 1, 1-22-2007)
 
Sec. 26-105. Speed zone.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 25 miles per hour on Cedar Bend Road North from Kimble Place to Windsong Trail during the hours set forth in section 26-104. 
(Ord. No. 0-001-2007, § 2, 1-22-2007)
 
Secs. 26-106—26-125. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. SPEED ZONES 
 
Sec. 26-126. Speed limit of 15 miles per hour—Buck's Island subdivision.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour within the Buck's Island subdivision which encompasses Buck's Island Road from the entrance of the subdivision to the end of the cul-de-sac. 
(Ord. No. 0-002-2006, §§ 1—4, 2-13-2006)
 
Sec. 26-127. Speed limit of 15 miles per hour—Hawthorne Estates, Mayflower Lane.
(a)	No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour in Hawthorne Estates, which shall include the following streets: 
(1)	Hawthorne Place. 
(2)	Hawthorne Circle. 
(3)	Radcliff Road. 
(b)	No person shall operate motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour on Mayflower Lane. 
(c)	Speed limits as described in this section shall apply as long as the city limits remain as they are at this date. 
(Ord. No. 0-142-94, §§ 1-A, 1-B, 2, 9-26-1994)
 
Sec. 26-128. Speed limit of 15 miles per hour—Peninsula Point, Belotti Road and Landline Road.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour on Peninsula Point, Belotti Road and Landline Road. All of these roads are located within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 0-013-2017, § 5, 11-27-2017)
 
Sec. 26-129. Speed limit on Fowlers Ferry Road.
(a)	The city council is concerned about the number of motor vehicle collisions and accidents occurring on Fowlers Ferry Road and has reviewed the need to reduce these problems, and to promote safe motor vehicle traffic, and determined that the public interest and the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city require that said motor vehicle traffic be regulated to require vehicles to travel slower. 
(b)	The city council has determined that the addition of a second bridge across the Coosa River, allowing the old bridge to be limited to traffic travelling in one direction and has determined that the public interest and health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city will allow the speed limit to be raised above the present 25 miles per hour speed limit on Alabama Highway 77 as it approaches the old bridge, provided that there is a no passing zone in this area. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the public thoroughfare identified as Fowlers Ferry Road, within the police jurisdiction of the city from the point where said road joins Lassiter Road until the said road joins a public thoroughfare identified as Alabama Highway 77 at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the public thoroughfare identified as Alabama Highway 77 from a point where it intersects Fowlers Ferry Road until the said road has crossed the Coosa River on the old bridge, at a speed greater than 40 miles per hour; and it shall be unlawful for any person to pass any other motor vehicle on this said public thoroughfare, hereby creating a no passing zone on Alabama Highway 77 from a point where it intersects Fowlers Ferry Road until the said road has crossed the Coosa River on the old bridge. 
(Ord. No. 0-31-79, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-1979; Ord. No. 0-38-80, §§ 1, 2, 2-11-1980)
 
Sec. 26-130. Speed limit of 35 miles per hour.
(a)	The city council hereby raises the speed limit from 25 miles per hour to 35 miles per hour on South Valley Road. 
(b)	No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 35 miles per hour on South Valley Road, which is located within the city limits. 
(c)	The speed limit as described in this section shall apply to South Valley Road as long as the city limits remain as they are at the present time. 
(d)	In addition to all provisions of law relating to the speed and operation of motor vehicles in the city, there is adopted by the city all laws of the state pertaining to speed limits as set forth in the state code. 
(Ord. No. 0-202-01, §§ 1—5, 3-26-2001)
 
Sec. 26-131. Speed limit of 45 miles per hour.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 45 miles per hour in the following areas of Alabama Highway 77: Starting at the northern city limits to Green Valley Road (milepost 97.15), both north and southbound lanes on Alabama Highway 77 shall be designated a 45 mile per hour speed zone. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-88, § 1-C, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 0-207-01, 9-24-2001)
 
Sec. 26-132. Speed limit of 50 miles per hour.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 50 miles per hour in the following listed zone of the city: On Alabama Highway 77 beginning at Leota Road (milepost 96.45) northward to Green Valley Road (milepost 97.15). 
(Ord. No. 0-89-88, § 1-B, 6-13-1988)
 
Sec. 26-133. Speed limit of 55 miles per hour.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 55 miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: On Alabama 77 beginning at the south city limits (milepost 94.10), northward to Leota Road (milepost 96.45). 
(Ord. No. 0-89-88, § 1-A, 6-13-1988)
 
Sec. 26-134. Applicability.
Speed limits as described in article shall apply as long as the city limits remain as they are at this date. In the event they are extended, this article shall be revised to properly cover the new territory. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-88, § 2, 6-13-1988)
 
Sec. 26-135. Parking prohibited.
No person shall park a motor vehicle in any designated area when said area is properly marked with yellow paint and/or signed. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-88, § 4, 6-13-1988)
 
Sec. 26-136. Penalties.
(a)	Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 or may be imprisoned in the municipal or county jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city, for a period not exceeding ten days. 
(b)	For a second conviction within one year thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 or may be imprisoned in the municipal or county jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding 20 days or both such fine and imprisonment. Upon a third or subsequent conviction within one year after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 or may be imprisoned in the municipal or county jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding six months or both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-88, § 5, 6-13-1988)
 
Secs. 26-137—26-150. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. COMPRESSION RELEASE BRAKES
 
Sec. 26-151. Definition.
Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-216 states that every motor vehicle be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. 
Engine compression release brake means any device that utilizes air compression and/or rapid release of compressed air in the cylinders of diesel engines to slow or retard vehicle speed. 
Public safety vehicle means any vehicle operated by the Southside Police Department or the Southside Fire Department, or any emergency vehicle as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-1.1. 
(Ord. No. 0-001-2021, 3-9-2021)
 
Sec. 26-152. Purpose.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to engage or allow to be engaged, operate, or use, an engine compression release brake on any public roadway within the City of Southside, Alabama. 
The supervisor of the public works department is authorized, but is not required, to place traffic control devices or signs in appropriate locations that substantially state "Engine Compression Release Brake Noise Laws Enforced" or "Vehicle Noise Laws Enforced" or "Jake Brake Laws Enforced" or "Engine Brake Ordinance Enforced". The provisions of this article shall be in full force and effect even if no signs are installed. 
(Ord. No. 0-001-2021, 3-9-2021)
 
Sec. 26-153. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to operators of a public safety vehicle. 
It shall be a complete defense to a charge of violation if defendant proves that the use was necessary to avoid imminent danger (emergency) to avoid injury or accident. 
(Ord. No. 0-001-2021, 3-9-2021)
 
Sec. 26-154. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this article can plead guilty to the charge of a "Compression Brake Violation" before a judge or a magistrate with the Southside Municipal Court. A guilty plea would be documented as a municipal ordinance violation. The penalty for violation of the article would be: 
1st offense$50.00 plus court cost
2nd offense$100.00 plus court cost
3rd or more offense$150.00 plus court cost
The non-traffic standard court cost would be collected along with the fine. No partial payments can be accepted by the magistrate therefore all partial payment request must go before the municipal judge for approval. "Compression Brake Violation" shall be added to the magistrate schedule and such charge can be paid online without a court appearance. The payment online of the violation would constitute a guilty plea from the defendant. Prior to payment the defendant would retain the right to come before a municipal judge for a trial if the defendant chooses to not plead guilty to the charge. 
(Ord. No. 0-001-2021, 3-9-2021)
 
Chapter 28 WATER AND SEWER 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 28-1. Fluorides into the city's water supply.
(a)	As a matter in the conservation of the health of the inhabitants of the city, approval is given to the introduction of fluorides into the city's water supply in accordance with the regulations of the state department of public health. 
(b)	The water works and sewer board of the city, is hereby vested with the authority to install the necessary facilities for the introduction of fluorides into its water supply, and to introduce such fluorides into the water supply, in accordance with the regulations of the state department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 0-58-83, §§ I—III, 10-24-1983)
 
Secs. 28-2—28-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. WATER
 
Sec. 28-21. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public water supply means the water distribution system owned and operated by the water works board of the city. 
Water means water taken from the public water supply. 
Water shortage emergency means the declaration of such by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 0-85-86, § 1, 11-24-1986)
 
Sec. 28-22. Application.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all users of the public water supply in the city and its police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 0-85-86, § 2, 11-24-1986)
 
Sec. 28-23. Implementation.
The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to declare a water shortage emergency whenever, in the opinion of the water works board and upon its recommendation to the mayor, there exists in the city a shortage of water from the public water supply and such shortage endangers the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. After declaring a water shortage emergency, the mayor shall give written notice of said declaration of emergency by publication one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. When a water shortage emergency is declared as provided herein, it shall continue until the mayor shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city that the emergency no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 0-85-86, § 3, 11-24-1986)
 
Sec. 28-24. Prohibited water uses.
When a water shortage emergency is declared and notice thereof is published as provided in section 28-23, it shall be unlawful for any user of the public water supply to use or to allow water to be used for any of the following purposes: 
(1)	The sprinkling, watering, or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground cover, plants, vines and gardens. 
(2)	The operation of any outdoor ornamental fountain or other structure using water with or without a recirculating system. 
(3)	The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, mobile homes, campers, boats, or any other type of mobile equipment. 
(4)	The filling of swimming pools. 
(5)	The washing of sidewalks, driveways, porches, exterior of homes, apartments or other exterior surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 0-85-86, § 4, 11-24-1986)
 
Sec. 28-25. Penalties.
Violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)	For the first violation, a fine of $50.00. 
(2)	For the second violation, a fine of $200.00. 
(3)	For the third and subsequent violations, a person shall be punished up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 0-85-86, § 5, 11-24-1986)
 
Secs. 28-26—28-53. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. SEWERS
 
Sec. 28-54. Connections required.
(a)	Any person whose building is on a lot or land adjoining a street in which a gravity sewage collection system exists and which building is within 150 feet of a sanitary sewer main shall be required to connect his building to the sewage collection system. Failure to connect to the system will result in monthly billing same as those benefiting from sewage access. 
(b)	No sewer mains or laterals will be run across private property, unless the city water works and sewer board is given a 30 foot easement. Any subdivider or contractor will be responsible for presenting plans to the city planning commission and city water works and sewer board for approval. The subdivider or contractor will be responsible for all cost involved. Any property requiring pumping facilities that will be owned and maintained by the city water works and sewer board will be deeded to such. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 1, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-55. Use of private facilities restricted.
No privies, cesspools or septic tanks shall be constructed or permitted within the area which is served by sanitary sewer facilities. Upon failure of a property owner to comply with the provisions hereof, written notice by the water works and sewer board shall be given demanding that connection with such sewer be made within 30 days from date of such notice. Upon failure to comply with such notice, then and in that event, the city water works and sewer board shall have the power and the authority to make such connection, the cost and expense of which shall be a lien against any such property. The sewer inspection or connection fee as established by the city water works and sewer board, for each and every connection made within the sewer district of the city shall be paid in advance before a permit for such connection shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 2, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-56. Connections.
Before any sewer connection shall be made with the city water works and sewer board a permit shall be obtained from the office of such. This will be done only after approval by the city planning commission and all permits required by the city purchased. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 3, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-57. Supervision.
No connections to city sewers shall be made either directly or indirectly, except by or under the supervision of a representative of the city water works and sewer board. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 4, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-58. Inspection; fee.
(a)	The inspector or his duly authorized assistant must be notified when the work of a sewer connection is completed and ready for his inspection. All work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved by the inspector or his duly authorized assistant. 
(b)	For each such inspection made by the city water works and sewer board, they shall be entitled to charge a fee. The charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. The inspector shall be the judge of the total number of inspections necessary to be made. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 5, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-59. Charges.
The sewer connection and inspection charges shall be set by the city water works and sewer board from time to time and be payable to the same before such connection is granted. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 6, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-60. Public buildings.
(a)	No public service building, hotel, school, public school, laundry or other kind of public service establishment shall be permitted to connect with the public sewers except at a manhole. If no standard manhole is available the construction and installation of a manhole necessary to such installation at a point to be designated by the city water works and sewer board shall be charged to and paid for by the applicant and such sewer connection line shall open into such manhole. 
(b)	The water works and sewer board shall take notice of the provisions of this section and the same shall be strictly enforced, unless the city water works and sewer board shall certify that some other method of making such connection will satisfy all public requirements. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 7, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-61. Charges.
The city water works and sewer board shall charge and collect from all users of the sewage lines and sewage system, for the use thereof, a monthly service charge for the following listed services in amounts as established by the mayor and city council from time to time: 
(1)	For all single-family dwellings. 
(2)	For all multifamily dwelling units with two or more units. The charge shall be computed on the number of such dwelling units occupied on the last day of the month for which the charge is to be made. The number of such dwelling units shall be reported to the water office manager by the tenth day of the month following. If no report is received by the tenth day of the month, the charge will be based on the maximum number of dwelling units, whether occupied or unoccupied. In the event a false report is rendered to the water office manager, a penalty of 50 percent of the correct amount due shall be added to the proper monthly charge. 
(3)	For all trailer courts, provided that the minimum charge for each trailer court shall not be less than $36.00 dollars per month. The charge shall be computed on the number of such trailers, mobile homes or dwelling units in each trailer court on the last day of the month for which the charge is to be made. The number of such trailers, mobile homes or dwelling units shall be reported to the water office manager by the tenth day of the month, the charge will be based on the maximum number of trailer spaces or dwelling units, occupied or unoccupied. In the event a false report is rendered to the water office manager, a penalty of 50 percent of the correct amount due shall be added to the proper monthly charge. For all commercial and industrial establishments, the rates shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 8, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-62. Billing.
Billing for sewer service charges shall be done in conjunction with billing for water charges. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 9, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-63. Lien provided.
The city water works and sewer board shall have a lien on each lot or parcel of land connected with its sewer system for charges made for services furnished by such system. Notices of such lien shall be filed and such liens shall be enforced as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 10, 8-22-1988)
 
Secs. 28-64—28-84. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. INDUSTRIAL WASTE
 
Sec. 28-85. Industrial wastes.
This article shall be known as the industrial waste ordinance of the Southside Water Works and Sewer Board. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 11, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-86. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter by standard methods procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
COD (denoting chemical oxygen demand) means a measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of organic and inorganic matter present is wastewater as milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storing and sale of produce. 
Industrial liquid wastes means all waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage. Industrial manufacturing processes shall include, but are not limited to: ordinance and accessories; food and allied products; tobacco manufacturers, textile mill products; apparel and other finished products made from fabrics and similar materials; lumber and wood products, except furniture; furniture and fixtures; printing, publishing, and allied industries; chemicals and allied products; petroleum refining and related industries; rubber and miscellaneous plastics products; leather and leather products; stone, clay, glass and concrete products; primary metal industries; fabricated metal products, except ordinance, machinery and transportation equipment; machinery, except electrical; electrical machinery, equipment and supplies; transportation equipment; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks; miscellaneous manufacturing industries. 
Interference with any wastewater treatment process means any condition or combination of conditions which cause degradation of the operational efficiency of a wastewater facility. 
Normal domestic wastewater means waterborne wastes normally discharging from the sanitary conveniences of buildings (including apartments, houses and hotels), office buildings factories and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial wastes. The term "normal domestic wastewater" means normal for the city. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means the public sewer portion of a wastewater facility which transports wastewater and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Settleable solids means those solids which settle during a preselected period of time as expressed in milliliters per liter of sample. 
Standard methods means the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and polluted industrial wastes. 
Trap means a device for retaining sand, silt, grit mineral material, petroleum solvent, grease or oil by gravity-differential separation from wastewater and of a design and capacity approved by the city water works and sewer board. 
Unpolluted process water means any water or waste containing none of the following: Free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkaline phenols or other substances imparting taste and odor to receiving water; toxic substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or odorous gases. 
Wastewater means the used water of a community. Such used water may be a combination of the liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, transport and treat domestic industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. The term "wastewater treatment works" is sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant, stabilization pond or lagoon. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 12, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-87. Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 13, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-88. Discharges to storm sewers.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city water works and sewer board, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 14, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-89. Discharge to public sewers of certain wastes prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described liquids or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)	Any wasters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater facility, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)	Any herbicides and pesticides. 
(4)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater facility. 
(5)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facility-such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(6)	Heavy metals. 
a.	In no case shall any discharge exceed the following limits of the following heavy metals: 
1.	Arsenic: 0.01 mg/l. 
2.	Manganese: 0.05 mg/l. 
3.	Iron: 0.3 mg/l. 
4.	Zinc: 5 mg/l. 
5.	Copper: 1 mg/l. 
b.	Further, no discharge shall contain any of the following heavy metals: 
1.	Antimony. 
2.	Barium. 
3.	Beryllium. 
4.	Bismuth. 
5.	Boron. 
6.	Cadmium. 
7.	Chromium (Hexa). 
8.	Chromium (Tri). 
9.	Cobalt. 
10.	Lead. 
11.	Mercury. 
12.	Molybdenum. 
13.	Nickel. 
14.	Rhenium. 
15.	Selenium. 
16.	Silver. 
17.	Strontium. 
18.	Tellurium. 
19.	Tin. 
20.	Uranyl ion. 
c.	Dilution of toxic materials and heavy metals in lieu of removal is not acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 15, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-90. Discharge of certain harmful wastes restricted.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city water works and sewer board and engineers of such, that such wastes can harm the wastewater facility, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city water works and sewer board will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature and capacity of the wastewater facility, degree of treatability of wastes in the wastewater treatment works and other pertinent factors. The substances which must be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 degrees Celsius. 
(2)	Any waters or wastes containing fats, grease, gas or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit or zero degrees Celsius to 65 degrees Celsius. 
(3)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder larger than those normally manufactured and sold for residential and non-commercial use will not be installed without specific review and approval by the city water works and sewer board. 
(4)	Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution, unless completely neutralized and approved by the city water works and sewer board for discharge. 
(5)	Any waters or wastes containing reducing substances of any organic or inorganic nature, toxic or nontoxic, which exert any immediate chlorine demand, if discharge of such agents will prevent the achievement of an adequate chlorine residual in the effluent of the wastewater treatment works. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits established by the city water works and sewer board after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established by the city water works and sewer board, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(8)	Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)	Materials which exert or cause: 
a.	Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's Earth, lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chlorine and sodium sulfate). 
b.	Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.	Unusual chemical oxygen demand, or biochemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment works. 
d.	Slugs or shocks constituting an unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes which will disturb the normal functioning of the wastewater facility. 
(10)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or education by the wastewater treatment works employed, or amenable to treatment only to such degree that the effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 16, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-91. Water works and sewer board's authority re discharge of harmful wastes.
(a)	If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in previous outlines, and which, in the judgement of the city water works and sewer board, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city water works and sewer board may: 
(1)	Reject the wastes; 
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; or 
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(b)	If the city water works and sewer board permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city water works and sewer board and the state and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 17, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-92. Testing.
Testing of an industrial waste will be performed at least twice a year or whenever found necessary by the city water works and sewer board. The person discharging the waste shall be liable for payment of all costs arising from the testing of the industrial waste. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 18, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-93. Traps.
Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city water works and sewer board, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand/or other harmful ingredients; except that such traps shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city water works and sewer board, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil traps shall be installed in all new filling stations, garages, restaurants and other new facilities wherein heavy discharge of grease and oil is to be expected. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 19, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-94. Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any industrial liquid wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his own expense. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 20, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-95. Control manholes.
(a)	When required by the city water works and sewer board, owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial liquid wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the wastes. 
(b)	Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, constructed in such a manner as to prevent infiltration of groundwaters and surface waters, and should be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city water works and sewer board. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 21, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-96. Compliance with standards.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association and American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. The control manhole provided shall be located so that sampling of the industrial waste will be performed before discharge into the public sewer system. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the wastewater treatment works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The samples taken by the city water works and sewer board will be as directed by the state department of environmental management. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 22, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-97. Cost recovery—Rate schedule.
The city water works and sewer board shall take necessary steps to establish a rate schedule for sewer service that ensures an equitable system of cost recovery. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 23, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-98. Cost recovery—System conditions.
The cost recovery system shall satisfy the following conditions: 
(1)	The apportionment of costs must take into consideration the individual industrial user's contribution as related to the total waste load, taking into account the volume and strength of all discharges. 
(2)	The costs to be considered should include, but are not limited to: 
a.	Amortization of the applicant's indebtedness for the cost of the treatment facilities (plant and interceptors). 
b.	Operation and maintenance of the treatment facilities. 
c.	Any additional cost which are necessary to ensure adequate treatment on a continuous basis. 
(3)	Substantial prepayment of the capital investment or other financial commitments will be required from each industry that contributes 30 percent or more of the total volume or strength of the waste load to be treated by the project. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 24, 8-22-1988)
 
Sec. 28-99. Cost recovery—Assessment of charges.
A charge will be assessed against persons discharging industrial liquid wastes which are of a greater strength and volume than normal, untreated domestic wastewater. Normal, untreated domestic wastewater is defined as having a maximum yearly average biochemical oxygen demand and chemical oxygen demand not in excess of 200 milligrams per liter and 400 milligrams per liter, respectively. The same sewage is considered to contain settleable solids not in excess of five milliliters per liter. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-88, § 25, 8-22-1988)
 
Chapter 30 ZONING 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 30-1. Authority.
This chapter is established in pursuance of the authority conferred unto the city by Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-70 through 11-52-84, inclusive, as amended, and for the general purposes of: 
(1)	Promoting the health, safety, morals, public peace, order, or general welfare of the city; 
(2)	Lessening congestion in the streets; 
(3)	Securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
(4)	Providing adequate light and air; 
(5)	Preventing the overcrowding of land; 
(6)	Avoiding undue concentration of population; 
(7)	Facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
(8)	Conserving the value of buildings; and 
(9)	Encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. I(§ 1), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Southside Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. I(§ 2), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-3. Interpretation.
In this interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for promotion of the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community. The standards and requirements of this chapter should be applied and enforced to balance public and private interests in the development of land in a manner that promotes mutual understanding and respect, and with prompt and just consideration given to the various interests involved in land investment, ownership, and development. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. I(§ 3), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-4. Jurisdiction of chapter.
The requirements and standards contained in this chapter shall apply to all areas within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. I(§ 4), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-5. General interpretive guidelines.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. Words of the masculine gender include the feminine, and words of the feminine gender include the masculine. The term "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust, or partnership. The term "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The term "building" includes "structure." The term "shall" is mandatory. The term "may" is permissive. The term "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land/or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(b)	Where any word specifically defined in the city subdivision regulations is used within these regulations, but is not specifically defined herein, then the specific definition contained in the city subdivision regulations shall apply. If a word used and defined in the city subdivision regulations bears a different or conflicting definition within this zoning chapter, then the word shall be used and interpreted within each code in accordance with the specific definition contained therein. 
(c)	Any words specifically defined in a subsequent section or article of this chapter shall carry that meaning within the context of the specific section or article within which it is defined. 
(d)	Any lingering confusion or questions regarding the definition of a term used in these regulations shall be decided by the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. II(§ 1), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-6. Specific definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure or use means a subordinate structure or a portion of the main structure, the use of which is incidental to the main or principal use of the premises. An accessory use is one which is incidental to the main or principal use of the premises. An accessory use or structure shall only be permitted on a lot containing a principal use or structure that is permitted by right or as a special exception within the applicable zoning district. 
Alley means a public service way which affords only a secondary means of access to the rear or side of abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration or altered means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	Any addition to the height, width, or depth of a building or structure; 
(2)	Any change in the location of any of the exterior walls of a building or structure; 
(3)	Any change in the position or placement of an existing structure or building on a lot; 
(4)	Any increase in the interior accommodations of a building or structure; 
(5)	Any repairs, renovation, remodeling, or rebuilding to a building or structure which costs, in total, more than 50 percent of the original value of the building or structure prior to the initiation of said activity. 
Apartment means a single dwelling unit contained within a multifamily dwelling. 
Automobile filling and service station means a place of business which primarily conducts routine and incidental maintenance, inspection, and repair services for malfunctioning, excessively worn, or broken parts and components on otherwise operable motor vehicles and/or which has pumps and registered underground storage tanks through which motor vehicle fuels, oils, fluids, or lubricants are dispensed, sold, or offered for public sale. No above ground storage tanks with a capacity in excess of 500 gallons shall be permitted. Such facilities may offer general automobile and travel-related commodities and services, excluding the following: 
(1)	Tire recapping or re-grooving; 
(2)	Exclusive auto parts sales where no repair or maintenance service is offered; 
(3)	Full vehicle restoration; 
(4)	Body painting, repainting, or detail (other than incidental touch-up associated with permitted repair and servicing work); 
(5)	Whole engine replacement or overhaul; 
(6)	The on-site storage and salvaging of inoperable motor vehicles, chassis, bodies, or engines, and other similar major vehicle body and restoration work or overhauls; 
(See also Body shop, Convenience store, andTruck stop.) 
Awning means a shelter attached to and extending outward from the vertical surface of a building, above an external entrance or window, without any support from the ground. 
Basement means a story having a part but not more than one-half of its height below grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations. 
Bed and breakfast inn means a lodging facility having the exterior appearance of a single-family house and providing short-term (less than one month per visit) rental sleeping accommodations. Such structure shall contain at least two, but not more than ten bedrooms for rent. Individual bedrooms within a bed and breakfast inn shall not contain any kitchen facilities, and must be accessed through a central internal lobby, foyer, or office. The lodging facility shall also contain the primary living facilities for the resident manager or owner of the facility. Breakfast shall be the only meal served to paying guests of the facility, which shall be prepared in a central kitchen facility and served in a central dining room. A manufactured home shall not be used as a bed and breakfast inn. (See also Boardinghouse or roominghouse,Hotel, and Motel.) 
Board of adjustment orboard means the zoning board of adjustment of the city. 
Boardinghouse or roominghouse means a building other than a hotel or motel where lodging or lodging and meals is provided to non-institutionalized persons (persons capable of independent living) for compensation over a long-term period (at least month-to-month). The structure shall contain at least three, but not more than 20, private rooms for rent and shall provide either shared or common kitchen facilities or shared bathroom facilities. Individual lodging rooms within the building must be accessed through a central internal lobby or office. The rooms contained within the structure shall not constitute independent dwelling units under the terms of this chapter. (See also Bed and breakfast inn, Dwelling, multifamily,Hotel, and Motel.) 
Body shop means a motor vehicle repair and restoration facility or garage that conducts minor and major vehicle repairs, including, but not limited to, full vehicle restoration work, body painting or repainting, whole engine replacement, and other similar major vehicle body and restoration work or overhauls, but not including the on-site storage and salvaging of inoperable motor vehicles. Such facilities may offer for sale motor vehicle fuels on an incidental basis. (See also Automobile filling and service stations, Junkyard, and Truck stop.) 
Buffer means a densely planted strip of evergreen shrubs or trees, or solid fencing, earthen berm, a natural drainageway, or a similar condition, or any combination thereof intended to serve as a physical and visual divider between different uses or lots. No buffer shall be less than 15 feet in width at any point. Each buffer shall be improved to provide an effective yearround visual screen between adjoining uses, such that evergreen trees shall not be spaced less than 15 feet apart on center and that evergreen shrubs shall not be spaced less than 7½ feet on center within the buffer strip. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or protection of persons, animals, or property. 
Building, accessory, means a subordinate structure or a portion of the principal building, the use of which is incidental to or supportive of the dominant use of the principal building on the same lot. (See also Building, principal.) 
Building area means that portion of a lot within the required setbacks that may be utilized for the construction of structures and other accessory uses associated with a permitted use. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for pitched roofs or, for flat roofs, to the mean height level between eaves and ridges for gable, hip and gambrel roofs and to the deck line of mansard roofs. 
Building, principal, means a structure within which the primary or dominant use of the applicable underlying lot is conducted. (See also Building, accessory.) 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any structure (excluding steps, gutters, and similar protruding fixtures on a building) and the fronting right-of-way line of the abutting street. 
Business, retail, means a commercial establishment that generally sells commodities or personal services in varying quantities directly to the ultimate consumer. These commodities or services are primarily for the use of the purchaser. 
Business, wholesale, means a commercial establishment that generally sells commodities or services in large quantities or by piece to retailers, contractors, other wholesale businesses, or manufacturing establishments. These commodities or services are mainly for resale, for use in the fabrication of a product, or for use by a retail business. 
Camper means any vehicle or similar portable structure mounted on wheels, designed and intended primarily for short-term occupancy, for dwelling or sleeping, or other purposes. The term "camper" includes the terms "travel trailer," "recreational vehicle," and "trailer." 
Campground means a lot or area of land divided into commercial sites which may be improved to accommodate cabins, campers, or tents for temporary rental occupancy by transient persons for recreational purposes and which retains an open air or natural character. 
Cellar means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade, and having more than one-half of its height below grade. A cellar is not counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations. 
Child care center means any nonresidential center, agency, or place, however styled, where children not related to the operator are received for custodial care, apart from their parents whether for compensation, reward, or otherwise, during the day only, and in full compliance with all applicable state requirements and/or certifications. The term "child care center" also includes and encompasses the term "day care center." (See special requirements for child care facilities contained in section 30-85.) (See also Child care facility, in-home.) 
Child care facility, in-home, means a custodial care business, conducted as an accessory home occupation use in a residential dwelling, where not more than six children, not related to the operator are received for temporary care during the day only, whether for compensation, reward, or otherwise, and in full compliance with all applicable state requirements and/or certifications. (See special requirements for child care facilities contained in section 30-85.) (See also Child care center.) 
Church means a building or structure used exclusively for religious worship, education, or other related ceremonies or practices (not including living quarters) by the congregation or members thereof. The term "church" shall include and encompass any other term for an exclusive religious structure, including synagogue, chapel, mosque, temple, and the like. A lot containing a church as the principal use also may contain a cemetery/graveyard and/or parsonage as accessory uses, provided that any accessory parsonage uses do not exceed the permitted residential intensity (in terms of the number of families housed) of any applicable residential zoning district, should the church be located within a residential zone. No structure designed to serve as a residence as its primary use shall be classified as a church, even if portions of the structure or lot are used, altered, or designed to be used for religious worship, education, or ceremonies. However, the prohibition of a church as a principal use in a specific zoning district shall not preclude or prohibit religious worship, education, expression, or other related practices as an accessory use associated with any permitted residential or public assembly use or structure. (See also Parsonage and Monastery.) 
Clinic, medical, means a public or private institution devoted to out-patient diagnosis, treatment, or care of sick or injured persons. No bedroom facilities for in-patient treatment shall be provided. The term "medical clinic" may include laboratories, a commercial cafeteria, and/or a commercial pharmacy. (See also Hospital.) 
Club, private, means a building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a corporation association, persons or person for a social, educational, or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Comprehensive plan means the most current or recently adopted land use or comprehensive plan for the city, as may be amended. 
Condominium means a multi-unit residential structure where it is possible to acquire legal ownership of a unit without title to the land on which it is located or with the purchase of a partial or shared interest in the land on which it is located. 
Construction, actual, means the commencement and continuous, uninterrupted (not to include delays caused by inclement weather conditions) prosecution of construction for the purpose of permanent placement and fastening of materials to the land/or structure, said purposes for which a permit has been issued. Construction includes filling, grading, the installation of drainage facilities, and the substantial demolition, clearing, excavation, or removal of an existing structure preparatory to new construction, provided that work shall be reasonably continuous until completion of the approved construction. 
Convenience store means a business use that sells motor vehicle fuels through pumps and registered underground storage tanks in combination or conjunction with general grocery and sundry goods primarily targeted to travelers or designed to serve quick-stop (generally ten item sales or less) shoppers, including, but not necessarily limited to: packaged and prepared food products, grocery items, magazines, newspapers, maps and atlases, tobacco products, over-the-counter (but not prescription) drugs, health and beauty products, and video rentals. Such businesses may include, if permitted within the applicable zoning district, not more than three distinct business operations in a single structure with internal public access between each business. Any multiple business operations shall be limited to grocery stores, fast food restaurants or pizza parlors, video rental stores, ice cream shops, souvenir shops, tobacco stores, and newsstands. (See also Automobile filling and service station and Truck stop.) 
Cottage industry means an accessory business use which is conducted within a building accessory to the permanent dwelling unit of the business owner. All cottage industries shall comply with the relevant standards contained in section 30-78. (See also Home occupation.) 
Developable land area means that portion of a lot that is not classified as: 
(1)	Areas of special flood hazard (100-year floodplain), as delineated on the applicable flood insurance rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)	Soils with severe limitations for septic systems, as delineated on the Soil Survey for Etowah County published by the Soil Conservation Service, now known as the Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
(3)	Steep natural slopes in excess of 25 percent grade, as determined by a survey of the development site, or if no such survey was required, by special interpretation using the 20-foot contour intervals delineated on the applicable U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute quadrangle. 
(4)	Wetland areas at least one acre in area, as delineated on the National Wetland Inventory prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
Development means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, relocation, or enlargement of a structure; any mining, dredging, fitting, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, or disturbance of land; or any use or expansion of use of land. 
Duplex means a residential building containing two functionally independent dwelling units on a commonly shared lot. A duplex also may be known as a two-family dwelling. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed, arranged, or used principally for residential occupancy. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a residential building containing three or more functionally independent dwelling units on a commonly-shared lot, such as an apartment building. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a residential building designed for and occupied by not more than one family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit, including modular homes, but not including manufactured homes. 
Dwelling unit means a dwelling or a portion thereof providing complete and separate facilities for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling, manufactured home, or other residential structure who live and function as a single housekeeping unit. 
Flood means an overflow of water onto lands not normally covered by water, resulting in significant adverse effects in the vicinity. 
Flood hazard area means all the land encompassed by the floodway and the floodway fringe areas. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. (See also Flood.) 
Floodway means the natural channel and the portion of the floodplain along the channel which must be retained solely for the passage of floodwaters to prevent an undue increase in flood heights upstream. 
Floodway fringe areas means areas lying outside the floodway but within the area subject to inundation by the 100-year flood, which is a flood having an average frequency of occurrence in the order of once in 100 years, although the flood may actually occur in any year. 
Floor area, gross or total, means the total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage, not including: attic space providing headroom of less than seven feet; unfinished basement, cellar, or crawl space; uncovered steps or fire escapes; open porches, decks, or patios; accessory water or cooling towers; and accessory off-street parking and loading spaces. 
Frontage means the distance along the boundary line of a lot which coincides with the public or approved private street right-of-way that provides primary vehicular access to the lot. The main street frontage of a lot shall be the frontage of the property along the street that serves as the official street address of the lot. 
Grade means the average level of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
Group home means a dwelling housing individuals who are not necessarily related by blood or marriage and who live and function as a single housekeeping unit under the supervision of one or more resident manager or resident manager teams. A resident manager team may include more than one resident care provider, as may be necessary, to provide around-the-clock staff support and coverage to serve the specific developmental or rehabilitation needs of the client population. Each resident manager or team and all associated individuals that are functionally or programmatically served by that resident manager or team shall constitute an individual and separate family residing within the group home. Specific individual living facilities shall be provided within the home for each family residing therein. A group home serves socially, physically, mentally, or developmentally impaired individuals in a family-type living arrangement, including homes for orphans or neglected children, homes for people with disabilities or who are mentally retarded or mentally ill, rehabilitation homes for drug or alcohol dependency, emergency care homes for abused spouses or children, and similar group residency individuals who require on-site assistance, counseling, or supervision from a resident manager, but do not otherwise represent a danger to society. Group homes shall comply with the relevant standards contained in section 30-76. 
Hazardous material means any explosive, corrosive, flammable, toxic, or carcinogenic material, chemical, or substance that poses a threat to human health or welfare. Such substances do not include common household products and cleansers which may, by their nature, include or constitute hazardous materials, as long as they are used exclusively for their intended purpose and are not stored in quantities that are excessive for common residential use. 
Hazardous waste means any discarded or disused material, chemical, or substance which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)	Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)	Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed, or otherwise managed. 
Home occupation means a business activity for gain or support incidental to the use of the premises for residential purposes, conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises, and conducted entirely within a dwelling or accessory building, in connection with which there is no advertising of any nature. All home occupations shall comply with the relevant standards contained in section 30-78. (See also Cottage industry.) 
Hospital means a public or private institution devoted to in-patient or in-patient and out-patient diagnosis, treatment, or care of sick or injured persons. A hospital may include laboratories, a commercial cafeteria, and/or a commercial pharmacy. (See also Clinic, medical.) 
Hotel means a commercial boarding and lodging facility offering sleeping accommodations to the public on a daily or weekly basis. Such facilities shall contain not less than ten bedrooms. Individual lodging rooms within a hotel shall not contain full kitchen facilities for exclusive use and must be accessed through a central internal lobby or office which is supervised at all times. Accessory uses permitted within a hotel building may include: a restaurant, conference facility, laundry facilities, meeting rooms, banquet rooms, gift shops, and recreational and exercise facilities. (See also Bed and breakfast inn,Boardinghouse or roominghouse,Dwelling, multifamily, and Motel.) 
Impervious surface area means that portion of a lot occupied by improved or natural surfaces that cause or contribute to stormwater runoff. Such surfaces shall include exposed bedrock or improvement to land that substantially reduces or prevents the natural infiltration of stormwater into the underlying soil layers and causes increased runoff, including, but not necessarily limited to paved surfaces, buildings, sidewalks, swimming pools, and any compaction of the surface layers of soil to an intensity of at least 95 percent. 
Institution means a structure or land occupied by a group, cooperative, board, agency or organization created for the purpose of carrying on nonprofit functions of a public or semi-public nature, including, but not limited to, hospitals, schools, churches, fraternal orders and orphanages, and also including residential accessory uses, such as rectories, parsonages, dormitories and dwellings for resident administrators, watchmen, custodians or caretakers. 
Junkyard means any lot or parcel of land upon which discarded or nonfunctional articles, products, and materials are kept, compacted, burned, stored, cannibalized, bought, or sold, but not actively repaired or used for their original purposes or as originally manufactured units. Such articles shall include, but may not be limited to, household appliances, scrap metal (ferrous or nonferrous), demolition materials or debris, worn or used rags, used furniture, scrap paper or glass, used or flat tires, and inoperable automobile bodies and parts. Any lot containing, for a period exceeding 30 consecutive days, two or more motor vehicles that are unregistered or are incapable of fully operating (start and move) under their own power shall constitute minimum prima-facie evidence of a junkyard. (See also Body shop and Solid waste facility.) 
Kennel means a lot or commercial enterprise or facility where five or more domestic animals are boarded or kept for any purpose whatsoever, with exception of on-site major medical treatment. (See also Veterinary clinic,Veterinary hospital,Pet store, and Pet grooming establishment.) 
Lot means an unsubdivided parcel or portion of land/or legal lot of record occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or group of buildings, uses, and open spaces belonging to the same. The term "lot" includes the terms "plot" and "parcel." The establishment of lease or rental lines shall not define separate lots for purposes of this chapter. 
Lot, corner, means a lot adjoining an intersection of two street rights-of-way such that it possesses frontage along the right-of-way lines of both intersecting streets. A lot located along a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if street frontage opposes both the rear and one side yard of the lot and the interior angle formed by the intersecting front street line and the side street line is less than 135 degrees. 
Lot depth means the longest distance between any point along the frontage line of a lot and the opposing rear property line as measured by a line drawn perpendicular to the building setback line. (See also Building setback line and Lot width.) 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot possessing frontage on two or more streets that do not intersect at any point along the subject lot boundaries. 
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot possessing frontage on only one street. 
Lot of record means any validly recorded unsubdivided parcel of land which, at the time of its recording, complied with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
Lot width means the distance between the side lines of a lot, measured along the building setback line. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or when erected on site is 320 or more square feet, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, and which is connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. All manufactured homes shall comply with the relevant and applicable standards contained in section 30-77. (See also Mobile home and Modular home.) 
Manufactured home park means a tract of land in single ownership having multiple spaces for lease which are used or designed to accommodate manufactured homes. 
Mobile home means a structure which complies with the definition of the term "manufactured home" but which was manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, mobile homes shall be a nonconformity subject to the regulations established in section 30-75. (See also Manufactured home and Modular home.) 
Modular home means a dwelling transported in pre-manufactured sections or components to the construction site and assembled and inspected in accordance with a national building code and bearing an insignia issued by the state manufactured housing commission verifying compliance of the structure's components with all applicable requirements of the state code, as amended. (See also Manufactured home and Mobile home.) 
Monastery means a religious building, structure, or compound occupied by monks residing and worshiping within the structure under religious vows and in seclusion. The term "monastery" shall also include convents. (See also Church and Parsonage.) 
Motel means a commercial boarding and lodging facility offering sleeping accommodations to the public on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis. Such facilities shall contain not less than ten bedrooms. Individual lodging rooms within a motel may be accessed directly from the outdoors and may contain partial kitchen facilities, such as a sink, small refrigerator, and a microwave oven, but not a stove, convection oven or dishwasher. Accessory uses permitted within a motel building may include: a restaurant, laundry facilities, meeting rooms, gift shops, and recreational and exercise facilities. Guest rooms also may be provided in the form of separate cottages on the motel premises, as long as any bathroom facilities are connected to municipal sewer or a sanitary on-site septic system approved for such use by the health department. (See also Bed and breakfast inn,Boardinghouse or roominghouse,Dwelling, multifamily, and Hotel.) 
Net area means the total area of a site minus the street area. 
Nonconformity means a lot of record, structure, or use of a lot or structure that legally existed at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or of subsequent amendment to this chapter, but which no longer conforms to all applicable provisions of the district in which it is located. 
Nursery school or kindergarten means any premises or portion thereof used for educational work or parental care of children of less than the age required for enrollment in the public school system. 
Nursing home means a home for the aged or infirmed in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar establishments devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
Open space means the area on a lot which is not occupied by a building or structure and is maintained in a natural state or has been developed to support outdoor recreational uses. 
Parking lot means an open area used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor vehicles and within which motor fuels and oils may be sold and fees charged, but no vehicles are to be equipped, repaired, rented or sold. 
Parsonage means an attached or detached dwelling used as a domicile for a church clergyman and his family. A parsonage also may be used as a temporary housing facility for visiting clergy. A parsonage may be an accessory structure on a church property or a principal use on an adjoining lot to a church. (See also Monastery and Church.) 
Pet grooming establishment means any commercial enterprise in a totally enclosed building where animals are groomed, but where overnight boarding or medical treatment are not permitted. (See also Kennel, Pet store, Veterinary clinic, and Veterinary hospital.) 
Pet store means a commercial enterprise in a totally enclosed building, where common domestic animals are temporarily housed for retail sale only and where extensive medical treatment is not provided. Such an enterprise also may offer pet products, canned or packaged food, and other associated supplies for retail sale. (See also Kennel, Pet grooming establishment, Veterinary clinic, andVeterinary hospital.) 
Planning commission or commission means the planning commission of the city. 
Public land use means any land use operated by or through a unit or level of government, either through lease or ownership, such as: municipal administration and operation; libraries; county buildings and activities; state highway offices and similar land uses; and federal uses such as post offices, bureau of public roads, internal revenue offices, military installations, etc. 
Recreational vehicle. See Camper.
Recreational vehicle park. See Campground.
Regular zoning district means a zoning district which is delineated on the base zoning map. 
Restaurant means a commercial dining facility serving food prepared or cooked on the premises to patrons who will primarily consume the prepared food on the premises or within the dining facility. Under the terms of this definition, a restaurant shall include delis, cafes, and ice cream parlors. (See also Restaurant, drive-through.) 
Restaurant, drive-through, means a commercial dining facility serving food prepared or cooked on the premises and specifically designed to afford patrons the option of dining on the premises or taking the prepared food away for off-site consumption. Such dining facilities are distinguished by the provision of a drive-through lane or service window or the absence of seating or parking facilities for on-site dining. (See also Restaurant.) 
Shopping center means a retail business development consisting of a group of commercial establishments designed as a unit and having shared parking and driveway facilities. 
Solid waste means any solid refuse materials generated by residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional uses for disposal. 
Solid waste facility means any land/or structure used for the long-term disposal, storage, transfer, collection, treatment, utilization, processing, incineration, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Special zoning district means a zoning district that overlays one or more regular zoning district identified on the zoning map. 
Stockyard means any fenced or walled pen or corral within which transient cattle, sheep, swine, or horses are kept temporarily for slaughter, market, or shipping. The term "stockyard" includes any associated shed, barn, or shelter directly or freely accessed by the animals residing within the contained yard for feeding and/or protection against the elements. However, a stockyard shall not be confused with pastureland, where similar animals are contained by a fence or wall in a low density setting or a large field with natural grass or ground vegetation to permit sustainable casual grazing. In a stockyard, animals are confined at such high intensities that the natural growth of ground vegetation is retarded by the persistent trampling of the confined animals. 
Story means that portion of a building other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor immediately above, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. 
Story, half, means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. A half-story containing an independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
Street means a dedicated right-of-way within which an improved surface has been constructed for vehicular traffic, which is opened to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. A public street is a street that has been dedicated for public use, improved according to city standards, and accepted by the city as a public right-of-way. A private street is a street that has been dedicated for public use, improved according to city standards, and is owned and maintained by an individual or an association of homeowners served by the street. 
Street, arterial, means as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
Street centerline means a line formed by the midpoint between the inside edges of the curbs or the drainage ditches along the improved roadway within a street right-of-way. 
Street, collector, means as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
Street, local, means as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
Street line means the right-of-way of a street. 
Street, major, means all arterials and collectors. 
Streets, minor, means all local streets. 
Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders; provided, however, that the application of any exterior siding to an existing building for the purpose of beautifying and modernizing shall not be considered a structural alteration. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, the term "structure" includes buildings, manufactured homes, walls, fences, and outdoor advertising signs. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
Theater, drive-in, means an open-air performance facility specifically designed to allow patrons to view a performance or motion picture while seated in a parked motor vehicle. 
Townhouse means buildings containing only one or two dwelling units, with three or more buildings attached to each other by party walls without openings. Side yards shall be required only at the end of rows of attached dwellings. In districts where permitted, the lot area of each building must be at least equal to the minimum lot area of that district. 
Travel trailer. See Camper.
Truck stop means a place of business that offers a wide array of services and goods primarily serving the needs of long-haul truckers and long-distance, nonresident travelers. Such services and goods may include a dine-in or drive-through restaurant; convenience foods, groceries, and sundries; common non-salvaged vehicle parts and accessories; maps and periodicals; and motor vehicle fuels, oils, fluids, or lubricants, provided that all motor vehicle fuels are stored in registered underground storage tanks. No aboveground storage tanks with a capacity in excess of 500 gallons shall be permitted. Such facilities also may provide shower and lounge facilities for the traveling public, except that no on-site bedrooms or other overnight sleeping accommodations shall be provided. The following services shall not be provided at a truck stop: 
(1)	Tire recapping or re-grooving; 
(2)	Exclusive auto parts sales where no repair or maintenance service is offered; 
(3)	Full vehicle restoration; 
(4)	Body painting, repainting, or detail (other than incidental touch-up associated with permitted repair and servicing work); 
(5)	Whole engine replacement or overhaul; 
(6)	The on-site storage and salvaging of inoperable motor vehicles, chassis, bodies, or engines, and other similar major vehicle body and restoration work or overhauls. 
(See also Automobile filling and service station, Body shop, andConvenience store.) 
Use means the purpose or activity for which land/or a building or other structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or the purpose or activity for which land is or may be occupied or maintained. 
Veterinary clinic means a satellite facility of an existing vet hospital that is located in the county for the outpatient treatment of small domestic animals, which is staffed by at least one doctor of veterinary medicine and which does not have facilities or provide for the overnight stay of animals. A veterinary clinic may offer pet grooming services. (See also Kennel, Pet grooming establishment, Pet store, andVeterinary hospital.) 
Veterinary hospital means a facility for the medical treatment and boarding of small domestic animals, which is staffed by a least one doctor of veterinary medicine. A veterinary hospital may offer pet grooming services. (See also Kennel, Pet grooming establishment, Pet store, andVeterinary clinic.) 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front, means a yard extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the right-of-way line of the abutting street and the nearest point of the principal building. 
Yard, rear, means a yard extending the full width of the lot from the rear of the lot to the nearest point of the principal building. 
Yard, side, means a yard situated between the nearest point of the principal building and the sideline of the lot, generally extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zoning district means a section of the city for which the zoning regulations are uniform, as delineated on the zoning map. 
Zoning map means the zoning map of the city which includes a base map of the regular zoning districts and an overlay of the special zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. II(§ 2), 3-22-2004)
 
Secs. 30-7—30-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
 
Sec. 30-31. Uses.
(a)	Land use compliance. Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, no building, structure, or parcel of land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, converted, moved, or altered except for a use permitted within the zoning district in which it is located. Any use that is not specifically listed as a permitted use or a special exception within the applicable zoning district shall be prohibited, unless authorized by the board of adjustment as a new use under the provisions of section 30-140. 
(b)	Exception for utility transmission poles and lines. Utility structures, including, but not limited to, poles, wires, cross arms, transformers attached to poles, guy wires, insulators, conduits and other facilities necessary for the transmission or distribution of electric power or to provide telephone, telegraph, cable, or fiber optic service and pipe lines, vents, valves, hydrants, regulators, meters and other facilities necessary for the transmission or distribution of gas, oil, water or other fluids, may be constructed, erected, repaired, maintained or replaced within the city. This exception is not to be construed to include the erection or construction of buildings or electric substations. 
(c)	Exception for railroad tracks and equipment. Railroad facilities, including main line tracks, switching spurs, control signals, poles, and wires or similar facilities (but not yards or service facilities) needed for train operations, may be constructed, repaired, maintained, or replaced in any district. However, all other associated structures and uses, such as terminals (including passenger or freight stations), team tracks, equipment/repair sheds, and storage yards shall be permitted only in the M-1 Zoning District. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 1), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-32. Structures.
It is the intent of this chapter that no more than one principal use structure shall be located on any single lot of record, plus any permitted accessory structures. Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, accessory structures shall not include functionally independent living quarters. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 2), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-33. Height and density.
(a)	Height of structures. In each district, each structure hereafter erected or altered shall not exceed the height limits specified in this chapter. Height limitations shall not apply to church steeples, barns, silos, farm structures, chimneys, flag poles, public utility poles, radio and television towers and all such structures that are specifically exempted from local zoning regulations by applicable federal law, nor to cooling towers, water tanks, and similar structures not intended for human occupancy. 
(b)	Intensity of use. Each building and lot shall not be used or occupied hereafter by more families or for a higher intensity of use than permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 3), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-34. Accessory structures.
(a)	In residential districts. Accessory structures in residential districts or the agricultural district, or any lot used primarily for residential purposes, shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)	Accessory structures (with the exception of a fully enclosed garage) shall be permitted in the rear yard only. Accessory structures shall not exceed the height of the principal use structure, shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard, and shall be located at least five feet from all lot lines. 
(2)	A fully enclosed garage that is not attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway, or similar means shall be permitted within the side yard, provided that no portion of the garage structure shall protrude into the front yard and provided that the siting of the garage shall comply with all applicable side yard setbacks. 
(3)	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway, or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is attached. 
(b)	In nonresidential districts. On any lot within a nonresidential zoning district that shares a side lot line with a lot in a residential zoning district, no part of any accessory structure shall be located within five feet of the common property line, nor shall any part of such accessory structure shall be located within 60 feet of the front lot line. 
(c)	Minimum separation. Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a lot line, nor closer than ten feet to a principal building or to any other accessory building on the same lot. 
(d)	Timing of placement. No accessory structure shall be placed or erected on a lot of record before construction or placement of a permitted principal use structure. This provision shall not be interpreted in a manner that would prohibit the placement of a permitted temporary use structure during the construction or reconstruction of a permitted principal use structure. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 4), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-35. Lots.
(a)	Minimum lot size. All lots created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall comply with the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district within which they are located. 
(b)	Yard reduction. Except as herein provided, no lot shall be reduced in area so that yards and other open spaces total less than the minimum area required under this section. 
(c)	Minimum frontage. All lots shall have a minimum frontage of not less than 40 feet along a public street or a private street dedicated for public use and constructed in accordance with all applicable city street standards. The minimum required frontage shall be reduced to 30 feet for lots fronting on the turn-about at the end of a permanent cul-de-sac. 
(d)	Minimum lot width-to-length ratio. No part of any lot shall be narrower than one foot for each three feet of length as measured along the longest side boundary of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 5), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-36. Yards and open space.
(a)	Required yards and open spaces. In each district, each structure hereafter erected or altered shall be provided with the yards specified, and shall be on a lot of the area and width specified in this section. No open space or lot required for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by or counted as open space for another building or structure. Except as hereafter provided, no yard or other open space provided about any building, nor the off-street parking and loading spaces required for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this section, shall hereafter be included as a part of a yard or other open space, or the off-street parking or loading spaces, for any other building. 
(b)	Yards and open spaces on substandard lots. Where the owner of a property has, at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a lot of official record which is substandard to the requirements of the district in which they are located according to this chapter, the building and its accessory structures may be built, provided: 
(1)	The yard space and other requirements conform as closely as possible, in the opinion of the board of adjustment, to the requirements of the district in which the property is located. 
(2)	That neither side yard shall be reduced to less than five feet. 
(3)	No building shall be required to set back more than the average of the front yard setbacks of the existing residences within 100 feet each side thereof, but in no case shall the front yard setback of any building hereafter erected or altered be less than 20 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
(c)	Swimming pools. In a residence district, no required yard except the rear yard shall be used for the location of a private swimming pool and, if constructed, said pool shall be enclosed by a fence of not less than four feet in height, provided that the owner of any existing pool shall be allowed a period of six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in which to provide a fence for such pool as herein required. No accessory mechanical equipment or portion of a pool shall be within ten feet of any lot line. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 6), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-37. Building setback lines.
(a)	Properties abutting existing improved public streets. When any required yard abuts a street or roadway with an existing public street right-of-way of 40 feet or more, the setback shall be the standard setback required in that zoning district. The setback shall be measured from the property line. 
(b)	Properties abutting dedicated rights-of-way. When any required yard abuts a public or private street or roadway with a dedicated right-of-way of less than 40 feet, the setback shall be not less than 25 feet, plus any additional setback required by the minimum dimensional requirements for the applicable zoning district. The setback shall be measured from the centerline of the existing improved roadway. If no improved roadway has been constructed within the right-of-way, then the 25-foot setback shall be measured from the centerline of the dedicated right-of-way. 
(c)	Properties abutting street or roadways without dedicated rights-of-way. When any required yard abuts a public or private street or roadway without a dedicated right-of-way, the setback shall be not less than 25 feet, plus any additional setback required by the minimum dimensional requirements for the applicable zoning district. The setback shall be measured from the centerline of the existing improved street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 7), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-38. Frontage on corner lots and double frontage lots.
On lots having frontage on more than one street, the side or rear yard setback along said secondary street shall not be less than the required front yard setback for the applicable zoning district. Where this requirement, as applied to a double frontage lot, would cause a building on a developed block to be set back from the street line a distance that would be inconsistent with the established setback on that block, the enforcement officer may approve a special setback requirement which shall not exceed the average of the building setbacks on the adjacent lots. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 8), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-39. Access to streets.
No building for human occupancy shall be erected without unrestricted vehicular access of at least 25 feet to a public street or a private street dedicated for public use and constructed in accordance with all applicable city street standards. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 9), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-40. Fences and walls.
(a)	Height on residential properties. Fences or walls may be erected, placed, maintained, or grown along a side or rear lot line on residentially zoned property, or adjacent thereto, to a height not exceeding eight feet above the ground. Fences or walls located in a required front yard shall not exceed a height of four feet, except as required to provide a retaining wall. Within the first 20 feet from the right-of-way line within a required front yard, the height shall not exceed 2½ feet. Where such lot line is adjacent to a nonresidentially zoned property, fences and walls may be maintained at a height not exceeding ten feet. 
(b)	Height on nonresidential properties. No fence or wall erected, placed, maintained, or grown along a lot line on any nonresidentially zoned property shall exceed a height of eight feet, except as may be required to construct a retaining wall. 
(c)	Prohibited materials. Barbed wire or razor wire shall not be used as fencing for any residential property. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 10), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-41. Traffic visibility at intersections.
On any corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, or grown in such a manner as to limit or obstruct traffic visibility at the street intersection. A clear sight triangle shall be maintained upon such lot, such sight triangle beginning at the intersection of the two lot lines along the street and running along each lot line for 20 feet; the third leg of the triangle is formed by connecting the other two legs of the triangle. Within such sight triangle, nothing shall be erected, placed, or grown taller than a height of 30 inches above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 11), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-42. Stormwater management.
Stormwater runoff from construction sites and urban development is a significant source of surface water contamination. Since the clean groundwaters and surface waters are important economic resources to the city, new development and construction activity must be designed to minimize on-site erosion and the resulting sedimentation of off-site water resources that can be generated by stormwater runoff. Therefore, no final inspection of a development site shall be conducted by the city until the developer has complied with all applicable requirements of this section. The city may request assistance from the natural resource conservation district or other qualified experts in evaluating the applicant's proposed measures to comply with these requirements. 
(1)	Exempt activities. The following activities shall be exempt from these stormwater management requirements: 
a.	Minor land disturbing activities normally associated with single-family uses, such as home gardens, landscaping, building repairs or alterations, swimming pool installation, or other related, low-impact activities. 
b.	Construction of a single-family dwelling on an individual lot and the installation or replacement of a manufactured home. 
c.	Agricultural practices or the construction of farm buildings, when conducted in full compliance with all applicable best management practices. 
d.	Private and commercial forestry activities, when conducted in full compliance with all applicable best management practices and with all applicable requirements specified in section 30-89. 
(2)	ADEM permit required. It shall be the developer's responsibility to secure compliance with all applicable state department of environmental management (ADEM) construction stormwater management administrative code rules, as amended, and/or any applicable ADEM construction site permit requirements, which are designed to prevent/minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of sediment and other pollutants in construction stormwater runoff to ensure the protection of water quality in accordance with applicable federal and state law. Applicants subject to this requirement shall provide evidence that a stormwater discharge permit has been issued by ADEM prior to the issuance of a zoning permit by the enforcement officer. 
(3)	Tie-in required. All proposed drainage improvements shall tie into any existing manmade or natural drainageways along the existing public streets adjoining the development site. Under no conditions shall stormwater drainage be emptied into the sanitary sewer system or vice-versa. 
(4)	Basic guidelines. Stormwater management measures shall be designed in accordance with all applicable best management practices for the proposed type of construction activity. Appropriate short-term (during construction) and long-term (after construction is complete) measures shall be applied to minimize potential erosion of disturbed soils on the development site. All slopes on the development site in excess of ten percent grade shall be permanently stabilized through the use of natural vegetation (preferably native vegetation), retaining walls, terracing, or a combination, as may be appropriate. Development sites which will contain more than 20,000 square feet of impervious surfaces or upon which more than 50 percent of the total lot area will consist of impervious surfaces shall contain adequate stormwater management facilities (detention or retention basins, drainageways, storm drains, etc.) to accommodate on-site and safely release or transmit the runoff that would be generated by a 25-year storm event, without causing an increase or surge in the volume and velocity of off-site peak stormwater runoff over the pre-development state. 
(5)	Creative and innovative polluted runoff management practices. Where feasible and appropriate, proposed developments may incorporate creative and innovative design to minimize the impacts of polluted runoff on the environment. Such design features may include, but are not limited to, undisturbed natural buffers between impervious surfaces and adjoining streams and drainageways, maximum retention of existing mature trees on building lots, the use of seeded shallow "V" drainage swales (with stabilized cut slopes not to exceed a ten percent grade) rather than concrete curb and gutter, the use of porous pavement surfaces for parking lots, service roads, alleys, and culs-de-sac, the use of crushed gravel or turf parking areas for small parking lots or spillover parking areas, and the creation of wetlands for stormwater detention and retention, and other practices as may be appropriate to address on-site stormwater drainage needs. Such creative and innovative design features should be used in the following development settings: 
a.	Where they will be compatible with existing off-site stormwater management infrastructure improvements serving the drainage basin; and 
b.	Where appropriate to adequately and safely accommodate the stormwater runoff that would be generated by the proposed level of impervious surfaces without the need for excessive perpetual maintenance. 
(6)	Lot drainage standards. The following design requirements for lot drainage shall be satisfied in each stormwater management plan: 
a.	A positive slope of finish grade shall be provided around each structure to direct water away from all foundations, slabs, or footings; 
b.	Side lot swales shall be utilized, as necessary, to direct lot drainage into public drainage improvements or easements; 
c.	Roof drains shall be utilized to prevent soil erosion and to prevent the accumulation of stormwater runoff along structure foundations and footings. Such drains shall be directed away from structures and into swales or other drainage facilities; 
d.	Driveway culvert pipes shall be the proper size to safely transmit design storm event drainage waters. The inside diameter of such culvert pipe shall be at least 15 inches, and shall consist of either metal pipe or a class three concrete pipe; 
e.	All driveway and service drive piping shall be installed on an appropriate grade to prevent standing water. 
(7)	Erosion and sediment control. The following erosion and sediment control measures shall be observed for the construction and maintenance of all stormwater management facilities: 
a.	Roadside ditches, swales, and embankments within each dedicated right-of-way or drainage easement shall be properly stabilized in accordance with applicable best management practices to prevent excessive erosion from cut slopes; 
b.	It shall be the developer's responsibility to provide the necessary measures to ensure that clearing, grubbing, grading, landscaping, and other construction activities do not adversely affect the drainage structures that are essential to overall stormwater management and control; 
c.	It shall be the developer's responsibility to ensure proper implementation, regular inspection, and continual maintenance of effective best management practices for construction site erosion and sediment control; 
d.	It shall be the developer's responsibility to promptly remove and/or remediate, to the extent practicable, any off-site sediment from the development site that is washed or deposited into municipal stormwater drainage facilities. 
(8)	Stormwater management on privately owned common open space lands. Where any stormwater management improvements are to be constructed on common open space lands within the development, such improvements shall be subject to special maintenance provisions as required in section 30-84. The city shall assume no responsibility or liability for the continued, maintenance, improvement, or repair of privately-owned stormwater management facilities. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 12), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-43. Land disturbance and erosion control.
Haphazard and speculative clearing of property with no site plan shall be discouraged. Soil erosion, sedimentation and/or other degrading of development sites can result from speculative clearing. Such erosion and sedimentation, when washed into the municipal stormwater drainage system, can impair and pollute public waters. Federal and state requirements promulgated by the environmental protection agency and the state department of environmental management require the city to minimize and prevent these water quality impacts by encouraging all new development to apply appropriate best management practices within development plans. It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and the environment in which they live by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development or other activity which breaks the topsoil, results in the movement of earth or soil, or removes natural or cultivated vegetation, and thereby increases the possibility of soil erosion, sediment deposits or flooding. 
(1)	Applicability. All development, whether or not subject to the permit requirements of this article, shall be subject to the applicable standards, guidelines, and requirements set forth in this section. 
(2)	Permit required. Except as otherwise exempted or allowed in this section, no person shall commence or perform any removal, grading, clearing, stripping, excavating, filling, or development on any site, without first obtaining a land disturbance and erosion control permit from the city. 
(3)	Exemptions from permit requirements. A permit shall not be required for any of the following: 
a.	Installation, renovation, or replacement of a septic system to serve an existing dwelling or structure subject to existing city or county ordinances, regulations and policies regarding same. 
b.	Repair work by utilities as long as such repair work is performed in compliance with this article. 
c.	The selective removal of dead or dying trees, shrubs, or other vegetation where no major disturbance of the soil shall occur, provided that such activities are conducted in compliance with the applicable requirements of section 30-89. 
d.	The establishment of a garden plot for the growing of vegetables, fruits, and other produce for home or family consumption. 
e.	Minor land disturbing activities normally associated with single-family uses, such as landscaping, building repairs or alterations, swimming pool installation, or other related, low-impact activities that disturb less than one acre of land. 
f.	Construction of a single-family dwelling on an individual lot and the installation or replacement of a manufactured home in accordance with a properly issued building permit and in full compliance with any required erosion control measures stipulated by said permit. 
g.	Agricultural practices or the construction of farm buildings, when conducted in full compliance with all applicable best management practices. 
h.	Private and commercial forestry activities, when conducted in full compliance with all applicable best management practices and with all applicable requirements specified in section 30-89. 
(4)	Definitions.
a.	Additional definitions that may apply to this section are contained in section 30-6. 
b.	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Clearing means the cutting of trees, shrubs, brush or other vegetation or structures. 
Drainage means the removal of surface water or groundwater from a given area either by gravity or pumping. 
Drainageway means a ditch, levee, watercourse, channel or other natural or artificial condition for the removal of surplus or excess surface water collecting or accumulating on the land. 
Erosion means the natural wearing away of the land by the action of running water, and/or wind. 
Erosion, accelerated, means an increased wearing away of the land by the action of running water and/or wind resulting from the development of land, destruction of vegetative cover, or other activity of man. 
Excavating means any act by which organic matter, earth, soil, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated. 
Exposed land means land from which vegetative cover and/or topsoil has been removed. 
Fill means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by man to a new location. 
Grade, existing, means the vertical location of the existing ground or other surface prior to excavation or filling. 
Grade, final, means the vertical location of the ground or other surface after the grading work is completed in accordance with submitted plans and permits. 
Grade, rough, means the vertical location of the ground or other surface after the commencement of grading but prior to the establishment of final grade. 
Grading means excavating, filling, or any combination thereof. 
Parcel means all contiguous land under single ownership and/or unified control or all land included within an erosion control plan. 
Permittee means any person to which a land disturbance/erosion control permit is issued. 
Removal means removing vegetation (including ground cover) to the ground and complete extraction of tree stumps by cutting, burning, chemical application or other means. 
Sedimentation means the process of forming and depositing of suspended matter carried in suspension in water through the action of gravity. 
Settling. See Sedimentation.
Site means a parcel of land where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
Site engineer means a registered professional engineer employed by the developer to prepare an erosion control/site plan and to monitor site development activities. 
Storm event of 25-year frequency means a storm that has a four percent probability of being equaled or exceeded during any year. A less frequent storm is a storm that has a lower probability of being equaled or exceeded during any year, i.e., a 50-year storm has a two percent probability of being equaled or exceeded during any year and a 100-year storm has a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded during any year. The frequency of storm events shall be based on the amount of rainfall which occurs in any 24-hour period in accordance with the criteria in the following chart prepared in Technical Paper #40 by the U.S. Weather Bureau. 
Frequency of Storm Event	Amount of Rainfall in a 24-Hour Period
100-year 	6.0 inches 
50-year 	5.5 inches 
25-year 	4.7 inches 
10-year 	4.1 inches 
5-year 	3.5 inches 
2-year 	2.8 inches 
1-year 	2.2 inches 

Stripping means any activity which relocates topsoil and vegetation from the site or relocates topsoil for later use on the site. 
Structure, hydraulic, means any engineering structure for the purpose of regulation and control of water. 
Structure, temporary, means any structure used to retard erosion or limit the flow of water constructed of nondurable materials in a manner to ensure temporary control of water flow rates for beneficial use over a short period of time, i.e., one or two seasons. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently and if the latter, with some degree of regularity. Such flow must be in a definite direction and cover a prescribed area. Watercourses may be either natural or artificial and both may occur either on the surface or underground. 
(5)	Land disturbance and erosion control guidelines and requirements. Measures taken to control erosion and sedimentation should be adequate to ensure that sediment is not transported from the site by storm events of one-, five-, ten-, and 25-year frequency. The following principles shall apply to all development activities within the city and to the preparation of the submissions required under subsection (6) of this section. These principles shall be followed by the site engineer as part of the required erosion control plan: 
a.	Site development should be planned so that it is consistent with and conforms to the topography and soils of the site so as to prevent and minimize soil erosion. Radical cuts and fills should be avoided in areas of steep slopes. Natural contours should be maintained as much as possible. 
b.	Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left undisturbed wherever possible. 
c.	Soils exposed during site development should be limited to the smallest working area practicable, for the shortest period practicable and during periods of the least intense rainfall. Stripping and excavation should be minimized. Vegetative cover should be restored at the earliest possible time. Large topsoil stockpiles and land removal of topsoil should be minimized. Topsoil stockpiles should be re-vegetated during periods of extended use or storage. 
d.	Sediment basins, debris basins, de-silting bins, or silt traps or filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediments generated by development activity from stormwater runoff. 
e.	The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be based upon the probable frequency of climatic and other events likely to contribute to erosion and upon an evaluation of the risks, costs, and benefits involved. 
f.	Aesthetics, public health and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered in the design and implementation of erosion control facilities and practices as part of an erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
g.	Provisions should be made to accommodate the increased water runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainageways should be designed and constructed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities of water will not create additional erosion on or beyond the site. 
h.	Permanent (post-construction) vegetation and hydraulic structures should be established and installed as soon as practicable during development. 
i.	No stormwater runoff shall leave the site after initial ground disturbance without proper mitigation by erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
j.	Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be incorporated into any stormwater management plan that may be required under section 30-42. 
(6)	Application for permit. Application for a land disturbance and erosion control permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the enforcement officer on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall include the names and addresses of the owner, developer of the site, any person retained by the applicant as site engineer, and the individual who will act as the principal contact for the site engineer. Each application shall be accompanied by the appropriate application fee. 
(7)	Land disturbance and erosion control plans. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by the following plans, data, and information: 
a.	A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location of the site, including the boundary lines and approximately acreage of the site, existing zoning, and a legend and scale. A legal description of the site must also be provided. 
b.	A plan showing: 
1.	Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within 100 feet of the site boundary, drawn at no greater than five-foot contour levels and clearly portraying the topography and drainage pattern of the area, including any and all existing stormwater drainage improvements. 
2.	The location of existing buildings, temporary structures, utilities, water bodies, floodplains, hydraulic structures, paved areas, and other significant natural or manmade features on the site and adjacent land within 100 feet of the boundary. 
3.	A general description of the predominant soil types on the site to the depth of intended excavation, their location, and their limitations for the proposed use. 
4.	Proposed use of the site, including present development and planned development and utilization; areas of excavation, grading, and filling; proposed contours, finished grades, and street profiles; provisions for storm drainage, including the control of accelerated erosion, with a drainage area map and computations which addresses the need for any stormwater retention devices; kinds and locations of utilities; and areas and acreage proposed to be paved, covered, sodded, seeded, stabilized by vegetation, or left undisturbed. 
c.	A plan showing proposed erosion and sedimentation controls, including: 
1.	All erosion control devices, structures or measures necessary to comply with this section, including the stormwater management provisions contained in section 30-42. The erosion control plan shall show all such devices, structures or measures to be employed temporarily during development and permanently upon completion of development. These measures s hall be shown on the detailed grading plan. 
2.	Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seed bed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. 
3.	Provisions for maintenance of erosion control devices, structures or measures, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance of any easements. 
4.	As a minimum measure, staked bales of hay or acceptable alternatives shall be properly placed around the frames of all open lid structures during construction to prevent sediment from clogging sewers and ditches and polluting or silting drainage facilities, watercourses or bodies of water. 
5.	The person or agent who will be responsible for the implementation and maintenance of temporary and/or permanent erosion control devices, structures or measures during the development process and after developed and completed. 
6.	That the proposed land disturbance and erosion control plan is consistent with existing or planned development of other parcels which may be affected by, or which may affect development of the subject parcel. 
d.	The proposed phasing/grading plans for development of the site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction, final grading and landscaping. Documentation on plans should reflect phasing of such development activities and identify a schedule of expected dates on which each phase will begin, the estimated duration of each phase in number of days, including the estimated duration of exposure of stripped and cleared areas, and the sequence of stripping and clearing, installation of temporary and permanent erosion control devices, structures or measures, final grading, installation of hydraulic structures, paving streets and parking areas, and establishment of permanent vegetative cover. 
e.	The land disturbance and erosion control plan shall conform to and demonstrate compliance with applicable established city policy regarding excavating and grading. 
(8)	Agreement; waiver. An application for a land disturbance and erosion control permit shall constitute the applicant's agreement to develop the site in accordance with the requirements of this section and the plan approved by the enforcement officer. Specific requirements under this section for the content of the submitted plan may be waived or modified in a written agreement approved by the city council if the city council first determines that development of the parcel in accordance with the land disturbance and erosion control plan submitted will conform with the general principles and purposes of this section. 
(9)	Bond requirements. Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance and erosion control plan permit, the applicant shall submit a corporate surety bond or other financing surety containing substantially the provisions set forth in this section to guarantee completion of the land disturbance and erosion control plan. 
(10)	Review and approval. Each application for a land disturbance and erosion control permit shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures: 
a.	After receiving an application, the city engineer and/or enforcement officer will review each application to determine its conformance with the provisions of this section. The enforcement officer may also refer any application to the appropriate soil and water conservation district and/or any other government or public agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and comment. Any additional fees incurred by such a referral shall be paid by the person applying for the permit. 
b.	A land disturbance and erosion control permit may be issued by the enforcement officer after approval of preliminary engineering plans for the site and the submission of detailed final engineering plans, all in accordance with this section. All work undertaken by the applicant pursuant to the permit shall be subject to all modifications necessary to comply with the approved final engineering plans for the site. By undertaking any work pursuant to the permit prior to approval of final engineering plans by the city engineer/enforcement officer and any other government or public agency having jurisdiction of the site, the applicant acknowledges and agrees that all modifications necessary to comply with approved final engineering plans or the requirements of such other government or public agency shall be performed and completed by the applicant at his sole cost and expense. 
c.	The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a land disturbance and erosion control plan permit upon submission, review and approval of an application, erosion control plan, and a bond. A land disturbance and erosion control plan permit may be issued only after approval of preliminary engineering plans for the site and the submission of detailed final engineering plans in accordance with this section. The applicant must also obtain all permits or approvals required by any other government or public agency, including an NPDES permit from the state department of environmental management if the area to be disturbed exceeds the applicable permit threshold requirement. The enforcement officer's approval or disapproval of each application shall be attached to any building permit that may be issued for construction on the site. 
(11)	Record drawings. The applicant shall provide the engineering department with reproducible record drawings upon completion of the project in compliance with the procedures and standards established by the enforcement officer. The enforcement officer shall have the authority to establish written procedures and standards for the content, review, and approval of record drawings for the purpose of establishing that projects have been completed in conformance with the requirements of this section. 
(12)	Inspection. The enforcement officer and/or the city engineer shall make such periodic inspections of the work as may be appropriate in their discretion and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee how the work fails to comply with the approved plan. A copy of the plan shall be maintained at the site during progress of the work. The city reserves the right to reject the need for formal inspection in writing for these specific items, but the city engineer will be solely responsible for making this determination. The permittee shall notify the enforcement officer not more than ten nor less than two working days before the anticipated completion of the following for any area or phase of the work: 
a.	Stripping and clearing; 
b.	Rough grading; 
c.	Final grading; 
d.	Final landscaping. 
(13)	City responsibility. The city shall use its best efforts to inspect and enforce the provisions of this section for the benefit of the people of the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed as creating any special duty to any particular person different from that owed to the public at-large. 
(14)	Special precautions. If at any stage of development, the enforcement officer or city engineer determines that the nature or conditions of the site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit may cause harm or accelerated erosion to any property, public way, watercourse, drainageway, hydraulic structure, or other structure, the enforcement officer or city engineer may require that such reasonable special precautions be taken as are appropriate to avoid such harm or accelerated erosion. Special precautions may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following requirements: a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage structures, berms, terracing, compaction, cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, other temporary structures, implementation of recommendations of a soil engineer and/or engineering geologist, or completion of work in stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices by specified dates. 
(15)	Amendment of plans. A permittee may request an amendment to the plan by submitting amended plans in accordance with the requirements of this section. The city shall process and approve or disapprove the proposed amendments in accordance with the provisions for review and approval of plans. 
(16)	Expiration of permit. Land disturbance and erosion control permits shall be valid for one year, unless otherwise stated in a written agreement between the permittee and the city in accordance with subsection (6) of this section. A permit under which development has commenced may be extended for up to one additional year upon written request made before the expiration date of the original permit. Requests for extensions shall be treated in the same manner as original applications. 
(17)	Acceptance of public improvements. Any permanent erosion control devices, structures or measures which are intended to be conveyed to the city shall be accepted by the city in accordance with the procedures for the acceptance of public improvements provided in the subdivision regulations of the city, but only after submission, review, and approval of record drawings in accordance with subsection (11) of this section, and a written certification by the site engineer that all work has been completed in accordance with the land disturbance and erosion control permit. 
(18)	Maintenance bond for public improvements. The permittee shall also be required, as a condition precedent to acceptance of improvements by the city, to submit a maintenance bond in a form approved by the city with good and sufficient sureties, guaranteeing the city against defects in materials, construction and workmanship. Such bond shall be in effect for a period of one year after acceptance of the improvements and shall be in the amount of ten percent of the estimated cost of construction of such improvements. 
(19)	Conveyance of public improvements. The permittee shall also be required, as a condition precedent to acceptance of such improvements by the city, to convey such improvements to the city, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, by a duly executed document in a form approved by the city. 
(20)	Approval of private improvements. Any permanent erosion control devices, structures or measures which will be under private ownership or control shall be subject to approval of the city engineer or enforcement officer as finally constructed, but only after submission, review and approval of record drawings in accordance with subsection (11) of this section, and a written certification by the site engineer that all work has been completed in accordance with the land disturbance and erosion control permit. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. III(§ 13), 3-22-2004)
 
Secs. 30-44—30-74. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. SPECIAL USE PROVISIONS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 30-75. Nonconforming uses and structures.
(a)	Purpose of provisions. Within the zoning districts established by this article or by subsequent amendments to this article, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawfully created, established, or constructed before the ordinance from which this article is derived was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this article or of subsequent amendments. It is the intent of this article to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or discontinued, but not to actively encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this article to ensure that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Nonconforming status runs with the land; i.e., a change in ownership or tenancy does not terminate the nonconforming status of a lot and/or structure. 
(b)	Incompatibility of nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses are declared by this article to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the zoning districts in which they are located. A nonconforming use of land, structure, or of land and structure in combination shall not be extended, enlarged, or otherwise intensified after passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, either by additions to any existing structure or by the addition of other uses of the property which would be generally prohibited in the district in which such use is located. 
(c)	Avoidance of undue hardship. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this section shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building upon which actual construction was lawfully initiated prior to the effective date of adoption of or amendment to this article. 
(d)	Single nonconforming lots of record. A lawfully recorded single lot of record which does not meet the minimum area, width, length, or frontage requirements of the zoning district in which it is located at the effective date of adoption of or amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived may be used or sold for the erection of those buildings and accessory buildings necessary to carry out the permitted uses in that district, provided: 
(1)	Minimum space and height requirements of the lot shall conform as closely as possible to the applicable standards for the district. 
(2)	Requirements for yards and setbacks, accessory buildings and uses, and off-street parking and loading spaces shall conform as closely as possible to the applicable standards for the district. 
(3)	Variance for area, dimensional, and other requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment as authorized in section 30-214(c). A variance shall only be required where the proposed structure cannot be designed to comply with the applicable dimensional requirements of the zoning district. 
(4)	Such lot must not have continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership that could be combined to eliminate the nonconformity. 
(e)	Procedure to cure nonconforming lots of record. If two or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots are contiguous, have continuous frontage, are in single ownership, and are of record at the time of passage of or amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the minimum space and height standards of this article, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this article and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with the minimum space and height standards. Nor shall any existing lot of record be divided in a way that would create a lot that does not comply with the applicable minimum space and height standards of this article. Nothing in this provision shall be interpreted to prevent the adjustment of an adjoining lot line or the resubdivision of a lot so combined, where sufficient land area exists to establish more than one conforming lot. 
(f)	Nonconforming structures. Where, at the effective date of the adoption or amendment to the ordinance from which this section is derived, a lawful structure exists that could not be built under the terms of this article by reason of not complying with minimum dimensional requirements or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
(1)	No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(2)	Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(3)	Should such structure be voluntarily relocated for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the requirements or standards for the district in which it is located after it is moved. This provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the replacement of a preexisting, nonconforming manufactured home or mobile home, as long as the replacement manufactured home complies with all applicable requirements specified in section 30-77 and the replacement manufactured home is placed in the exact location of the previous home or a more conforming location on the lot. 
(g)	Nonconforming uses of land, structure, or land and structure in combination. Where, at the time of adoption or amendment to the ordinance from which this section is derived, lawful uses of land, structure, or land and structure in combination exist which, under the terms of this article, would not be permitted in the zoning district in which they are located, the uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, provided: 
(1)	No such nonconforming uses, nor structures devoted to nonconforming uses, shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption of or amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)	No such nonconforming uses, nor structures devoted to nonconforming uses, shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of adoption of or amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(3)	No additional structures shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming uses. 
(4)	If any such nonconforming uses are discontinued for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of the land and/or structure formerly devoted to such nonconforming uses shall thereafter conform to the requirements or standards specified by this article for the zoning district in which such land and/or structure is located. 
(5)	If any nonconforming use is replaced by a permitted use, any subsequent use of the land and/or structure formerly devoted to such nonconforming uses shall thereafter conform to the requirements or standards for the district in which it is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(6)	A nonconforming use may change to a new nonconforming use, provided the new use is more consistent with the permitted uses of the district in which it is located and is less objectionable and generates fewer external impacts on neighboring uses and properties than the previous nonconforming use. In determining whether the new use would be in greater conformity with this article, impact criteria such as, but not limited to, the following shall be evaluated: 
a.	The degree to which traffic generation and congestion, including truck, passenger car, and pedestrian traffic would be reduced. 
b.	The degree to which external noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare, or vibration would be reduced. 
c.	The degree to which the nature of the new use or business activity is consistent with other business uses permitted in the district. 
(7)	Where nonconforming use status applies to land and structure in combination, removal or destruction of the structure to the extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost immediately prior to damage shall terminate the nonconforming status of the structure but shall not terminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(h)	Repairs and maintenance.
(1)	On any structure devoted entirely or in part to a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary maintenance, including remodeling, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided the cubic content of the structure, as it existed at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or subsequent amendment, shall not be increased. 
(2)	On any lot devoted entirely or in part to a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary maintenance, repair, or replacement of parking and loading areas, signs, lighting, fences, walls, and related exterior amenities, provided the extent of those amenities shall not be increased or rearranged. 
(3)	Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or exterior amenity declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 1), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-76. Group homes.
Group homes shall be conducted within a building that is consistent or compatible with the character of the district in which it is located. 
(1)	No exterior changes incompatible with residential character. A group home located in a single-family or two-family residential district shall be conducted within a building that shall maintain the exterior appearance of a single-family dwelling, with no separate outside entrances to individual bedrooms. 
(2)	Group homes in multifamily and nonresidential districts. A group home in a multifamily or business district may be conducted in a building other than a single-family dwelling, provided that the group home conforms to the characteristics described in the definition of the term "group home" in section 30-6. 
(3)	Compliance with all applicable state laws. Where applicable, the group home shall provide evidence that it will operate in compliance with any state licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 2), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-77. Manufactured homes.
All manufactured homes shall comply with the following requirements prior to occupancy: 
(1)	H.U.D. seal required. Prior to installation, each manufactured home shall bear a seal certifying compliance with the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Any lawfully existing mobile home or manufactured home not bearing such seal shall be deemed a nonconforming structure and shall be treated as a nonconforming structure and use in accordance with the regulations established in section 30-75. 
(2)	Anchoring requirements. All manufactured homes shall be set up, installed, and anchored in full compliance with the requirements of the state manufactured housing commission. Each manufactured home site shall be properly prepared for set up and installation as may be necessary and appropriate to prevent the accumulation of standing water or the drainage of stormwater runoff beneath the manufactured home. 
(3)	Skirting required. All manufactured homes shall be skirted with a weather-resistant material which resembles siding materials commonly found on a single-family dwelling. Exterior siding should not have a high-gloss finish and should be residential in appearance, including, but not limited to, clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes, or similar material, but excluding smooth, ribbed, or corrugated metal or plastic panels. Concrete block or brick and mortar foundation walls, constructed in compliance with all applicable building code requirements, shall be the preferred method of skirting. The exterior siding material must extend to the ground except that, when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation. Where the space beneath a manufactured home that is to be enclosed by skirting is not completely covered by a concrete pad, then a ground vapor retarder of six mil rated polyethylene sheeting or greater shall be installed over the entire area enclosed by skirting. All skirting shall be adequately vented. 
(4)	Axles and tow bars removed. Once a manufactured home has been placed on an individual lot, all tow bars and axles shall be removed and stored in a location on the lot where they cannot be seen from the street, neighboring homes, or adjoining properties. 
(5)	Access to exterior entrances. Immediately after installation and prior to occupation, steps and a landing or porch shall be constructed at each raised exterior entrance or doorway to the manufactured home. At a minimum, the front or main entrance to a manufactured home shall be served by a stairway (not less than three feet in width) leading to a landing or porch not narrower than five feet in depth (as measured outward from the exterior of the structure) nor shorter than eight feet in length (centered along the entranceway) and containing a railing along all exterior edges of the landing and stairway. A stairway (not less than three feet in width) with exterior railings shall be erected at all other exterior entrances to the manufactured home. All required stairways and landings/porches shall be constructed of pressure treated wood or brick materials, or some combination of both. Required railings may be constructed of pressure treated wood or metal materials. 
(6)	Sanitary facilities. Each manufactured home shall contain at least one shower or tub, a flush toilet, a lavatory, hot and cold running water, and a central source of heat for the occupants thereof. 
(7)	Landscaping. All manufactured homes located on individual lots (not in a manufactured home park) shall be landscaped in a manner consistent with other adjoining residential home sites in the area or neighborhood. At a minimum, ornamental shrubs shall be applied along the front yard foundation or skirting of each manufactured home. 
(8)	Orientation. When sited on an individual lot (not in a manufactured home park) each manufactured home shall be oriented on the lot so that it meets all setback and area requirements of the zoning district. Wherever possible, the unit shall be located with its long axis parallel with the street. 
(9)	Minimum width. When sited on an individual lot (not in a manufactured home park) each manufactured home shall be at least 12 feet in width. 
(10)	Fuel storage facilities. All fuel oil supply systems serving a manufactured home that is sited on an individual lot (not in a manufactured home park) shall be constructed and installed within the foundation wall or underground in accordance with all applicable building and safety codes, except that any bottled gas tanks may be fenced or screened so as not to be clearly visible from the street or abutting properties. 
(11)	Number allowed. Not more than one manufactured home shall be permitted on any individual lot that is not located within a manufactured home park. 
(12)	Use limitations. No manufactured home may be used for any purpose other than as regulated for residential use herein except in a nonresidential zoning district as follows: 
a.	As an office and storage for parts at a legally licensed manufactured home sales lot by the owner, real estate office, or sales office. 
b.	A temporary construction office or a temporary residence at a construction job site provided that such use shall cease when a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
c.	Campaign headquarters, to be removed immediately after election day. 
d.	Showing of exhibits or special products for a period not to exceed 14 days. 
e.	For special sales or promotions by civic or nonprofit organizations, to be removed on a specified date. 
(13)	Compatibility with adjoining residential properties. While the city acknowledges and accepts its responsibility to promote a wide range of affordable housing styles for its residents, it also must recognize that manufactured homes are a distinct type of housing that can, under certain circumstances, alter or disrupt the stability of property values and character of established residential neighborhoods that consist predominantly or exclusively of site-built single-family detached dwellings. Such disruptions can be especially severe in neighborhoods that consist of historic homes that represent and reflect a specific architectural style and character or that consist of uniformly high value dwellings, relative to the value of a standard manufactured home. In these special neighborhoods, the city's responsibility to provide siting flexibility for manufactured homes must be reasonably tempered and balanced by the city's competing responsibility to maintain the character, architectural integrity, and property value stability of established single-family residential neighborhoods. Therefore, manufactured homes may be permitted only in full compliance with the following special conditions: 
a.	The proposed manufactured home will not be located on a vacant lot that is within a designated local, state, or federal historic district or a vacant lot that is adjacent to one or more structures that have been listed on or are eligible for addition to the National Register of Historic Places; 
b.	The combined value of the proposed manufactured home and the property upon which it will be sited shall not be less than 90 percent of the average fair market value of all adjoining properties that have been improved for single-family residential use, according to the property value records maintained by the county tax assessor's office; 
c.	No manufactured home shall be utilized as a parsonage on or adjacent to a lot containing a church; and 
d.	Each manufactured home shall comply with all applicable dimensional requirements and minimum standards for dwellings required for the subject zoning district in which it will be located. 
(14)	Storm shelter. Each manufactured home site shall have at least one underground storm shelter capable of accommodating at least one person for each bedroom contained in the manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 3), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-78. Home occupations and cottage industries.
(a)	Home occupations. A home occupation may consist of any accessory business use that fully complies with all of the standards contained in this section. No home occupation shall be allowed in any multifamily dwelling. A home occupation shall not include barbershops, beauty shops, doctors' or dentists' offices for the treatment of patients, solid waste facilities, junk or scrap metal shops, automobile repair shops or garages, or food processing/packing operations. 
(b)	Cottage industries. A cottage industry may consist of any accessory business use, except barbershops, beauty shops, doctors' or dentists' offices for the treatment of patients, solid waste facilities, junk or scrap metal shops, automobile repair shops or garages, or food processing/packing operations, that fully complies with all of the standards contained in this section. Cottage industries may be permitted only within the agricultural zoning district. 
(c)	Standards applicable to both home occupations and cottage industries. The following standards shall apply to both home occupations and cottage industries: 
(1)	The home occupation or cottage industry must be owned and operated by the owner of the dwelling within which or property upon which such business use is to be located, or the business owner must have written approval of the owner of the premises, if the applicant is a tenant. Not more than three persons shall be employed by a home occupation or cottage industry all of which must reside inside the home within which the business use is conducted. 
(2)	The home occupation or cottage industry shall not involve the use of or result in the production of any hazardous materials or hazardous waste. 
(3)	The home occupation or cottage industry shall not generate smoke, glare, vibrations, electrical disturbance, radioactivity, or other conditions that will be a nuisance to the surrounding area. The home occupation shall not involve the use of any equipment or process that creates visual or audible interference on any radio or television receivers on the premises or that causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(4)	The home occupation or cottage industry shall not generate any business or customer traffic (either by the business operators or customers) between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(5)	At least two, but no more than four, off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the home occupation or cottage industry. 
(6)	Only one non-illuminated sign shall be allowed for any home occupation or cottage industry. Said sign shall not exceed more than two square foot in total surface area and shall be mounted flat against a wall of the principal use building on the property. Any vehicles bearing advertising for the home occupation shall be parked in an enclosed structure on the property or a location on the property where said advertisement is screened from view. 
(d)	Standards applicable to home occupations. The following standards shall apply to only home occupations: 
(1)	All business operations, activities, and transactions associated with the home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit. No business operations, activities, or transactions shall be conducted in any portion of the dwelling not approved for home occupation use by the city. 
(2)	The home occupation shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the total dwelling unit floor area. In no instance shall the total floor area devoted to a home occupation exceed 500 square feet. 
(3)	The home occupation shall not cause or result in any change in the outside appearance and residential character of the dwelling unit. 
(4)	The home occupation shall not generate more customers to the home at any point in time than can be accommodated in the improved off-street parking area on the property, and in no instance shall the total customer traffic at the home exceed more than two vehicles at a time. 
(5)	The home occupation shall not produce any vibrations, noises, or odors that may be discernable by the average person outside of the dwelling unit. 
(6)	All equipment, materials, and products of the home occupation, with the exception of one vehicle intended for business use, shall be safely and securely stored inside the dwelling unit at all times. 
(7)	The home occupation and dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes. Home occupations will not be permitted in any dwelling unit in which the primary residential use does not fully comply with the applicable requirements for the zoning district within which it is located. 
(e)	Standards applicable to cottage industries. The following standards shall apply to only cottage industries: 
(1)	No cottage industry shall be permitted on a lot smaller than three acres in total land area. 
(2)	All business operations, activities, and transactions associated with the cottage industry shall be conducted entirely within the primary dwelling unit and/or in an accessory building on the same lot. No activities associated with a cottage industry, including materials storage, shall be located or conducted within an accessory building that is more than 50 feet from the closest part of the principal dwelling or less than 50 feet from an adjoining property line. No business operations, activities, or transactions shall be conducted in any portion of the dwelling or lot not specifically approved by the city for cottage industry use. 
(3)	The cottage industry shall not occupy a total area greater than 40 percent of the total dwelling unit floor area or 800 square feet, whichever is less. 
(4)	The cottage industry shall not cause or result in any change in the outside appearance or character of any structure on the lot. 
(5)	The home occupation shall not generate more customers to the home at any point in time than can be accommodated in the improved off-street parking area on the property, and in no instance shall the total customer traffic at the home exceed more than three vehicles at a time. 
(6)	The cottage industry shall not produce any vibrations, noises, or odors that may be discernable by the average person beyond the boundaries of the lot. 
(7)	All equipment, materials, and products of the cottage industry, with the exception of one vehicle intended for business use, shall be safely stored inside a secured structure on the lot. 
(8)	The cottage industry and dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes. Cottage industries will not be permitted in any structure which does not fully comply with all applicable requirements for the zoning district within which it is located. 
(f)	Expiration of permit. A permit for a home occupation or cottage industry shall expire under the following conditions: 
(1)	Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the structure or lot for which the home occupation or cottage industry permit was issued. No subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home occupation or cottage industry until a new permit has been issued for the proposed business activity. A permit to operate a home occupation or cottage industry is not transferable to a new residence or lot. 
(2)	Whenever the holder of a home occupation or cottage industry permit ceases operation of the permitted business activity for any period of 90 consecutive days. 
(3)	When the owner of a permitted home occupation or cottage industry is issued a notice of violation of this section, the owner shall cease and desist from all business operations until such time as the enforcing officer has verified, through on-site inspection, that the violation has been remedied. Failure to cease and desist from all business operations, in accordance with this provision, shall constitute a separate violation. If the owner fails to comply with a cease and desist order, or the violation has not been remedied within 15 days of the date that the notice of violation was issued, the home occupation or cottage industry permit and business license shall expire and no resumption of business activities associated with such business may occur without first obtaining a new permit and business license. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 4), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-79. Off-street parking requirements.
(a)	Basic design requirements for parking lots. Required parking spaces, as set forth below, shall provide not less than 225 square feet of total parking lot area per space and shall be located entirely outside street rights-of-way. Each individual parking space shall be at least nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. Required spaces shall have an all-weather surface, an unobstructed maneuvering space, and access lanes of adequate width leading to a street or alley. Overflow or reserve parking areas in excess of the minimum spaces required herein shall be constructed of permeable surface materials, including gravel, crushed stone, or other porous pavement materials designed to serve the anticipated intensity or frequency of overflow parking and to prevent excessive soil erosion. Except for one- and two-family dwellings with access from local or minor collector streets only, maneuvering and turning areas shall be provided so that no vehicles will be required to back into a street. Only vehicles in operating condition shall be allowed to occupy these spaces. The following identifies the minimum number of automobile parking spaces for specified uses. Where a particular use is not specifically mentioned, the requirements of a similar or related use shall apply. Where more than one use will be conducted on a specific site, the site shall satisfy the combined requirements of all specified uses. Required parking spaces shall include spaces designated for people with disabilities, the number and design of which shall be in accordance with the standards set forth by the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(1)	Automobile service stations. Three parking spaces for each grease rack, vehicle lift, or similar facility, plus one for each attendant. 
(2)	Bowling alleys. Four parking spaces for each alley. 
(3)	Churches, theatres, auditoriums, stadiums or other places of public assembly. One parking space for every four seats in the principal assembly room or area. 
(4)	Dwellings. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit, except that residential structures containing three or more dwelling units shall have 1½ parking spaces per unit. 
(5)	Hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. One space for each four beds intended for patients, plus one space for each staff member employed during the peak work shift. 
(6)	Manufactured home parks. Two parking spaces located on each manufactured home site, plus one-half parking space per site to be located so as to serve the parking needs of visitors to the park and of occupants who have more than two automobiles. However, for each manufactured home space that fronts along a private road that does not provide through-traffic service, the minimum space required for each off-street parking space on the lot shall be reduced to 102 square feet, and the requirement to provide off-street space for vehicle turn-around without backing into the street shall be waived. 
(7)	Motels and hotels. One parking space for each room leased for guest accommodation, plus one additional space per full-time equivalent employee during the peak work shift. 
(8)	Offices, or professional or public buildings. One parking space for 300 square feet of gross floor area or four parking spaces for each separate office or work cubicle, whichever is greater. Travel lanes for drive-through services shall not be included in the minimum area required for the parking lot. 
(9)	Private club or lodge. One space for every ten members. 
(10)	Restaurant or other eating place. One parking space for every two seats. Travel lanes for drive-through services shall not be included in the minimum area required for the parking lot. 
(11)	Retail or services. One parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area devoted to trade or service activity (including inventory storage space and administrative office space). Travel lanes for drive-through services shall not be included in the minimum area required for the parking lot. 
(12)	Roominghouses, boardinghouses, and bed and breakfast inns. One parking space for each rental room, plus two spaces for each resident manager unit. 
(13)	Schools. One parking space for each administrative employee working at the school. Two parking spaces for each classroom serving students below grade ten. One parking space for every five students of classroom seating capacity for each classroom serving students in grade ten or higher. 
(14)	Shopping centers. Four parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of area devoted to trade or service activity. 
(15)	Warehousing, manufacturing, and industrial establishments. Three parking spaces for every two employees working during the peak work shift. 
(16)	Wholesale establishments. One parking space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)	Plans and specifications required for off-street parking spaces. Plans and specifications showing required off-street parking spaces, including the means of access and interior circulation, shall be submitted to the enforcing officer for review at the time of application for a zoning permit. 
(c)	Location of parking spaces.
(1)	Except for one- and two-family dwelling units, if required parking spaces cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on adjoining off-street property, provided that the required spaces are located no farther than 400 feet from the main entrance of the principal use. Such parking spaces shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(2)	Parking spaces designated for use by people with disabilities shall be located in close proximity to the main entrance of the building with which they are associated, in accordance with the standards set forth by the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(3)	Up to 50 percent of the parking spaces required for theaters, public auditorium, bowling alleys, dance halls, night clubs or cafes, and up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church auditorium may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same; provided, however, that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified in subsection (e) of this section. 
(4)	No off-street parking shall be permitted in the required front yard of any residential zoning district, except upon a driveway providing access to a garage, carport or parking area for a dwelling. 
(d)	Truck parking restrictions. No commercial vehicle with a rated capacity exceeding 1¼ tons shall be permitted to park in any residential district, unless it is stored in a fully enclosed accessory garage or storage shed. 
(e)	Joint use of off-street parking areas. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the joint use of an off-street parking area or facility by two or more buildings or uses if the total of such spaces, when used together, shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses or buildings computed separately. In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney and shall be filed with the application for a building permit, recorded at the applicant's expense in the office of judge of probate, and shall be in full force and effect until released by resolution of the planning commission. 
(f)	Landscaping. All paved surface parking lots containing more than 40 parking spaces shall incorporate, within the paved area, landscaped islands constituting not less than ten percent of the total paved portions of the parking lot. The area occupied by any required islands shall not be counted as part of the required minimum parking area for the off-street parking lot. Landscaped islands shall be distributed broadly throughout the parking lot and designed to provide sufficient unpaved area to support healthy plant growth and root structures. Each landscaped island shall also be designed to accommodate at least one mature shade tree, which shall be not less than ten feet tall at planting. Shrubs, flowers, and other ornamental plants or ground cover shall be incorporated into the landscaping on each island. Special consideration shall be given to native plants and trees when selecting vegetation and additional consideration shall be given to the location of trees and tall shrubs with respect to above ground power lines, light poles, and other possible obstructions, to prevent the need for excessive pruning as the trees and shrubs grow and mature. Additional consideration shall be given to the concept of designing internal landscaped islands to serve as bioretention zones to absorb excess stormwater runoff from a portion of the off-street parking lot. Such bioretention zones shall be landscaped with plantings that thrive in moist soil conditions and/or shall be designed to saturate the underlying soil strata without causing excessive flooding of the parking lot or excessive contamination of underlying groundwater resources. 
(g)	Plans and specifications required for off-street loading and unloading spaces. Plans and specifications showing required loading and unloading spaces, including the means of ingress and egress and interior circulation, shall be submitted to the enforcing officer for review at the time of application for a zoning permit. 
(h)	Off-street loading and unloading.
(1)	All commercial and industrial structures hereafter erected or created are required to provide and maintain adequate off-street space for loading and unloading of materials, goods, or things, and for delivery and shipping. Such off-street space shall be designed so that service and delivery vehicles may use this space without encroaching on or interfering with public use of streets and alleys by pedestrians and other vehicles. All such structures are also required to have sufficient off-street parking space for all vehicles owned, controlled, or rented by such establishment. 
(2)	Where any commercial or industrial structure is enlarged, or any such use is expanded, the full amount of off-street loading space shall be provided and maintained for the structure or use in its enlarged size. 
(3)	Where the use of a structure or land, or any part thereof, is changed to a use requiring off-street loading space under this article, the full amount of off-street loading space shall be provided and maintained to comply with this subsection. 
(4)	Off-street loading space shall be an area at least 12 feet wide by 45 feet long with 14½ feet of vertical clearance. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.	For each retail store, market, restaurant, funeral home, laundry, dry cleaning plant, or similar use which has an aggregate floor space: 
1.	Less than 8,000 square feet: no off-street loading required, but no permit will be issued without off-street loading until the enforcement officer has approved the plot plan of the proposed structure; 
2.	8,000 square feet to less than 20,000 square feet: one space of off-street loading is required; 
3.	20,000 square feet to less than 60,000 square feet: two spaces of off-street loading is required. 
Each additional 50,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, over the first 60,000 square feet, requires one additional off-street loading space. 
b.	For each auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, hotel, office building, stadium, sanitarium, or similar use which has an aggregate gross floor area: 
1.	Less than 10,000 square feet: no off-street loading required, but no permit will be issued without off-street loading until the enforcement officer has approved the plot plan of the proposed structure; 
2.	10,000 square feet to less than 40,000 square feet: one space of off-street parking is required. 
Each additional 50,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, over the first 40,000 square feet, requires one additional off-street loading space. 
c.	For each storage warehouse, wholesale establishment, industrial plant, freight terminal, or similar use which has an aggregate gross floor area: 
1.	Less than 5,000 square feet: no off-street loading required, but no permit will be issued without off-street loading until the enforcement officer has approved the plot plan of the proposed structure; 
2.	Of 5,000 square feet to less than 40,000 square feet: one space of off-street parking is required; 
3.	40,000 square feet to less than 100,000 square feet: two spaces of off-street parking is required. 
Each 75,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, over the first 100,000 square feet, requires one additional space of off-street parking. 
d.	For any use not specifically mentioned herein, the off-street loading requirements specified above for the most similar use shall apply. 
(5)	No area or facility supplied to meet the required off-street parking facilities shall be utilized for or deemed to meet the requirements of this article for off-street loading facilities. 
(6)	Nothing in this article shall prevent the collective, joint, or combined provision of off-street loading facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided that such off-street loading facilities are equal in size and capacity to the combined requirements of the several buildings or uses and are so located and arranged as to be usable thereby. 
(7)	Plans for buildings or uses requiring off-street loading facilities under the provisions of this article shall clearly indicate the location, dimensions, clearance, and access of all such required off-street loading facilities. 
(i)	Emergency vehicle access. The enforcing officer shall require, at the specific request of the chief of police or chief of the fire department, separate additional emergency vehicle access lanes, if deemed necessary to provide for adequate emergency vehicle access to the principal structures on the property. Where required, emergency vehicle access lanes shall be located as close as possible to the main entrance of the principal structures of the property, shall be at least 15 feet in width, and shall be visibly designated for exclusive emergency use, either by painting, appropriate signage, or both. 
(j)	Continuing character of obligation. Required off-street parking and loading spaces associated with newly erected or altered buildings or newly established uses of land shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of said building or land so long as the structure or use exists or its use requiring such parking or loading facilities continues. Apart from the discontinuance, sale, or transfer of the building or use, it shall be unlawful for said owner to discontinue, change, dispense with, or cause the discontinuance or change of the required vehicle parking or loading space without establishing alternative vehicle parking or loading space which meets the requirements of and is in compliance with this article or for any person to use a building or lot without providing vehicle parking or loading spaces which meet the requirements of and are in compliance with this article. 
(k)	Lighting. All lighting installed in within parking facilities (including canopy lighting for gasoline station pump islands) shall be shielded or otherwise directed down and into the confines of the parking area to prevent glare on adjoining properties or streets. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 5), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-80. Accessory residential units.
Technological and medical advances have made it possible for people to live longer lives and to live more independently than ever before. At the same time, a declining number of children must provide care and support for an expanding elderly population, despite increased work demands to make ends meet. The city understands the conflicting demands faced by working adults and seeks to provide an option for families to provide special and convenient care for elderly and handicapped members. The purpose of this section is to establish basic standards for the development of accessory residential units to provide a semi-independent living environment for family members who require special care and support from the primary household. Such a unit would provide greater privacy and personal freedom than an added bedroom within the primary dwelling but would not create an additional independent living unit that would alter the character of the original single-family structure and the surrounding neighborhood. However, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the creation of an accessory residential unit to provide in-home care for an elderly or handicapped family member. Accessory residential units shall be allowed only for single-family dwellings, excluding manufactured homes. Where permitted, all accessory residential units must comply with all of the following requirements: 
(1)	Incomplete facilities for exclusive personal use. The purpose of this section is to provide opportunities for families to provide essential on-site care and support for elderly and handicapped members, not to provide opportunities for families to create independent rental units for general leasing. Therefore, accessory residential units must be designed to prevent independent use. All accessory residential units must lack either complete kitchen facilities or bathroom facilities for exclusive personal use. An incomplete kitchen must lack either a convection oven/stove or a kitchen sink. An incomplete bathroom must lack either a toilet or shower/bathtub. The remaining kitchen or bathroom facilities necessary to serve the accessory residential unit must be provided within the primary dwelling unit. The applicant shall provide evidence that the sewage disposal needs of the additional accessory bedroom can be satisfied by the existing sewage service. No separate meters for utility service shall be established or provided for any accessory residential unit. 
(2)	Maximum floor area. Accessory residential units shall contain no more than 500 gross square feet or 25 percent of the total improved floor area of the primary residential dwelling, whichever is less. 
(3)	Leasing agreement prohibited. No accessory residential unit shall be leased to a tenant through any formal leasing agreement or contract. Any reimbursement arrangements for use of the unit or support services provided to the tenant shall be on an informal and incidental basis. 
(4)	Contained within primary dwelling. An accessory residential unit must be attached to (by a common wall) or contained within the primary dwelling unit on a property. No accessory structure or outbuilding on the lot may be used or modified to serve as an accessory residential unit. Not more than one exterior entrance to an accessory residential unit shall be permitted. 
(5)	Limit on number of units. Where permitted, no more than one accessory residential unit shall be allowed per primary dwelling. 
(6)	No change in character of structure. An accessory residential unit shall be designed to cause no apparent change in the exterior residential character or appearance of the primary dwelling unit. 
(7)	Documentation of need. Accessory residential units are intended to serve specific family or household needs that would be better satisfied by the creation of a semi-independent living environment. Applicants who desire to construct an accessory residential unit shall submit a written statement to the enforcement officer describing the need that will be served by the accessory residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 6), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-81. Sign regulations.
(a)	Purpose of sign regulations. The public has a legitimate interest and concern in the construction, maintenance, and regulation of outdoor advertising within the city. While the city acknowledges the legitimate public need for business visibility, local businesses must also recognize the legitimate public need for a beautiful and uncluttered community and the city's legitimate need to ensure safe traffic circulation on city streets. Local experience within Anniston, Gadsden, the Guntersville-Albertville-Boaz area, Atlanta, and Birmingham generally supports the contention that excessive, competing signage along public streets can create visual clutter, which makes it difficult for motorists to see traffic control and highway safety signs and to know where entrances to adjoining businesses are located. The city also has determined that excessive, competing signage can divert motorist attention from the highway, which contributes to traffic accidents. Therefore, the city has determined that it is desirable to prescribe the manner of sign construction and to compel the use of safe materials; limit the number, type, surface area, height, and location of signs; and require clean and sanitary maintenance of signs in order to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. Further, these sign regulations are intended to lessen hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic; preserve property values; prevent unsightly and detrimental development which has a blighting influence upon the community; and, in general, preserve the character and aesthetic quality of the various zones within the city. 
(b)	Sign terms defined. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertiser means any person, corporation, or other entity that seeks to convey a visual or audio message to the public. 
Animated sign means any sign which all or any part thereof visibly moves, imitates movement, or changes appearance in any fashion whatsoever. 
Balloon sign means any device which is inflated by gas or air and intended to serve as a sign or to direct attention to a specific property or location. 
Banner means a temporary sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame or suspended from wires, cables, or rope. Banners generally possess letters, characters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric. The term "banner" includes pennants, but does not include official flags of a government entity or political subdivision. 
Beacon or searchlight means any light with one or more beams (including laser beams), which may be stationary, moving, or rotating, directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same property as the light source. 
Billboard means any sign owned by a person, corporation, or other entity that is erected for the purpose of selling, leasing, or donating the display space on that sign to an advertiser. 
Building nameplate means a small memorial plaque, usually composed of metal or wood, affixed flush to an exterior wall near the main entrance of a building and bearing the name of the building or occupant, the date of construction, and/or the persons, entities, or corporations that financed its construction. 
Canopy means any permanent roof-like structure projecting from the wall surface of a building or structure, generally located at or below the roofline and designed to provide shelter from the elements. The term "canopy" includes all structures commonly known as awnings and marquees. 
Canopy sign means any sign attached to or made part of the front, top, or side of a canopy. 
Copy means the permanent or removable wording and/or graphics placed upon, painted upon, or bonded to the display surface of a sign. 
Erect a sign means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint, or affix a sign. 
Exempt sign means a sign made exempt from a sign permit, in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
Face means that portion of a sign upon which the copy is placed, attached, bonded, or painted. 
Flashing sign means any lighted sign or sign containing a reflective surface which changes color, twinkles, or flashes regularly or intermittently. Flashing signs shall not include signs displaying the current time and temperature, as permitted by the city council, or traffic control signs. 
Freestanding sign means any permanent sign that is either mounted independently upon the ground or supported by one or more columns or poles, and independent of support from any other building or structure on the site. The term "freestanding sign" includes, but shall not be limited to, all signs commonly known as ground signs, pole signs, pylon signs, A-frame signs, sandwich signs, and billboards. 
Hanging sign means any sign which is attached to and projects down or dangles from a roof, canopy, or projecting brace that is attached to the face of an exterior building wall. 
Historic marker means a sign prepared in accordance with National Trust for Historic Preservation guidelines and approved by the city council which identifies an historic landmark or district on the property. Such sign may contain a narrative describing the historic significance of the landmark or district. 
Number of signs. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, each sign shall be considered a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where copy is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, each element shall be considered a single sign. A multi-sided sign shall be considered one sign. 
Permanent sign means any sign, other than a temporary sign, designed with a permanent display face. If a sign face is permanent but the copy displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall still be regarded as permanent. 
Portable sign means any sign that is not attached to a stationary object or structure that has a footing or that is not implanted beneath the surface of the soil. Such signs are commonly mounted on wheels or a frame that rests upon the ground. The term "portable sign" includes vehicles or portions of vehicles upon which signs or sign copy has been affixed that are permanently parked or displayed in one or more locations to serve exclusively as a business advertisement. 
Projecting sign means any sign containing not more than two faces, that is affixed directly to the exterior wall of a building or structure or to a solid brace or frame that is attached to the exterior wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the sign face extends outward from the wall surface. 
Roof sign means any sign that is mounted upon, affixed to, or painted upon the roof of a building or structure or that extends above the building or structure roofline. 
Sign means any identification, structure, illustration, or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, that is visible to the general public and directs attention to a product, message, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation. A sign shall also include any emblem, painting, flag, statue, banner, pennant, balloon, or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information to the public. 
Sign area means the gross area, in square feet, of the advertising copy surface of a sign, as delineated by one continuous perimeter line, enclosing the extreme limits of the writing, representation, or other display. Where a sign contains multiple faces, only one face of the sign shall be used in computing the sign area. 
Sign structure means any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
Snipe sign means a sign of any material that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence, rock, or other similar object located on public or private property. The term "snipe sign" does not include real estate, political, yard sale, "beware," "keep out," "posted," "private property," or "no trespassing" signs. 
Temporary sign means any sign fabricated of paper, plywood, fabric, window whitewash, or other light, impermanent material and intended to be displayed for a limited duration. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary. 
Traffic control sign means a sign or electronic device, such as a traffic signal or signs denoting stop, danger, handicap parking, one-way traffic, no parking, fire lane, etc., for the purpose of directing or regulating the movement of traffic and/or pedestrians. 
Wall sign means any sign displaying only one face that is mounted flat upon, affixed flat to, or painted upon an exterior wall surface of a building or structure and is located entirely below the roofline. 
Window sign means a temporary sign placed inside or upon a building or structure window and intended to be seen from the exterior of the building or structure. 
(c)	Required permits, fees, and inspections.
(1)	Except where this chapter explicitly exempts a sign, all signs erected shall require a zoning permit issued by the enforcement officer. In addition, whether a sign is exempt from zoning requirements or not, the city's building and electrical codes may require additional permits. No zoning permit shall be required for routine maintenance or painting of a permitted or preexisting, nonconforming sign, provided that such maintenance or painting activities do not alter the original format or appearance of the sign or result in any increase in the existing sign area or height of the sign. 
(2)	Each zoning permit application for a sign shall include the following items: 
a.	Name, signature, and address of the property owner, authorized agent of the property owner, if any, and sign contractor. 
b.	Address of the property where the sign is to be erected. 
c.	Lot area, zoning, and principal land use on the lot subject to erection of a sign. 
d.	A complete description of the sign to be erected, including, but not limited to, number, type, freestanding or attached, method of illumination, on- or off-premises display, and setbacks. 
e.	A dimensioned sketch of the sign and a plot plan showing the location of each sign on the lot. 
f.	Other details sufficient for the enforcement officer to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
g.	The required application fee. 
(3)	The applicable permit processing fee established by the city council shall accompany each application for a sign permit. 
(4)	The enforcement officer shall inspect each sign authorized by permit to determine compliance with the permit application. 
(d)	Signs exempt from zoning permits. All exempt signs are permitted in any district as accessory structures to a permitted activity on a lot. The following signs are exempt from required zoning permits and all associated fees, only when designed, constructed, and sited in accordance with the standards contained within this section and any other applicable provisions of these sign regulations: 
(1)	Historic markers. Official historic marker signs designed or sanctioned by the National Trust for Historic Preservation shall be allowed upon approval by the city council. 
(2)	Traffic control signs. Such sign may include legal notices required by law; warning signs and no trespassing signs; as well as identification, informational, or directional signs erected by any governmental agency or public utility. 
(3)	Directional signs. Such sign may indicate bus stops, taxi stands, off-street parking or loading facilities, other signs required for the control of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, restroom identification and direction, drive-through window direction, telephone identification and similar directional information. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in total sign area. 
(4)	Flags. Any official flag of a government entity and banners of a religious, charitable or fraternal organization. This exemption shall include the supporting device or flagpole. However, no property shall display more than four flags at a time without prior approval from the city council. 
(5)	Artistic displays. Such displays may include decorative or architectural features of a building; public art works, murals, or displays; statues and sculptures that are not specifically commissioned or designed to advertise a specific business activity or commercial product; as well as antique, commemorative, or historically significant signs that are properly maintained; and similar artistic displays. 
(6)	Real estate or rental signs. Each property may have up to one non-illuminated real estate or rental sign, containing a maximum of two sign faces in compliance with the following requirements: 
a.	The maximum sign area shall not exceed six square feet for signs in a residential zone or 12 square feet for signs in a nonresidential zoning district. 
b.	Multiple listing strips, sale pending, and sold signs shall be allowed when attached to the real estate sign, as long as the combined sign area does not exceed the maximum allowed in subsection (d)(6)a of this section. 
c.	One temporary on-premises "open house" or "open for inspection" sign, not exceeding three square feet in sign area, may be allowed per property. Similar off-premises signs for directional purposes shall be allowed within the public right-of-way at subdivision entrances or on other private properties with the consent of the property owner. These signs must be removed when the premises are no longer open for inspection. 
d.	All real estate signs shall be removed when ownership or occupancy of the property has changed and the property is no longer listed for sale, lease, or rent. 
(7)	Construction site identification sign. Each construction site shall be allowed to erect not more than one non-illuminated, single face, temporary construction sign on a property which has been authorized for construction by the issuance of a zoning permit. Construction site signs shall not be allowed on properties where only one single-family or duplex home is to be constructed. Said sign shall be freestanding, and the sign area shall not exceed 12 square feet. Construction signs must be set back at least five feet from a street right-of-way line and at least ten feet from all other property lines. The sign may include the names of the persons and firms performing services or labor or supplying materials for the construction project. Any temporary construction sign shall be removed before any building or structures built on the property may be occupied. Temporary construction signs for residential developments shall be allowed to remain erect until 75 percent of the total residential lots have been sold, or until a permanent identification sign has been erected, whichever occurs first. 
(8)	Window signs. Properties not located within a residential zoning district (AG, RT, R-1, R-2, R-3 and MHP) may display window signs, provided that the sign area of any individual window sign shall not exceed 15 square feet and no more than 30 percent of the total surface area of any window may be obscured by window signs. 
(9)	Political signs. Temporary political signs advertising campaigns of candidates for political offices or advertising, proposing, opposing, or relating views or positions upon a political question appearing or to appear upon an official election ballot may be erected in connection with elections or political campaigns. No political signs shall be allowed within or upon a public right-of-way. Within residential districts (AG, RT, R-1, R-2, R-3 and MHP) only one sign per candidate or political issue may be placed upon any single lot of record. Within all other regular zoning districts, not more than two signs per candidate or political issue may be placed on any single lot of record. The total sign area for any political sign shall not exceed six square feet. Political signs shall not be erected more than 90 days prior to the date of the election, whether general or special, for which the person or issue advertised will appear on the ballot. Such signs must be removed within 15 days after the date of the election or run-off election (if necessary) has occurred. 
(10)	Garage or yard sale sign. A temporary sign advertising the sale of personal property on a lot may be erected on the lot where the sale is to take place. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in sign area and shall be displayed only on the day immediately prior to and during which the sale is conducted. 
(11)	Special event sign and decorations. A temporary sign indicating a special event such as a grand opening, traveling public exhibits, fair, carnival, circus, festival, personal announcements of births, marriages, birthdays, or similar events may be erected on the lot where the event is to take place, provided that such signs do not exceed the maximum applicable height and surface area requirements for the type of sign used and the sign is installed not more than 30 days prior to the event and removed not more than ten days after the event has occurred. Decorative flags, banners, and bunting shall be allowed only for city-wide celebrations, conventions, and commemorations when specifically authorized by the mayor and city council. This exemption also shall apply to decorative lights and displays celebrating any legal holiday. 
(12)	Entrance/exit signs. Entrance and/or exit signs which have a maximum sign face length of three feet, a maximum sign face height of 1½ feet, and a total maximum sign height of two feet. Only one entrance/exit sign shall be allowed per curb cut. Entrance/exit signs shall not be allowed in residential zones or for any single or two-family residential uses located within any zoning district. 
(13)	Farm information sign. Such sign may include farm logos or product information affixed to vehicles, equipment, buildings, silos, and tanks, and similar non-freestanding agricultural displays. Such signs shall be exempt from a zoning permit only within the AG Agricultural Zoning District and RT Rural Transitional Zoning District. 
(14)	Vehicle signs. Such sign may depict identifying name, business, product, service, logo, and similar information painted or otherwise affixed to a registered vehicle that is in operating condition and is used regularly for business transportation. This exemption shall not apply to vehicles or portions of vehicles that are permanently parked in one or more locations to serve exclusively as a business advertisement. Such vehicles or portions thereof shall constitute a portable sign under the context of these regulations. 
(15)	Building nameplates. Not more than one nameplate per nonresidential building, which shall not exceed two square feet in total sign area. 
(16)	Legal notices and official instruments. Legal notices and instruments required by a government or public regulatory entity to be posted or displayed shall be exempt from all aspects of these regulations. 
(17)	Residential family name and/or house number signs. A sign of less than two square feet in area located on a parcel of property used for residential purposes, if that sign announces the name of the occupants or the street number of the property only. 
(e)	Sign prohibitions. Except where qualified below, the following signs are specifically prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)	Any sign or advertising structure which, by reason of location, position, shape, or color, interferes with, obstructs the view of, resembles, or can be confused with an authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device, or which incorporates the words "stop," "look," "danger," "turn back," or any other word, phrase, or symbol or character that would interfere with, mislead, or confuse motorists. 
(2)	Any sign incorporating any noisy mechanical device (whistles, horns, sirens, or any other noisy audible devices) or emitting smoke or steam. 
(3)	Any sign of any type or support thereof placed, extending, or projecting into or upon a public right-of-way, except as expressly authorized. 
(4)	Animated or revolving signs. 
(5)	Any sign located so that it substantially interferes with the view necessary for motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public streets or private drives. 
(6)	Any sign with illegal, obscene, or prurient words, scenes, or graphics. 
(7)	Any sign that blocks another sign, fire escape, door, window, parking or loading aisle or space. 
(8)	Any sign that is damaged or not in a structurally safe condition and good state of repair. 
(9)	Roof signs. 
(10)	Snipe signs. 
(11)	Portable signs. 
(12)	Beacons or searchlights. 
(13)	Flashing signs. 
(14)	Banners, unless approved by the mayor or city council for a grand opening or a city-wide celebration, convention, or legal holiday. 
(15)	Billboards. 
(16)	Balloon signs. 
(f)	Treatment of abandoned signs and signs advertising abandoned uses, products, or services.
(1)	Any sign copy or billboard copy identifying or announcing a use or business activity that has been abandoned, closed, or relocated, or which advertises a product, service, or entertainment the production, sale, or provision of which has been discontinued or canceled, shall be removed within six calendar months of the date of abandonment or discontinuance. 
(2)	If a sign face is left blank for a continuous period of 120 days, that sign shall be considered abandoned, and within 30 days after abandonment, the owner of the property where the sign is located shall cause the sign to be removed or replace the sign face or copy with an appropriate display or advertisement. 
(g)	Nonconforming signs.
(1)	Grandfather status. Any permanent sign legally existing on or before the adoption date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, or any future amendment thereto, that does not conform with the requirements of these regulations may be continued and maintained. All nonconforming portable or temporary signs shall be removed or replaced with a conforming sign within one year of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived. 
(2)	Alterations. A nonconforming sign shall not be rebuilt, expanded, or altered in a way that would increase the degree of nonconformity as it existed at the time the grandfather status was conferred. This requirement shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit proper maintenance of a nonconforming sign or changes to the copy of the sign that do not increase the existing degree of nonconformity. 
(3)	Expiration. A nonconforming sign shall not be rebuilt or re-established after its use has been discontinued for a period of one calendar year, unless approved by the city council. 
(4)	Damage repair. A nonconforming sign shall not be reconstructed or repaired to a nonconforming status if it has sustained damage exceeding 75 percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage, unless approved by the city council. The appraised value of the sign shall be determined by the city council. 
(h)	Dimensional requirements for permitted signs.
(1)	Canopy signs. In zoning districts where permitted, canopy signs shall be allowed on the vertical faces of any canopy, awning, or marquee that is located directly above a building entranceway. Under no circumstances shall the sign face or copy of any canopy sign be allowed to extend beyond the edges of the vertical face of a canopy, awning, or marquee. In addition, the following absolute dimensional requirements shall apply: 
a.	Maximum sign area per single canopy face: 12 square feet. 
b.	Total cumulative sign area for all sign faces on an individual canopy, awning, or marquee: 20 square feet. 
c.	Maximum sign face or copy height: two feet. 
d.	Maximum sign face or copy width: six feet. 
(2)	Freestanding signs. In zoning districts where freestanding signs are permitted, each lot of record may have not more than one freestanding sign as an accessory structure to a principal use structure on the property. Freestanding signs shall be securely fastened to the ground or to some other metallic or concrete supportive structure so that there is no danger that either the sign or the supportive structure may be moved by the wind or other forces of nature and cause injury to persons or property. The city council may approve one additional freestanding sign for any existing lot of record that is accessed by more than one collector or arterial street on opposing sides of the property. Furthermore, if a development is located on a corner lot that has at least 200 feet of frontage on each of the two intersecting public streets, then the city council may allow not more than one freestanding sign along each side of the development site bordered by such streets. Freestanding signs shall be located as close as possible to the main traffic access to the property but shall not be located closer than four feet to the right-of-way of a public street nor closer than ten feet to any property boundary. In addition, no freestanding sign shall be located less than 50 feet from another freestanding sign on the same side of the street or less than 100 feet from another freestanding sign on the same property. All freestanding signs shall comply with the following dimensional requirements: 
a.	Maximum sign area. The maximum sign area for each freestanding sign shall be determined by the floor area of the principal use structure in accordance with the following schedule. The sign area listed for each size category shall include the total area of the primary advertising face and any subordinate reader board that may be attached to the sign structure. For buildings: 
1.	Containing less than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area: 30 square feet. 
2.	Containing at least 2,500, but less than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area: 40 square feet; and 
3.	Containing at least 15,000 square feet of gross floor area: 80 square feet. 
The city council may increase the maximum sign area to a total sign area of not more than 100 square feet for a freestanding sign that will serve all businesses in a shopping plaza or office park containing not less than five businesses. 
b.	Maximum sign height, including the supporting structure and sign face. The maximum height for signs, including supporting structure and sign face shall be 12 feet along a street in a residential zoning district (AG, RT, R-1, R-2, R-3 and MHP), 25 feet in all other districts. However, the city council may increase the maximum height of a freestanding sign to ensure sign visibility from an adjoining public street, where the elevation of the street exceeds the elevation of the property by more than five feet at the point where the freestanding sign will be erected. In no instance shall the increased height allow the top of the freestanding sign face or copy to extend more than 20 feet above the nearest surface elevation of the paved street. 
c.	Maximum sign face or copy height. The maximum sign face or copy height shall be ten feet for any sign displaying more than 80 square feet of sign area; eight feet for all other signs. 
d.	Maximum sign face or copy width. The maximum sign face or copy width shall be ten feet. 
(3)	Hanging and projecting signs. In zoning districts where hanging and/or projecting signs are allowed, each building may have not more than one hanging or projecting sign per building wall that has an exterior entrance. Hanging or projecting signs may extend into a public right-of-way but shall not extend any closer than four feet to the inside face of a street curb or the outer edge of the paved travel lane of a street, whichever is applicable. Hanging or projecting signs shall be located as close as possible to said exterior building entrance in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.	Maximum sign area: 12 square feet. 
b.	Maximum sign face or copy height: six feet. 
c.	Maximum sign face or copy width: two feet. 
d.	Minimum elevation from the bottom of the sign face or copy (including all supporting frames or braces) to the finished ground level directly beneath the sign: eight feet. 
(4)	Wall signs. In zoning districts where wall signs are allowed, no portion of a wall sign shall extend above the building roofline or beyond the edges of the wall. In addition, no portion of a wall sign shall obscure any portion of a window or entranceway to the building. Each wall sign shall be affixed flush to the wall and shall not project more than one foot away from the wall surface, exclusive of any approved lighting fixtures. The following dimensional requirements also shall apply to all permitted wall signs: 
a.	Maximum sign area of any individual wall sign: 24 square feet. 
b.	Maximum cumulative sign area of all wall signs on a single building: 48 square feet, or not more than 30 percent of the surface area of an affected wall, whichever is less. 
c.	Maximum sign face or copy height: four feet. 
d.	Maximum sign face or copy width: six feet. 
(i)	Signs allowed within residential zoning districts. Within agricultural and residential zoning districts (AG, RT, R-1, R-2, R-3 and MHP) the only signs that shall be allowed are those classified as exempt from these regulations under subsection (d) of this section and residential subdivision entrance signs in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)	Permanent freestanding ground signs to residential subdivision developments may be erected at principal entrances to the project. One sign shall be permitted at each principal entrance to the development. 
(2)	Entrance signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area and five feet in height as measured from the base of the sign. 
(3)	Entrance signs shall be securely fastened to the ground or to some other substantial supportive structure so that there is no danger that either the sign or the supportive structure may be accidentally toppled or moved by the wind or other forces of nature and cause injury to persons or property. 
(4)	Residential subdivision entrance signs shall not be illuminated, unless indirect illumination is afforded by a streetlight positioned at the entranceway. 
(5)	Development entranceways, and, specifically, the area adjoining the entrance sign, should be appropriately landscaped and maintained to provide an attractive and inviting entrance to the subdivision. 
(6)	Public and semi-public uses (including churches, cemeteries, recreational centers, schools, libraries, etc.) located within a residential zone shall be allowed to install not more than one freestanding or wall sign that does not exceed 20 square feet in total sign area. No freestanding sign shall stand higher than 15 feet above the finished level of the ground at the base of the sign. 
(j)	Signs allowed within nonresidential zoning districts. All signs that are exempt from these regulations shall be permitted in any nonresidential zoning district in accordance with the conditions specified in subsection (d) of this section. In addition, owners of land within a nonresidential zoning district may erect any sign identified in subsection (h) of this section in accordance with all dimensional requirements prescribed therein. However, in no instance shall the cumulative total sign area for all signs permitted under subsection (h) of this section that are erected on a single lot of record exceed the limits specified below for the applicable nonresidential zoning district. Where a lot of record is divided by two or more nonresidential zoning districts, the cumulative total sign area limitation of the more restrictive zoning district shall apply to the entire nonresidentially zoned area of the subject lot of record. 
(1)	VC Village Center district. This district shall be allowed 12 square feet of cumulative total sign area for each multifamily residential building or complex, public use, or church, 50 square feet of cumulative total sign area for each nonresidential building located on an individual lot and 80 square feet for each commercial center or complex containing five or more businesses or offices. 
(2)	B-1 Neighborhood Business district. This district shall be allowed 60 square feet of cumulative total sign area. 
(3)	B-2 Highway Commercial district. This district shall be allowed 100 square feet of cumulative total sign area. 
(4)	M-1 Light Manufacturing district. This district shall be allowed 80 square feet of cumulative total sign area. 
(5)	FHA Flood Hazard Area zone. The total permitted cumulative sign area allowed shall be determined by the underlying zoning district requirements. 
(6)	PD Planned Development zone. The total permitted cumulative sign area allowed shall be determined by the underlying zoning district requirements. 
(7)	RSC Regional Shopping Center zone. The total permitted cumulative sign area allowed shall be determined by the underlying zoning district requirements. 
(k)	Traffic visibility provisions. No permanent or temporary sign exceeding four square feet in area shall be permitted within the clear sight triangle of an intersection, as defined in section 30-41, or within 15 feet from the front lot line. This limitation may be waived if such sign does not obstruct visibility between a height of 30 inches and eight feet above the nearest street grade level or otherwise does not interfere with traffic visibility for entrance onto and exit from the lot and adjacent lots and the visibility of traffic flow through nearby intersections, as determined by the enforcement officer. In any event, no sign, regardless of size, height, or design shall extend into any right-of-way, except as expressly authorized. 
(l)	Construction and maintenance of signs.
(1)	All signs shall conform with applicable city building codes, which provide a comprehensive set of construction standards for signs. These specifications include wind loads, vibration resistance, seismic loads, acceptable supports, allowable stresses, materials, and electrical wiring. 
(2)	All signs and all components thereof, including structural supports, shall be kept in a state of good repair. 
(3)	The area surrounding the base of any freestanding sign shall be kept clear of all debris and undergrowth. 
(4)	No person may, for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign, damage, trim, destroy, or remove any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation within any right-of-way (unless express written authorization is obtained from the agency having jurisdiction over the right-of-way) or on any area where landscaping is required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 7), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-82. Telecommunication towers, antennas, and satellite dishes.
(a)	Purpose of regulations. The public has a legitimate interest and concern in the placement and appearance of telecommunication towers, antennas, and satellite dishes under the Telecommunications Act of 1996, where such control does not conflict with or unreasonably constrain the legitimate right of businesses to exercise free trade. The city desires access to advanced technology to serve its businesses and citizens, but not at the expense of the community's overall appearance and public image. The city seeks to impose sensible controls on telecommunication facilities, in order to maintain the aesthetic character and charm of the community and its neighborhoods against the insensitive and uncontrolled proliferation and placement of wireless facilities. New telecommunications towers should not create a cluttered landscape or dominate the community's natural skyline as it is viewed from the primary highway entrances to the city. To that end, the city desires to partner with telecommunications firms to ensure expansion of the existing telecommunications infrastructure that will provide effective advanced communications services throughout the city and surrounding environs, commensurate with local needs, with a minimal visual impact on the character and charm of the community, and without creating impediments to free competition among wireless telecommunications providers seeking to serve the city. These regulations have been developed by the city to achieve the aforementioned objectives. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antenna means an electromagnetic device which conducts radio signals, through an attached cable or wave guide, to or from a radio transmitter or receiver. The term "antenna" includes devices commonly known as whips, panels, and parabolic dishes. The term "antenna" includes an antenna used in conjunction with microwave, cellular, or personal communication service systems and any other type of telecommunications systems now or hereafter in use. 
Applicant means a party or parties who apply for a permit to construct a tower, to install an antenna on a proposed or existing tower, or to locate equipment on a proposed or existing tower compound. 
Co-location site means a parcel of land/or other site on which the antennas and related equipment of more than on party are located. 
Communication facilities means towers, antennas, and associated equipment collectively. 
Equipment means all equipment and facilities used in conjunction with one or more towers and/or antennas, including, but not limited to, electronic systems, generators, fuel tanks, and fuel. 
FAA means the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the U.S. Federal Communications Commission. 
Fiber optics means light transmissions through very fine flexible glass, by internal reflection. 
Monopole means any self-supporting wooden pole, metal, or concrete pole designed to support an antenna, provided that the term "monopole" shall not include a latticed steel or metal tower, a tower which requires guy wires for support, or a tower which has more than one source of support, such as a tower with more than one leg. 
Residential property means any land which is located in a Residential Zoning District—AG, RT, R-1, R-2, R-3, and MHP. 
Surveyor means a person who is registered with, and licensed by, the state as a surveyor. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and any other like structure used to support wireless telecommunications transmission facilities now or hereafter in use. As used in this section, the term "tower" shall include any telecommunication tower installed or constructed within the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, regardless of whether such tower is a monopole or another type of tower. 
Tower compound means a parcel of land/or a building on which communication facilities are located. 
(c)	Jurisdiction of regulations. All communication facilities or structures greater than one meter in size, including but not limited to, those facilities known as cellular, personal communication system (PCS), paging services, and similar services, shall comply with these regulations. However, the following shall be exempt from these regulations under the specified conditions: 
(1)	Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the city council. 
(2)	Amateur radio or receive-only antennas. Any tower, or the installation of any antenna that does not exceed the maximum height restriction of the applicable zoning district or 70 feet, whichever is less, and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator, or is exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
(3)	Preexisting communication facilities or towers. Any communication tower or antenna which was constructed prior to the effective date of these regulations and which complied with all applicable state, federal, and local codes, laws, and regulations in effect at the time of construction, provided, however, that all preexisting communication facilities or towers shall submit a written request of exemption to the enforcement officer within six months of the effective date of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived. The written request shall state the name, mailing address, business and home telephone numbers of the owner, the street address and tax parcel identification number of the property upon which the communication facilities are located, and the date upon which construction of the facilities was complete. All written requests containing the required information shall be automatically approved if received within the above specified deadline. 
(d)	Basic requirements and design considerations. All proposed communication facilities (towers and antennas) governed by these regulations shall comply with the following requirements and guidelines: 
(1)	Compliance with FAA regulations. All proposed communication facilities shall comply with all applicable FAA requirements, including, but not limited to, part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), as amended. 
(2)	Compliance with FCC regulations. All proposed communication facilities shall comply with all applicable FCC requirements, including but not limited to, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended. 
(3)	Structural safety. All proposed communication facilities shall comply with wind loading and other applicable structural standards contained in local building and technical codes, as they may be in effect and amended from time to time, including, without limitation, the Southern Standard Building Code and the Electronic Industries Association Code and any amendments thereto or replacements thereof, as may be adopted by the city council. The city's building inspector or his designee shall determine whether a proposed communication facility will comply with this requirement. 
(4)	Appearance and view protection. All proposed communication facilities with the exception of proposed antennas that will be co-located on a preexisting tower shall be attractively camouflaged, disguised, or hidden in a manner that it will blend into the surrounding environment to the greatest extent possible. Examples of proper camouflaging include designing a tower to resemble a tree, designing a monopole to look like and function as a flagpole or freestanding sign support, hiding an antenna within a church steeple, or any other effective means of disguising the appearance of a tower or antenna that may be appropriate for the setting in the area surrounding the proposed communication facility site. It shall be the burden of the applicant to document and prove that a proposed communication facility cannot be effectively camouflaged, before approval of a non-camouflaged structure may be permitted by the city. In such instances, the applicant shall explore alternative means of minimizing the visual impact of the antenna, such as installing it onto an existing telephone pole, streetlight, or building rooftop, rather than erecting a new tower specifically for the proposed antenna. However, in no instance shall a non-camouflaged communication facility be approved for a residential property. 
(5)	Signs prohibited. No signs or other forms of advertising, including signs displaying the name of the owner or user of the tower or antenna, may be attached to or depicted on a communication facility, unless the proposed facility is a new monopole specifically camouflaged and approved to serve as a permitted freestanding sign support. This prohibition shall not apply to any required warning or private property posting signs. 
(6)	Construction materials. Where applicable building codes, technical codes, and federal regulations permit flexibility in the choice of construction materials and where the selection of alternative construction materials will not compromise the structural integrity of the proposed communication facility, proposed new towers and monopoles shall be constructed of materials that have a composition, texture, and color that will most closely resemble structures and natural features that exist on and adjoining the facility site. 
(7)	Health effects. All proposed communication facilities shall comply with all applicable FCC regulations and requirements in effect to prevent detrimental health effects from the proposed communication facilities. Under the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the city cannot deny a request to construct a communication facility on the grounds that its radio frequency or electromagnetic emissions would be harmful to the environment or the health of residents, if those emissions meet FCC standards. 
(8)	Interference with existing communication facilities. All proposed communication facilities shall comply with all applicable FCC regulations and requirements in effect to prevent interference with existing communication facilities serving the area. 
(9)	Siting requirements for whip antennas. Whip antennas shall not be allowed on a wall-mounted antenna structure. 
(10)	Co-location. No new tower or monopole shall be erected on a proposed communication facility site unless the applicant can document and prove that an existing co-location site is not available or is not technically capable of serving the specific telecommunication need in the area of the proposed site. This co-location requirement may be waived by the city where the proposed antenna would create an excessively cluttered appearance on the available co-location site (thereby drawing greater visual attention to the existing antenna site or creating a more imposing obstruction to scenic views and vistas from the area) and the proposed new antenna would be less visible or intrusive on the surrounding area if effectively camouflaged on an alternate site. 
(11)	Setback requirements. All proposed communication facilities and structures, including guys and accessory facilities shall satisfy the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district in which they will be sited. However, all proposed tower compounds that will be located on a residential property shall be subject to an additional setback from all property boundaries of the site equal to the height of the tower structure as measured from the finished ground level at the base or pad surface to the tallest point of the structure. If the tower compound abuts a property with an existing or approved (but not yet constructed or completed) residential use, the residential property setback requirement shall be satisfied for all property boundaries of the site that abut said existing or approved residential uses. 
(12)	Lighting. Towers may not be artificially lighted, except where required to satisfy applicable FAA regulations. Lights for security and to assist in making emergency repairs may be installed on buildings within the tower compound which contain equipment essential to the operation and maintenance of the tower. Such lights shall be shielded and directed in a downward direction from a height of not more than ten feet, and no such light may exceed a maximum of 150 watts. Such lights shall be located and directed so that they do not shine, reflect, or generate excessive glare onto or toward any residential property or adjoining property upon which a residential use exists or has been approved for construction. 
(13)	Security fence. All communication facilities to be located within a proposed tower compound shall be secured by the construction of an eight-foot-high security fence or wall constructed, at a minimum, using chain link fencing. 
(14)	Landscaping. All proposed tower compounds must be surrounded by a landscaped buffer which shall provide an effective yearround screen to a height of at least eight feet upon planting in order to screen views of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, residential properties, and properties upon which a residential use exists or has been approved for construction. The buffer shall include a landscaped strip at least four feet in depth located outside of the security fence or wall. The landscaped strip shall be planted with a combination of trees, shrubs, vines, and grown covers which are capable of attaining, at maturity, a height as high as the security fence or wall and which will enhance and screen the outward appearance of the security fence. The use of native species of plants and trees are encouraged to the extent that they will satisfy the requirement for adequate yearround screening. The applicant shall provide documentation to show what forms of vegetation will be planted within the landscaped area and how the area will be effectively maintained to ensure the long-term health of the plantings. Such documentation shall include the name, mailing address, and business telephone number of the party who shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the communication facilities and any fences, walls, and landscaped buffer areas. If the person or party responsible for such maintenance and repair changes any time after approval has been issued, the owner of the tower must provide the city's enforcement officer with written notice of the new party's name, mailing address, and business telephone number and the date upon which the change will become effective. 
(15)	Communication facility siting priorities. When selecting sites within the city to locate proposed communication facilities or tower compounds, priority shall be given to locations in nonresidential zoning districts. Residential property sites shall be given the lowest possible consideration for new sites. 
(16)	Access and parking. A driveway and parking area with a surface appropriate for the intensity of use shall be provided for each proposed tower compound to provide adequate access to the tower compound for the maintenance and repair of the communication facilities and for vehicle providing emergency services. Subject to the approval of the city council and to an appropriate agreement with the owner thereof, access and parking for the tower compound may be provided on an adjoining property or along one or more public streets adjoining the tower compound. 
(17)	Height limitations in residential zones. No tower or monopole on a residential property shall exceed the maximum structure height limitations specified by the applicable zoning district standards contained in article IV of this chapter. 
(e)	Levels of review and approval. In recognition of the high standards for proposed communication facilities established by this section, allowances have been made for an efficient and, in certain instances, expedited review process, where the applicant can demonstrate that a good faith effort to embrace and comply with the spirit and intent of these guidelines has been made in the design of the proposal. The three levels of review and approval and the types of projects that can be considered within each level are as follows: 
(1)	Review and approval by enforcement officer. The following types of communication facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the enforcement officer without the need for a public hearing, provided the proposed improvement fully complies with all requirements specified in subsection (d) of this section: 
a.	Any antenna, and associated cables and equipment, that will be co-located on an existing approved or registered preexisting tower, as long as the proposed antenna will not protrude at any point from the exterior surface of said tower by a distance of more than four feet and the tower will contain no more than five antennas if the application is approved. In addition, the supporting equipment for the proposed antenna shall not require the construction of any new freestanding structures on the tower compound. 
b.	Any antenna, and associated cables and equipment, that will be sited in an existing structure that fully conforms with all applicable requirements of this section (not a nonconforming structure) and where, after installation, the antenna and all supporting equipment will be completely enclosed by the exterior walls of the structure or completely screened from public view at any point on the land within 2,000 feet of the proposed antenna. An example of such a scenario would be the placement of an antenna within the steeple of a church or the dome of a farm silo. The addition of the antenna and supporting equipment to the existing conforming structure shall not require the construction of an addition to house the communication facilities. However, interior modifications to the structure may be permitted as part of the approval by the enforcement officer. 
(2)	Review and approval exclusively by city council. The city council shall have the authority to review and approve the following specific types of communication facilities and tower compounds, subject to the conduct of a public hearing, but without the need for a formal recommendation from the planning commission: 
a.	Any antenna (and associated cables and equipment) that will be installed on a co-location site that does not fall within the approval authority of the enforcement officer, as specified in subsection (e)(1)a of this section. 
b.	Any new antenna (not including a tower) that will be attached to an existing structure that fully conforms with all applicable requirements of this section (not a nonconforming structure), but that would not otherwise fall within the approval authority of the enforcement officer as specified in subsection (e)(1)b of this section. 
c.	Any new monopole not greater than 30 feet in height and located in a nonresidential zoning district that is camouflaged or disguised in such a way that it cannot be immediately recognized as an antenna support. 
d.	Any new antenna or tower to be located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city and located within a nonresidential zoning district. 
(3)	Review and approval by city council upon recommendation from planning commission. All applications not subject to review and approval by the enforcement officer in accordance with subsection (e)(1) of this section or review and approval exclusively by the city council in accordance with subsection (e)(2) of this section shall be subject to review and public hearings by both the planning commission and the city council. The planning commission shall review the application and issue a recommendation for approval or denial to the city council. Final review and approval or denial of the application shall be issued exclusively by the city council. 
(f)	Approval procedures. Review and approval of an application shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)	Preapplication consultation. Any applicant seeking to develop communication facilities or tower compounds that fall within the jurisdiction of these regulations may request an informal consultation with the enforcement officer and/or building inspector prior to the preparation and submission of a formal application. The purpose of this voluntary consultation shall be to answer specific questions about the process or applicable design requirements, discuss possible camouflaging or co-location options, or discuss application format options and/or potential supporting documentation submission needs. Any such consultation discussions must occur before a formal application is submitted to the city, shall be non-binding on the applicant and the city, and shall not in any way constitute or be interpreted to constitute a decision to approve or deny an application. 
(2)	Receipt of application. All required applications shall be submitted to the enforcement officer. Upon submission, the enforcement officer shall determine that the application contains all submission requirements specified in subsection (g) of this section and is, therefore, complete. No incomplete application shall be received by the city for review and approval. Once the enforcement officer determines the application is complete, the application shall be determined to have been received by the city on that date. 
(3)	Enforcement officer review. The enforcement officer and/or building official shall review a complete application within 31 days of the date of receipt. At the end of that review, the enforcement officer shall issue approval or denial for those aspects of the application that fall within the approval authority of the enforcement officer, as specified in subsection (e)(1) of this section. If the application or any part of the application is denied, the enforcement officer shall provide the applicant with a written letter of denial outlining the specific findings of fact used by the city as the basis of the denial. Such denial shall be based on the unwillingness of the applicant to comply with the requirements of the regulations and/or the failure of the application to satisfy specific basic requirements and design considerations outlined in subsection (d) of this section. If the enforcement officer fails to render a decision on the application within the required 31 days, then aspects of the application subject to review and approval by the enforcement officer shall be deemed to be automatically approved without further consideration by the city. However, the city council may grant an extension to the 31 day deadline not to exceed an additional 31 days, due to extended illness or absence of the enforcement officer during the required review and approval period or the submission of an application that is too large or extensive to be reviewed by existing staff resources within the prescribed time frame. On the date that the enforcement officer's review period ends, any remaining portions of the application not subject to approval or denial by the enforcement officer shall be submitted to the city council and/or planning commission for action, as may be applicable. The forwarded application shall be accompanied by a written report from the enforcement officer regarding his assessment of the proposed communication facility or tower compound with the applicable requirements specified in subsection (d) of this section. 
(4)	Planning commission and city council review. All applications or portions of applications requiring review and approval of the city council and/or planning commission in accordance with subsections (e)(2) or (3) of this section shall follow the same general guidelines as for an amendment to this chapter, as specified in article VII of this chapter, with the specific exception that planning commission review shall not be required for applications that may be approved exclusively by the city council, in accordance with subsection (e)(2) of this section. 
(5)	Public hearing. The city council and, if necessary, planning commission shall each conduct one public hearing on the application at the earliest regular meeting date that will satisfy the public hearing notice requirements following the date of submission by the enforcement officer. The required public hearing shall be noticed in the same manner prescribed in the applicable sections of article VII of this chapter (section 30-242 for the planning commission and section 30-243 for the city council). At the hearing, the presiding body shall entertain a report from the enforcement officer regarding his assessment of the proposed communication facility or tower compound with the applicable requirements specified in subsection (d) of this section. A written copy of the enforcement officer's report shall be incorporated into the minutes of the public hearing, along with a written synopsis of all public comments received and an attendance sheet identifying the names and mailing addresses of every person who attended the public hearing. 
(6)	Decision. The presiding body shall render a decision on the application within 31 days from the date that the public hearing is closed. For the planning commission, such decision shall be in the form of a written recommendation, along with a list of the findings of fact upon which the recommendation was based, to the city council for final action. If the planning commission fails to render a formal recommendation on the application within the required 31 days, then the application shall be transmitted to the city council for final decision with an automatic or implied recommendation of approval. If the city council fails to render a decision on the application within the required 31 days, then the application shall be deemed to be automatically approved without further consideration by the city. If the application or any part of the application is denied, the city council shall provide the applicant with a written letter of denial outlining the specific findings of fact used by the city council as the basis of the denial. Such denial shall be based on the unwillingness of the applicant to comply with the requirements of the regulations or specific basic requirements and design considerations outlined in subsection (d) of this section that the application fails to satisfy. 
(g)	Submission requirements. All applications to construct communication facilities that fall within the jurisdiction of these regulations shall provide adequate documentation to demonstrate compliance with all applicable basic requirements and design considerations specified in subsection (d) of this section. A single application may include any number of proposed tower compounds that will be located within the jurisdiction of this section, even though some of the proposed tower compounds may be subject to expedited review procedures as provided in subsection (e) of this section. Where an application includes tower compounds subject to different levels of review, the application may be divided into sections for each review category, within which all necessary supporting information for each proposed tower compound shall be provided. Whenever portions of an application have been approved or denied through an expedited review process, that information and any terms of said approval or denial shall be noted and considered in the subsequent review procedures for the remaining portions of the application. The enforcement officer shall determine the number of application copies that must be submitted by the applicant, based on the number of parties who must review the application. One copy of the application shall be required for each of the following review agents, as may be required: the enforcement officer, building inspector (if such person is not the enforcement officer), planning commission (as a body), and the city council (as a body). At a minimum, each required application shall contain the following: 
(1)	A completed zoning permit application form, including the required application fee. 
(2)	A site plan of the tower compound, prepared by a surveyor, at a scale not less than one inch to 50 feet, showing the location, street address, tax parcel identification number, and dimensions of the parcel of land that will contain the tower compound, the location of all required setback lines, driveways, parking areas, buffers, fencing, landscaping, stormwater management improvements, fuel tanks (both above and below ground), and structures that exist or will be constructed on the property. If the property upon which a proposed tower compound will be located exceeds 100 acres in size, then the scale of the site plan shall be increased to one inch to 100 feet, or the enforcement officer may grant authority to the applicant to limit the site plan coverage to a specified area around the proposed tower compound. 
(3)	Written proof of ownership of the proposed tower compound or authorization to use it. 
(4)	A written report, including a description of the proposed tower or antenna with the technical reasons for its design, a certificate from the project engineer documenting the structural integrity of the tower or antenna support for its proposed use including any co-located communication facilities that may already exist at the site, and an affidavit signed by the owner of the proposed communication facilities and the project engineer attesting compliance of the proposed communication facilities with all applicable FCC requirements with regard to any potential detrimental health effects that could be generated by the proposed facilities. 
(5)	A silhouette and elevation view of the proposed tower (or the existing tower, if the applicant is seeking permission to install an antenna on an existing tower) and all other communication facilities, and the tower compound, describing colors and materials to be used for the communication facilities and any security fence, decorative fence, and decorative wall. The configuration of proposed antenna arrays must be shown on the silhouette. The proposed location of future, additional antenna arrays must be shown on the silhouette by dashed lines. The elevation view shall portray the general context and compatibility of the proposed facilities with respect to surrounding structures and natural features. 
(6)	Copies of any proposed easements, where applicable to the project. 
(7)	Documentation of the frequency band and wattage of the proposed communication facilities. 
(8)	For each new monopole, tower, or antenna that is not otherwise located on a co-location site, a written report documenting the attempts made by the applicant to secure a suitable co-location site both within the city and in the adjoining unincorporated areas and any supporting technical reasons supporting the need for a new independent site. 
(h)	Inspection/fee. To determine whether tower compounds are in compliance with the requirements of this section, the city shall make, or have made on its behalf, an annual inspection of the communication facilities on each tower compound and the walls, fences, and landscaping around each tower compound, for which an annual inspection fee shall be imposed. The inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. If more than one antenna is located on a tower, the annual inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. The fee shall be due on January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by January 31 of such year. To help defray the cost of collecting delinquent fees, an additional fee, in the amount equal to ten percent of the fee shall be payable for each month, or portion of a month, after January in which the fee remains unpaid. If the fee is not paid within three months of its due date, the city may withdraw its permission for the location of communication facilities on the tower compound, in which event, all communication facilities must be removed from the tower compound within three months of the day on which the owner or owners of the tower receive notice of such withdrawal of permission. The fee shall be payable by and shall be the responsibility of the owner of the tower, even if additional antennas located on the tower are owned by other parties. If there is more than one owner of the tower, each owner shall be jointly and severally liable for the entire amount of the fee and any additional fees due because of delinquency in payment. Any inspection conducted in accordance with these regulations shall not be relate to the safety or structural soundness of the communication facilities or tower. The purpose of the inspection shall be limited to determining whether such communication facilities and tower compound are in compliance with the provisions of this section. Any violation of the provisions of this section that are discovered through said inspection shall be processed and resolved in accordance with the procedures specified in section 30-178. 
(i)	Removal of obsolete towers. Any tower that is no longer serving an active communication use shall be removed at the owner's expense. The owner shall provide the enforcement officer with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and remove the tower and all associated communication facilities from the site within three months from the date that all operations ceased. Where a tower serves as a co-location site, this provision shall not apply until all active users cease operation. If the owner of the tower fails to remove the tower as required, the responsibility for removal shall then apply to the owner of the land upon which the obsolete tower is located. Once the responsibility for removal has shifted to the property owner, the property owner shall remove the obsolete tower within one month of the date that tower owner's removal deadline lapsed. If neither the owner of the tower nor the owner of the land removes the obsolete tower within the time prescribed herein, the city may, but shall not be obligated to, remove the obsolete tower. If the city removes the obsolete tower, it shall be entitled to recover the cost of removal from the owner of the tower and/or the owner of the land upon which the tower is located. 
(j)	Satellite dishes. All satellite dishes exceeding one meter in diameter shall be considered structures required to be installed in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article, the standard building code, and any other applicable regulations enforced by the city. All such dishes shall be located in the rear yard of the property and shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the dish. 
(k)	Appeals. All appeals from a decision by the enforcement officer or city council shall be to the circuit court or FCC as prescribed by the Telecommunication Act of 1996. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 8), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-83. Temporary use buildings and offices.
Nothing is this article shall be interpreted to prohibit the use of a temporary construction office in accordance with the building code of the city. Temporary construction offices shall be removed upon completion of all construction work or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. Such temporary use permit shall expire six months from the date of issuance. If construction work has not been completed within that time period, the applicant shall apply for and receive a new permit on or before the date of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 9), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-84. Common open space requirements.
Within developments where common open space is required or will be provided by a developer, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)	Access to common open space. Open space should be distributed throughout the development so that all lots within the development shall have either direct access or access from an improved public right-of-way or easement to such areas. Common open space lands shall be designed to permit access for maintenance without the need to cross private lands. Where common or public lakefront open space is provided within a proposed development, such lands shall be afforded convenient vehicular and pedestrian access from all lots within the development. Such access may be provided through a combination of streets and greenbelt easements. 
(2)	Minimum size of subdivision. No subdivision containing fewer than 25 lots or units shall contain common open space lands, unless such common lands are deemed necessary by the planning commission to provide and maintain required stormwater management improvements. 
(3)	Improvements prohibited from inclusion in common open space. Common open space shall not include public or private streets, driveways, private yards, patios, parking areas, or utility easements, where the utilities within the easement would interfere with reasonable active or passive recreation uses. Sidewalks, playgrounds, and other outdoor recreational facilities, and ponds or lakes may be constructed within common open space lands, where adequate provisions are made for continued private maintenance of any such improvements. 
(4)	Management agreement for control and maintenance of common areas. The city shall bear no responsibility or liability for the continued maintenance, repair, or improvement of privately owned common open space lands. No lot or structure in a development containing common or shared open space shall be sold until a corporation, association, property owner's group or similar entity has been formed. Such corporation shall possess the right to assess all the properties which are jointly owned with interests in the common areas and facilities in the entire development, or in the tract, which is a part of the entire development, to meet the expense of such entity. The corporation also shall be vested with authority to control, and the duty to regularly maintain (either directly or by contract), all of said mutually owned features of the development or tract portion thereof. In addition, the homeowner's association bylaws or rules shall contain provisions authorizing the local government to maintain said open space at the association's expense and upon 15 days' advance written notice, if the association has not properly maintained any or all open space entrusted to it. Such entity shall operate under recorded conditions, covenants, and restrictions which may include compulsory memberships of all owners of lots and/or dwelling units, and flexibility of assessments to meet the changing costs of maintenance, repairs, and services. The subdivider or developer shall submit evidence of compliance with these requirements to the planning commission prior to approval of a zoning permit or final plat. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 10), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-85. Child care center requirements.
All child care facilities, whether conducted within a home or in a nonresidential building, shall be established in compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)	In-home child care centers. Any in-home child care center that was lawfully established and licensed by the state prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be allowed to remain in operation without further approval from the city (subject to any conditions imposed by the planning commission at the time of approval). Any new in-home child care center (serving six or fewer children) will only be permitted by the board of adjustment as a special exception within a residential zone (AG, RT, R-1, R-2, R-3, and MHP) subject to the applicable requirements of a home occupation, as specified in section 30-78, and subject to any additional mitigating conditions that the board of adjustment is authorized to impose under section 30-214(b). No signs advertising an in-home child care center shall be located on the property. An in-home child care center shall be classified as a residential-based facility and must satisfy all applicable requirements imposed by the state department of human resources. 
(2)	Nonresidential child care centers. Child care centers serving seven or more children shall not be allowed in any residential zone or residential use building. All such child care centers shall fully comply with all requirements of the building code for an educational occupancy. Architectural plans also may be required to document compliance. Any child care center that was lawfully established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, but does not comply with the requirements specified herein, shall be classified as a preexisting, nonconforming use, subject to the requirements contained in section 30-75. Such uses shall be allowed to continue operation as previously permitted, only as long as the facility does not increase the number of children it serves and it does not expand the area of the facility (both indoors and outdoors) dedicated to child care services. Any such change in the intensity of use shall require the issuance of a new zoning permit, and the facility shall fully comply with all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 11), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-86. Recreational vehicle parking and storage.
Major recreational vehicles including house boats, travel trailers, pick-up campers, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and other like vehicles shall not be stored or parked in any front yard on any lot in a residential district except within an enclosed garage or structure, provided however that such equipment may be parked in any off-street location in any district for a period not to exceed three consecutive days. Any such vehicle parked or stored in the side yard of a residential property (and not within an enclosed garage or structure) shall be parked in such a manner that no portion of the vehicle shall protrude into the front yard of the property. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. Any such recreational vehicle that is not stored within an enclosed structure shall be registered and bear a valid tag. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 12), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-87. Junk vehicle storage.
No automobiles, trucks, sport utility vehicles, vans, or other passenger vehicles that are not registered, do not bear a valid license tag, and/or are incapable of starting and moving under their own power shall be stored or parked on any land within a residential zone other than within a completely enclosed garage or storage building. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 13), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-88. Manufactured home subdivisions.
All manufactured home subdivisions shall be permitted only in those zoning districts where single-family manufactured homes are permitted on individual lots. Such subdivisions shall comply with the following special requirements: 
(1)	Each manufactured home subdivision shall provide a landscaped buffer along any exterior boundary of the development site that abuts a property zoned RT, R-1, R-2 or VC. 
(2)	Each manufactured home subdivision shall comply with all applicable requirements of the city subdivision regulations, and shall be approved by the city planning commission in accordance with those regulations. 
(3)	The development site size for a manufactured home subdivision shall be five acres, at least 80 percent of which shall be developable land area. 
(4)	Not less than ten percent of the land area within a manufactured home subdivision containing 25 or more lots shall be dedicated for common open space. 
(5)	H.U.D. seal required. Prior to installation, each manufactured home shall bear a seal certifying compliance with the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Any lawfully existing mobile home or manufactured home not bearing such seal shall be deemed a nonconforming structure and shall be treated as a nonconforming structure and use in accordance with the regulations established in section 30-75. 
(6)	Anchoring requirements. All manufactured homes shall be set up, installed, and anchored in full compliance with the requirements of the state manufactured housing commission. Each manufactured home site shall be properly prepared for set up and installation as may be necessary and appropriate to prevent the accumulation of standing water or the drainage of stormwater runoff beneath the manufactured home. 
(7)	Skirting required. All manufactured homes shall be skirted with a weather-resistant material which resembles siding materials commonly found on a single-family dwelling. Exterior siding should not have a high-gloss finish and should be residential in appearance, including, but not limited to, clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes, or similar material, but excluding smooth, ribbed, or corrugated metal or plastic panels. Concrete block or brick and mortar foundation walls, constructed in compliance with all applicable building code requirements, shall be the preferred method of skirting. The exterior siding material must extend to the ground except that, when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation. Where the space beneath a manufactured home that is to be enclosed by skirting is not completely covered by a concrete pad, then a ground vapor retarder of six mil rated polyethylene sheeting or greater shall be installed over the entire area enclosed by skirting. All skirting shall be adequately vented. 
(8)	Axles and tow bars removed. Once a manufactured home has been placed on an individual lot, all tow bars and axles shall be removed and stored in a location on the lot where they cannot be seen from the street, neighboring homes, or adjoining properties. 
(9)	Access to exterior entrances. Immediately after installation and prior to occupation, steps and a landing or porch shall be constructed at each raised exterior entrance or doorway to the manufactured home. At a minimum, the front or main entrance to a manufactured home shall be served by a stairway (not less than three feet in width) leading to a landing or porch not narrower than five feet in depth (as measured outward from the exterior of the structure) nor shorter than eight feet in length (centered along the entranceway) and containing a railing along all exterior edges of the landing and stairway. A stairway (not less than three feet in width) with exterior railings shall be erected at all other exterior entrances to the manufactured home. All required stairways and landings/porches shall be constructed of pressure treated wood or brick materials, or some combination of both. Required railings may be constructed of pressure treated wood or metal materials. 
(10)	Sanitary facilities. Each manufactured home shall contain at least one shower or tub, a flush toilet, a lavatory, hot and cold running water, and a central source of heat for the occupants thereof. 
(11)	Landscaping. All manufactured homes shall be landscaped in a manner consistent with other adjoining residential home sites in the area or neighborhood. At a minimum, ornamental shrubs shall be applied along the front yard foundation or skirting of each manufactured home. 
(12)	Orientation. Each manufactured home shall be oriented on the lot so that it meets all setback and area requirements of the zoning district. Wherever possible, the unit shall be located with its long axis parallel with the street. 
(13)	Minimum width. Each manufactured home shall be at least 12 feet in width. 
(14)	Fuel storage facilities. All fuel oil supply systems serving a manufactured home shall be constructed and installed within the foundation wall or underground in accordance with all applicable building and safety codes, except that any bottled gas tanks may be fenced or screened so as not to be clearly visible from the street or abutting properties. 
(15)	Number allowed. Not more than one manufactured home shall be permitted on any individual lot that is not located within a manufactured home subdivision. 
(16)	Use limitations. No manufactured home may be used for any purpose other than as regulated for residential use herein except in a nonresidential zoning district as a temporary construction office or a temporary residence at a construction job site, provided that such use shall cease when a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(17)	Storm shelters. Each manufactured home lot shall have at least one underground storm shelter capable of accommodating at least one person for each bedroom contained in the manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 14), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-89. Timber harvesting.
(a)	The selective harvesting or cutting of trees and/or the pruning of standing trees shall be permitted by right on any property in any zoning district within the city. Similarly, the clearing of all trees on those portions of a property designated and approved for the construction of buildings and structures in accordance with a zoning permit shall be permitted by right on any property in any zoning district within the city. However, the city recognizes and appreciates the value and benefits provided by mature trees in residential areas and along public streets. Such trees help reduce ambient air temperatures in urban and suburban areas, provide an attractive setting for developed uses that enhance property values, and present an appearance of stability and genuine concern for the aesthetic qualities of land development. As such, the city strongly encourages moderation and restraint in the pruning or harvesting of mature trees to facilitate land development activities. Clear cutting activities should be limited to the smallest area of the site as is practicable and necessary for site development. Vegetative cover should be restored at the earliest possible time. Where the scope of the tree harvesting activities will require a land disturbance and soil erosion permit as required in section 30-43, such permit shall be obtained prior to the initiation of clearing activities. 
(b)	Where a property owner seeks to clear cut a property exclusively for the private or commercial sale of timber (rather than to clear a site for development), the following requirements shall be satisfied: 
(1)	Prior to the initiation of any clear cutting activities within the city limits, the property owner shall submit a plan to the enforcement officer showing the boundaries of the subject property and the boundaries of all areas subject to clear cutting activities (including any easements) for the issuance of a zoning permit. 
(2)	All clear cutting activities shall retain an undisturbed buffer area of at least 50 feet in width adjoining all property boundaries and the banks of all perennial streams and lakes that adjoin or cross the property, within which no trimming or felling of existing trees shall be conducted, except where such action may be required to provide access to the areas of the property within which trees will be harvested. The width of the required buffer may be reduced to 25 feet where the subject property is less than one acre in size and only along property lines that border an undeveloped lot or existing nonresidential use. 
(3)	All clear cutting activities shall be conducted in compliance with state best management practices (BMPs) as promulgated by the state forestry commission. 
(4)	Once a property has been clear cut in accordance with the requirements of this section, the property owner shall clear away any refuse material and replant those areas of the property that will not be dedicated to an agricultural use or a developed use. The city may require the owner to post a performance bond to ensure that restoration work will be undertaken. 
(5)	Clear cutting activities in accordance with these requirements shall be allowed in any zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 15), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-90. Standards for townhouses, condominiums, and garden homes.
(a)	Townhouses and condominiums. The design, review, and approval of townhouse or condominium development projects within any regular zoning district where such uses may be permitted, shall be governed by this guidelines and requirements contained in this section. 
(1)	Statement of intent. The purpose of this section is to establish special standards for the design and review of development projects containing townhouse and condominium dwellings. It is expected that townhouse and condominium developments will offer a higher standard of amenity than a traditional residential subdivision to compensate for the higher residential density opportunities afforded by these special development standards. In addition, the development design flexibility created by these standards should be used to protect sensitive natural features within or adjacent to the development site, such as rivers and streams, lakes or lake shoreline, rare or endangered species colonies or habitats, or large stands or tracts of mature trees or forest areas. Such natural features or resources add substantial value to the development but are often difficult to protect under traditional subdivision practices. Although architectural design of individual buildings is not specifically regulated by this section, the city expects developers of townhouse and condominium projects to design buildings and utilize exterior materials and color schemes that will help the project blend with or complement the predominant architectural style of the surrounding neighborhood and to minimize the appearance and intrusion of the higher permitted residential densities on the natural environment, neighboring properties, and the overall setting of the project. 
(2)	Basic development requirements for all townhouses and condominiums. The following basic design requirements and dimensional standards shall be incorporated into each townhouse and condominium development: 
a.	Minimum development site area for townhouse and condominium projects. Each lot or development site that will be designed to accommodate townhouse or condominium dwelling units and buildings shall contain not less than five acres within an R-1 or R-2 residential zone and not less than 2½ acres in any other permitted zoning district. At least 75 percent of the land area contained within the entire development site shall consist of developable land area. 
b.	Maximum number of dwelling units. The maximum number of townhouse and/or condominium dwelling units that may be constructed on any given acre of land contained with the development site shall not exceed the number specified below, unless approved by the planning commission in accordance with the density bonus provisions of subsection (a)(3) of this section: 
1.	R-1 Single-Family Residential zone, ten units. 
2.	R-2, Medium Density Residential zone, 12 units. 
3.	All other zones, 18 units. 
c.	Maximum and minimum number of dwelling units allowed in a single building. No townhouse or condominium building shall contain fewer than four nor more than 12 independent dwelling units. 
d.	Maximum percentage of development site covered by impervious surfaces. The maximum percentage of an entire development site that may be covered by impervious surfaces at project build-out shall not exceed 40 percent in the R-1 or R-2 zone or 50 percent in all other zoning districts, unless approved by the planning commission in accordance with the density bonus provisions of subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
e.	Common lands required. All areas of townhouse or condominium development site that are not divided into townhouse lots, condominium buildings, or dedicated public street rights-of way shall be dedicated for development and perpetual maintenance as common lands, subject to the requirements contained in section 30-84. Common lands may be used for parking, driveways, recreation, stormwater management, and buffers. At least 25 percent of the common lands shall be dedicated to either passive or active recreational uses, and at least 50 percent of said common recreational lands shall consist of developable land area. Recreational improvements shall be designed to cater to the target market population of the development. 
f.	Setback from dedicated street rights-of-way. All buildings containing townhouse or condominium units shall be comply with the applicable minimum front yard setback for the regular zoning district within which it will be located, but in no case shall a townhouse or condominium building be set back more than 35 feet from a dedicated street right-of-way line. 
g.	Separation between buildings. On any townhouse or condominium development site, individual buildings or complexes of attached and semi-detached units shall be spaced according to the following guidelines: 
1.	Not less than 40 feet between the front facade (where the main entrances to the building or units are located) of a building and any other opposing building facade, or between the back facades of opposing buildings. 
2.	Not less than 20 feet between the side facades of two neighboring buildings. 
h.	Minimum floor area for each dwelling unit. For one story dwellings, 1,000 square feet per unit. For two story dwellings, 1,100 square feet per unit with a minimum of 550 square feet on the first floor. 
i.	Dimensional requirements for townhouse development lots. All individual lots in a development containing townhouse units (including any lots containing single-family attached or semi-detached units) shall comply with the following requirements. These requirements shall not apply to condominium structures or developments: 
1.	Minimum required lot area for each townhouse unit: 1,250 square feet. 
2.	Minimum required lot width: 20 feet. 
3.	Minimum required front and rear yards: 2½ feet. 
4.	Minimum required side yards: none. 
5.	Maximum percentage of lot covered by impervious surfaces: 96 percent. 
6.	Minimum separation distance between townhouse lot and street right-of-way line. No portion of a lot containing a townhouse unit shall be located within 25 feet of a dedicated street right-of-way line. 
j.	Off-street parking requirements. All townhouse lots shall contain adequate parking for a single-family residential use, as specified in section 30-79. Each building containing condominium units shall contain an off-street parking lot providing the number of spaces required for a multifamily building, as specified in section 30-79. 
k.	Maximum height. No buildings or structures subject to height restrictions within a townhouse or condominium development shall exceed 25 feet or 2½ stories. 
l.	Minimum roof pitch. All townhouse buildings shall have a minimum roof pitch of 3:12. Rooflines should be articulated in a manner consistent with residential units in the surrounding neighborhood. No minimum roof pitch shall apply to condominium buildings. 
m.	Required buffers. All townhouse and condominium developments shall be effectively buffered and attractively landscaped along the exterior boundaries of the development site. All buffer areas shall be owned and maintained as common open space within each development. Each buffer area shall be dedicated and improved (at a minimum) in accordance with the description of a buffer in section 30-6. 
n.	Required infrastructure. All proposed townhouse and condominium buildings shall be served by municipal water and sewer. 
o.	Household rubbish containers. Each townhouse and condominium development shall provide adequate on-site containers for the collection of household garbage generated by the residents of the development. All garbage containers shall be placed and kept within three- or four-sided enclosures with walls at least four feet high to provide proper screening of the containers. 
p.	Fire suppression facilities. Every townhouse and condominium development shall be served or equipped at all times with fire hydrant equipment in good working order, of such type, size, and number and so located within the development as to satisfy applicable regulations of the city. Each dwelling unit in a townhouse or condominium development shall be located not more than 1,000 feet away from a fire hydrant. No open fires, except barbecue grills, shall be permitted within a townhouse or condominium development. All townhouse and condominium developments shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the city fire department. 
q.	Resident manager. At least one dwelling unit in each townhouse or condominium development containing 20 or more dwelling units shall be designated or reserved for a paid or volunteer resident manager, who shall represent the development owner or homeowner's association and shall be responsible for ensuring proper maintenance of all facilities and improvements in the development. Where a townhouse or condominium development contains 60 or more dwelling units, the required resident manager unit may be improved and utilized as an administrative office for the development. 
(3)	Review and approval. Since both townhouse and condominium developments result in the subdivision of land into parcels or units for sale or transfer of ownership, they must be approved as subdivisions. Therefore, all townhouse and condominium developments must be reviewed and approved by the planning commission in accordance with the review and approval procedures of the city subdivision regulations, prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. To the extent that the development standards and/or review considerations of this section conflict with the corresponding requirements of the city subdivision regulations (as they may be applied to townhouse or condominium projects), the requirements contained in this chapter shall supersede and govern. All other procedures and requirements of the city subdivision regulations shall apply. During its review of a townhouse or condominium development, the planning commission shall evaluate the following review considerations, and may issue such conditions of approval as may be reasonably necessary to correct specific design deficiencies under these considerations: 
a.	The consistency of the proposed development scheme with the comprehensive plan. 
b.	The traffic impacts of the proposed development on adjoining public streets in terms of access and circulation and congestion on neighborhood streets. 
c.	The extent to which the layout and design of the development will retain and protect sensitive and enhancing natural features of the site that would otherwise be lost under a traditional subdivision design. 
d.	The extent to which the architectural design and style of the buildings will complement the predominant architectural styles present in the surrounding neighborhood. All townhouse and condominium buildings within a development should be designed and/or painted to be aesthetically compatible with each other. Where the building exteriors or trim are to be painted, earth tones shall be preferred. To the greatest extent feasible, all townhouse and condominium buildings should be designed to be compatible with or reflective of the predominant architectural style represented in the neighborhood surrounding the development site (if the neighborhood is clearly characterized by a particular architectural style). 
e.	The extent to which the proposed buildings will be designed and oriented to take advantage of scenic views and/or to maximize solar access. 
f.	The extent to which the higher development densities on the site are visually screened from any adjoining properties developed for traditional single-family detached homes. 
g.	The extent to which recreational improvements and amenities, designed to serve the target market population for the project, will be incorporated into the common open space within the development. As an additional incentive to advance the provision of recreational improvements within a townhouse or condominium development, the planning commission may authorize the developer to construct an additional four dwelling units or lots per acre over and above the maximum number of units allowed in subsection (a)(2) of this section and an increase of not more than 20 percent in the maximum percentage of impervious surfaces for townhouse developments or 30 percent for condominium developments in exchange for the provision of any two of the following recreational amenities, as may be appropriate for the specific development: 
1.	An outdoor, in-ground, Olympic-size swimming pool with a diving platform. 
2.	A children's playground area with not less than three play stations offering a range of play activities. 
3.	A walking trail around the development with not less than six exercise stations. 
4.	A common boat launch facility and dock. 
5.	A hard surface tennis facility providing not less than two separate courts. 
6.	A central clubhouse building designed for social events or gatherings. 
7.	Improved sidewalks, not less than four feet in width connecting all residential buildings, common recreational facilities, and (where available) public sidewalk facilities adjoining the development site. 
(b)	Garden home subdivisions. For the purposes of this subsection, a garden home shall be defined as a single- or two-family detached dwelling unit (excluding manufactured homes) designed and sited on a lot to maximize rear yard or rear and side yard access and utility, through the construction of an exterior patio or first floor deck, rear patio doors, large rear and/or side windows, and the incorporation of intensive ornamental landscaping (which may include ornamental fencing) surrounding the exterior patio/deck to enhance rear/side yard privacy and visual appeal. Garden homes are designed to create a high value single-family residential environment in a high-density setting. All garden home developments shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	Residential dwelling types permitted. Single-family dwellings, excluding manufactured homes. 
(2)	Infrastructure requirements. All garden homes shall be served by municipal water and sewer. 
(3)	Siting. Garden home structures shall be sited as close as possible to the front setback line and one of the side yard setback lines to maximize utility of the remaining rear and opposing side yard for patio/garden development. Such units may be designed as a zero lot line development in accordance with the provisions of section 30-91. 
(4)	Accessory structures. No accessory structures shall be permitted on a garden home lot. Exterior storage units and garages must be attached to the dwelling unit. 
(5)	Landscaping. Intensive ornamental landscaping shall be provided in the rear and side yard of all garden homes to ensure visual privacy within the enlarged side and rear yards and to create an attractive garden environment. Ornamental walls constructed of wood, brick, or stone not taller than four feet in height and terraces may be incorporated into the landscaping scheme to provide additional privacy and visual interest. 
(6)	Windows. Windows within garden homes shall be designed to favor (in terms of size, number, or both) views of the landscaped rear and/or side yards of the property. 
(7)	Special infill development incentives for garden home subdivisions. The city desires to encourage high quality infill residential development within the developed core of the city. Infill development promotes efficient growth by utilizing existing infrastructure and breathing new life into established neighborhoods, thereby stabilizing property values and strengthening established neighborhoods. To help encourage quality infill residential development, the city has developed the following development incentives or intensity bonuses for any garden home subdivision in areas of the city identified by the city comprehensive plan as "potential infill residential development sites." These areas have been identified by the planning commission as desired locations for the development or redevelopment of high-value urban residential environments, where supporting infrastructure and community services are available and accessible. Any applicant that either develops or rezones and develops an area identified in the comprehensive plan as a "potential infill residential development site" in accordance with the garden home subdivision provisions of this subsection, shall be entitled to develop the site in accordance with the modified dimensional requirements listed below. All other dimensional requirements imposed by the applicable zoning district that are not otherwise modified by the following standards listed shall be applied as specified in that district: 
a.	Modified minimum lot size: 8,000 square feet for each lot designed to accommodate a single-family detached dwelling. 
b.	Modified front yard setback: 20 feet. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
c.	Modified minimum lot width: 80 feet for each lot designed to accommodate a single-family detached dwelling. All lots must comply with the minimum lot width to length ratio specified in this chapter. 
d.	Minimum side yard setbacks: Five feet. 
e.	Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet. 
f.	Modified maximum impervious surface area: 50 percent. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 16), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-91. Zero lot line developments.
A zero lot line development is a single-family subdivision within which the standard side yard setback requirements are modified to allow the individual dwelling units to be sited along one side yard lot line with a corresponding increase in the opposing side yard. The modified setback requirements authorized by this section must be approved by the planning commission as part of a preliminary subdivision plan for the proposed zero lot line development. The zero lot line concept may be applied to any residential subdivision in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 residential zoning districts. All zero lot line developments shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	Zero lot line zoning modifications allowed only for subdivisions. The zoning modifications stipulated in this section for zero lot line developments shall be approved only for a subdivision that satisfies all special requirements for zero lot line developments. No zero lot line zoning modifications shall be authorized for an individual dwelling building lot that is not part of a zero lot line subdivision plat approved by the planning commission. 
(2)	Infrastructure requirements. All dwelling units in a zero lot line development shall be served by municipal water. 
(3)	Residential dwelling types permitted. Any single-family dwelling, including garden homes, but excluding manufactured homes, shall be permitted within a zero lot line development, as long as the proposed units satisfy all applicable dimensional requirements of this zoning district. 
(4)	Minimum size of a zero lot line development site. All zero lot line development sites shall contain not less than three acres. At least 80 percent of the development site shall consist of developable land area. 
(5)	Side yard setback modification. Within any zero lot line subdivision approved by the planning commission, the minimum side yard setback on one side of each lot shall be reduced to one foot, resulting in a corresponding increase in the minimum side yard setback requirement for the opposing side yard on the lot. In no instance shall a reduced side yard on one lot abut a reduced side yard on an adjoining lot. One exterior wall of each dwelling unit constructed on a zero lot line property shall be sited along the reduced side yard setback. 
(6)	Maintenance easement required. For each zero lot line property, a permanently dedicated four-foot-wide maintenance easement shall be imposed on the side yard of the adjoining property that abuts a zero side yard, to allow the zero lot line property owner adequate access to the neighboring property to maintain the exterior wall of the dwelling along the zero lot line. The easement shall prohibit the construction of any fence, landscaping, or other access obstruction with the required maintenance easement. 
(7)	No windows or doors allowed along the zero side yard. No exterior windows or doors shall be permitted along any dwelling wall that is located along a zero side yard. Skylights along the interior ceiling line of each floor may be permitted by the planning commission, provided that they are designed to ensure the privacy of the neighboring yard. 
(8)	Consistency within blocks. Side yard setbacks shall not be modified for an individual lot, unless it is part of a block within the development in which all lots will possess zero side yards. No reduced side yard within a zero lot line development shall abut a standard lot adjacent to the development. 
(9)	Common open space and recreation improvements. All commonly owned lands shall be subject to the common open space requirements specified in section 30-84. All zero lot line developments containing 50 or more dwelling units shall provide one or more improved outdoor recreational areas for the tenants of the development utilizing not less than ten percent of the gross development site area. At least half of the land dedicated to such recreational improvements shall be developable land area, and the recreational area or areas must be afforded public access from every dwelling unit in the development. Recreational improvements shall be designed to serve the specific recreational needs of the target population for the development (if the development has been designed to serve a specific market segment of the population), and may include: 
a.	A hard surface walking trail with exercise stations. 
b.	A swimming pool facility. 
c.	Tennis/basketball courts. 
d.	Athletic fields (but no bleachers or stands). 
e.	A playground with playground equipment. 
f.	A recreational lake with at least one of the following facilities: a community boat launch, fishing pier, and/or a beach. The improvement of an existing water amenity adjacent to or within the development shall satisfy this recreational option. 
g.	A community picnic area with picnic tables, barbecue stations, and/or pavilions. 
h.	A skateboard track. 
i.	A perpetually maintained ornamental garden with walking paths and a gazebo. 
j.	Golf putting greens or a miniature golf course. 
(10)	Buffer requirements. A landscaped and perpetually maintained buffer shall be provided along any property line of a zero lot line development that adjoins a property zoned AG, RT, R-1, R-2, VC, B-2, M-1 or MHP and along any road classified as an arterial or collector highway in the city comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 17), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-92. Industrial use development plans.
In all proposed new industrial developments, the developer must submit to the planning commission a site development plan for approval prior to submitting an application for a building permit. Said site development plan shall contain all of the information required by section 30-152(c)(1). If the proposed industrial development involves the subdivision of land, an application for subdivision approval shall also be required and the review of the site development plan shall be conducted in conjunction with and as a component of the required subdivision review. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IV(§ 18), 3-22-2004)
 
Secs. 30-93—30-112. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. SHORT-TERM RENTAL OF SINGLE-FAMILY AND MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCES OVERLAY DISTRICT
 
Sec. 30-113. Findings and purpose.
(a)	The city is committed to maintaining and preserving the quality of its residential character, the housing stock and existing single-family and multifamily communities, scenic beauty, and the natural resources that are the foundation of its economic strength and quality of life. 
(b)	The rental of single-family and multifamily residences for temporary occupancy has been identified as a community concern due to the potential for increased traffic, noise, high occupant turnover, and density in single-family and multifamily residential districts. 
(c)	The number of occupants occupying short-term rentals has the potential to create a danger to the health and safety of the residential neighborhood and nearby residential properties. 
(d)	The purpose of this division is to safeguard the peace, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city, and their visitors and guests, by eliminating noise, vandalism, overcrowding, neighborhood uncertainty, high occupancy turnover, diminution of neighborhood character, and other effects that have become associated with the short-term rental of single-family and multifamily residential dwellings. 
(e)	The restrictions established by this division are necessary to protect the integrity and residential character of the city's single-family and multifamily residential neighborhoods and the health and safety of the residents and citizens of the city. 
(f)	This division is required to prohibit, in certain circumstances, the rental of single-family and multifamily residences and the promotion and advertisement of short-term rentals of single-family residences for periods of less than 90 consecutive days, in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and the existing community standards in the city relating to single-family residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2016, § 1, 6-27-2016)
 
Sec. 30-114. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertise or advertisement means any written, electronic, or oral publication, dissemination, solicitation, or circulation which is intended to directly or indirectly induce any person to enter into an agreement for the rental of a single-family and multifamily residence in violation of this division or other applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. The term "advertise" or "advertisement" includes, but is not limited to, mailings, print advertisements, Internet listings, e-mail publications, Facebook publications, or other oral, printed, or electronic means. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is permitted, designed, or used primarily for a single-family residence, except that the term "dwelling" shall not include boardinghouses or roominghouses, tents, dormitories, motels, hotels, or other structures which are not designed or used primarily for a single-family residence as defined by this article. 
Dwelling unit means any portion of a building used, intended, or designed as a separate abode for one family. 
Enterprise means any corporation, association, firm, partnership, LLC, or other legal entity. 
Facilitate means a person, operator, or enterprise acting with knowledge that an operator, managing agency or rental agent is committing or intends to commit the offense of renting a single-family residence in violation of this article, the person or enterprise knowingly provides the operator, managing agency or rental agent with means or opportunity for the commission of said offense. 
Managing agency or rental agent means a person, operator, enterprise, or agency representing the owner of the single-family residence, or a person, enterprise or agency owning more than one single-family residence. 
Operator means a person or enterprise who is owner or proprietor of a single-family residence, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, managing agency, rental agent, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agency of any type or character, or where the operator performs his functions through a managing agency or the rental agent, the operator has the same duties as its principal. 
Person means any individual or a group of individuals, enterprise, managing agency, rental agent, operator, or any entity. 
Remuneration means compensation, money, or other consideration given in return for occupancy, possession, or use of real property. 
Rent means the consideration or remuneration charged whether or not received, for the occupancy or possession of space in a single-family residence, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property or services of any kind. 
Rental means an arrangement between a transient and an operator whereby rent is received in exchange for the right to possess a residential structure. 
Single-family residence means any dwelling, dwelling unit, or any structure located in the following residential zoning districts: R-I, R-2, R-3, RG, RT, and AG as defined in the zoning ordinance and city zoning map. 
Solicit means a person with the intent to promote or facilitate the short-term rental of a single-family residence in violation of this division, or if such person commands, encourages, requests or solicits another person to engage in conduct which would constitute a violation of this division. 
Transient means those who reside, possess, or inhabit a single-family residence as defined by this section for a period of less than 90 consecutive calendar days, counting portions of calendar days as full days. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2016, § 2, 6-27-2016)
 
Sec. 30-115. Prohibited rental duration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or possess to rent for any type of remuneration, any single-family residence, or multifamily residence as defined by this division, for a period of time of less than 90 consecutive days in duration to any transient. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2016, § 3, 6-27-2016)
 
Sec. 30-116. Advertisement of short-term rentals of single-family residences prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, solicit, or facilitate the rental for a duration less than 90 consecutive days of any single-family or multifamily residence as defined by this division. Such activity is prohibited, whether by mailings, print advertisements, Internet listings, or any other means for communicating such advertisement. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2016, § 4, 6-27-2016)
 
Sec. 30-117. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this division shall constitute a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by section 1-15. Each day that any violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as described herein, as an additional violation for each day such violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2016, § 5, 6-27-2016)
 
Sec. 30-118. Civil penalties.
A violation of any portion of this division constitutes a public nuisance per se. The city, as an additional or alternate remedy, may institute equitable or injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate uses prohibited by this division. Said petition shall be verified by the mayor, city clerk, police officer, or any other governing official or employee of the city authorized to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2016, § 6, 6-27-2016)
 
Sec. 30-119. Additional remedies for violation of this division.
(a)	Any violation of any provision of this division shall authorize, in addition to any other fines, penalties, remedies, or violations provided for in this division, the issuance of a UNTCC pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(b)	Any recipient of a UNTCC issued for the violation of any provisions of this division may, within 72 hours from the receipt of such UNTCC, present such UNTCC to the police officer or any officer of the city responsible for the enforcement of the provisions who issued such UNTCC, or the chief of police or his designee and shall provide evidence that the alleged violations as reflected in the UNTCC have been abated within 72 hours of receipt of the same by the recipient, and upon investigation, such officer who issued the UNTCC or the chief of police or his designee may, after inspection, void the citation prior to the presentation to the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 0-008-2016, § 7, 6-27-2016)
 
Secs. 30-120—30-136. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
 
Sec. 30-137. Establishment of zoning districts.
For the purpose of this article, the city is hereby divided into the type of districts designated as follows: 
(1)	Regular districts.
AG 	Agricultural 
RT 	Rural Transitional 
R-1 	Single-family Residential 
R-2 	Medium Density Residential 
R-3 	Multifamily Residential 
MHP 	Mobile Home Park 
VC 	Village Center 
B-1 	Neighborhood Business 
B-2 	Highway Commercial 
M-1 	Light Manufacturing 

(2)	Special districts.
FHA 	Flood Hazard Area 
PD 	Planned Development 
RSC 	Regional Shopping Center 

(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 1), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-138. Zoning district boundaries.
The boundaries of the various zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map. The zoning map includes a base map which identifies the location of the regular districts and an overlay to the base map which outlines the boundaries of the special districts. The zoning map and all explanatory matter thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of this article. Official copies of the zoning map shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 2), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-139. Interpretation of zoning district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on said maps, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following jurisdictional limits or platted lot lines or other property lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)	Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following streets, alleys, rights-of-way, or railroads, such boundaries shall be construed to follow the centerlines of such streets, alleys, rights-of-way, or railroads. 
(3)	Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following shorelines of lakes or ponds, such boundaries shall be construed to follow the mean high-water lines of such lakes or ponds. In the event of a change in the mean high waterline, the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the actual mean high waterline. 
(4)	Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following streams, rivers, or other perennial watercourses, such boundaries shall be construed to follow the centerline of such waterways as determined by the mean high-water mark along opposing banks. In the event of a natural change in the location of such waterways, the district boundary shall be construed as moving with the centerline. 
(5)	Where boundaries are indicated as being separate from but approximately parallel to any features listed in subsections (1) through (4) of this section, such boundaries shall be construed as being parallel to and at such distance as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
(6)	In unsubdivided property or tracts where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map. 
(7)	Where a public road, street, or alley shown on the zoning map is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which the right-of-way reverts shall apply to the vacated or abandoned road, street, or alley. 
(8)	In case any further uncertainty exists, the board of adjustment shall determine the location of boundaries. The board of adjustment may also cause to be prepared sectional maps of any part of the city which will interpret the exact location of the district boundaries, following the guidelines contained in the preceding subsections. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 3), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-140. Interpretation of uses.
Where doubt exists as to whether a new or previously unclassified use is similar in nature to the permitted uses identified in this article, the board of adjustment shall approve or deny the location of the unclassified use in question. In making such a determination, the board of adjustment shall consider the extent to which the proposed use is consistent with the intent of the zoning district and determine the specific permitted use within the zoning district that is most similar in impact and characteristics to the proposed new use. However, in no instance shall the board of adjustment interpret a proposed use as being permitted in one district, when the use is more similar in impact and characteristics to a use that is permitted exclusively in another district. The following procedures to establish consistency of unclassified uses shall be observed: 
(1)	Determination by board of adjustment. If compatible with the existing zoning district intent, the unclassified use shall be permitted by special exception upon approval of and subject to the conditions set by the board of adjustment. Such conditions of approval shall be established to prevent undue impacts of the new use on surrounding uses, and shall be limited to: 
a.	Special setback requirements; 
b.	Special buffer or fencing requirements; 
c.	Special lighting requirements to prevent excessive glare on neighboring properties; 
d.	Special parking requirements; 
e.	Special landscaping requirements; 
f.	Special limitations on signage; 
g.	Special limitations on traffic access points to the property; and 
h.	Special stormwater management requirements. 
(2)	Rezoning required. If the unclassified use is deemed to be incompatible with the existing zoning district intent, the enforcement officer shall recommend the most appropriate district classification and shall require the applicant to seek rezoning of the property in question, before the proposed use can be conducted on the property. In addition, the unclassified use shall be permitted by special exception in the district to which the property was rezoned. upon approval of and subject to the conditions set by the board of adjustment. 
(3)	Amendment of permitted uses. Following the final action on the unclassified use, as subsections (1) or (2) of this section may require, the planning commission may initiate an amendment to this article to add the newly permitted use to the list of permitted uses in the appropriate zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 4), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-141. AG Agricultural zoning district.
(a)	District intent. The purpose of this district shall be to encourage very low density single-family residential development in outlying rural areas of the community characterized by active forestry and agricultural uses, but are just beginning to be developed. These areas typically lack full access to municipal infrastructure, or are located upon or near sensitive natural resources. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following identifies the uses permitted in the AG Agricultural zoning district: 
(1)	Single-family dwellings. 
(2)	Single-family manufactured homes on individual lots, subject to the applicable requirements specified in section 30-77. 
(3)	Accessory residential dwelling units in compliance with all requirements specified in section 30-80. 
(4)	Single-family group homes, subject to the standards established in sections 30-6 and 30-76. 
(5)	Accessory uses and buildings, subject to the standards established in section 30-34. 
(6)	Home occupations, subject to the standards established in section 30-78. 
(7)	Cottage industries, subject to the standards established in section 30-78. 
(8)	In-home child care centers, subject to the standards established in section 30-85. 
(9)	Commercial (for profit or public sale) agricultural, dairying, and poultry and livestock raising, provided that such activities comply with all applicable best management practices promoted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the subject lot contains not less than three acres of land, and all buildings used for housing fowl or animals, storing grain or feed, or processing products shall not be located closer than 100 feet to any property line of a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, MHP or PD; 50 feet to any other property line that is not zoned AG; or 30 feet to any other property line within the AG zone. Permitted commercial agricultural uses shall not include commercial feed lots or stock yards. 
(10)	Sale of products and commodities raised or grown on the premises only, provided that any structure used for such sales shall not be closer than 30 feet to the front or side property lines. 
(11)	Non-commercial (for personal use by the property owners and not for sale or profit) agriculture, gardening, poultry, horse, and livestock raising as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupant thereof, provided that all related accessory buildings are located in the rear yard and not closer than 50 feet to any property line of a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, MHP or PD; 40 feet to any other property line not zoned AG; or 30 feet to any other property line within the AG zone. 
(12)	Harvesting of timber, provided that such activities comply with all applicable best management practices promoted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and no clear cutting of land shall occur within 50 feet of the mean high-water mark of any lake or perennial stream. 
(13)	Temporary or portable sawmills for the cutting of timber on the surrounding land, provided that machine operations are not located closer than 200 feet from any property line of a property not located within the AG zone or 100 feet from any other property line. 
(14)	Riding stables and academies, provided that the subject lot contains not less than three acres of land, and any structure, pen, or corral housing animals (but not including grazing areas) shall not be closer than 50 feet to any property line of a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, MHP, or PD, or 30 feet to any other property line. 
(15)	Public or private schools, including pre-schools, day nurseries, and kindergartens, provided that any play area is enclosed on all sides by a fence to a height of at least four feet. 
(16)	Publicly-owned and operated community structures and lands, including parks. 
(17)	Public utility structures and lands. 
(18)	Public or private golf course, except a par three golf course, miniature course or practice golf driving range operated for commercial purposes. 
(19)	Churches and other similar places of worship. 
(20)	Cemeteries. 
(21)	Campgrounds, provided that no camping sites or improved recreational areas will be located less than 100 feet from any property line of a property that is not located within the AG zone or less than 50 feet from any other property line. 
(22)	Boat docks and boat houses, as accessory uses to a residential use. 
(23)	Bed and breakfast inns. 
(24)	Residential care homes, domiciliary care facilities, or board and care homes. 
(25)	Greenhouses and nurseries. 
(26)	Temporary or portable sawmills for the cutting of timber on the surrounding land, provided that machine operations shall not be located closer than 200 feet from any property line. 
(27)	Veterinary hospitals and clinics, commercial kennels, and the raising of other domestic animals for sale, provided that no portion of a building, structure, outdoor run, or pens used to house or exercise such animals shall not be located closer than 50 feet from any property line. 
(28)	Short term rental of single-family residences for durations of not less than 90 days. 
(c)	Uses allowed by special exception. Each use permitted by special exception shall comply with all specified conditions or requirements of the applicable use. The following uses may be allowed by special exception in the AG zone, subject to approval of the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures specified in article VI of this chapter: 
(1)	Hospitals (which may include a commercial cafeteria and/or a commercial pharmacy) and medical clinics, provided that the proposed facility and any permitted accessory structures and uses will not be located closer than 100 feet to any property line of a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, MHP or PD. 
(2)	Athletic fields or stadiums, racetracks and speedways, and other recreational areas for public use, including swimming pools, fish lakes, and similar recreational uses, provided that all activities are located at least 200 feet from any property line. 
(3)	Public or private fishing clubs, gun clubs, and other similar outdoor recreational activities, provided that no lot dedicated to these uses shall adjoin a property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3, all activities shall conducted at least 200 feet from any property line, and the discharge of any firearms shall be directed away from any established residential uses. 
(4)	Manufactured home subdivisions on lots that do not abut an R-1 zone, subject to compliance with all applicable requirements specified in section 30-88. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. For this district there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	A minimum lot size of one acre (43,560 square feet) for all lots. Lots not served by municipal sewer shall contain at least the required minimum, plus any additional area deemed necessary by the county health department for proper siting and installation of on-site sewage disposal facilities. 
(2)	A minimum lot width of 250 feet. 
(3)	A minimum front yard setback of 45 feet from the edge of a major street right-of-way line and 30 feet from the edge of a minor street right-of-way line. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
(4)	A minimum side yard setback of 15 feet. 
(5)	A minimum rear yard setback of 40 feet. 
(6)	A maximum structure height of 45 feet or 2½ stories for all structures that are not exempt from height requirements, as specified in section 30-33(a). 
(7)	A maximum impervious surface area for all lots. 
a.	Under one acre (43,560 square feet) in size: not more than 4,000 total square feet of impervious surfaces. 
b.	Between one acre (43,560 square feet) and three acres in size: 8,000 total square feet of impervious surfaces. 
c.	Greater than or equal to three acres in size: not more than eight percent of the total lot area. 
(e)	Minimum standards for all dwellings.
(1)	Minimum dwelling unit gross floor area shall be 1,000 square feet. 
(2)	Minimum required roof pitch shall be 3:12. 
(3)	Landscaping. All dwelling sites shall be landscaped in a manner consistent with other adjoining residential home sites in the area or neighborhood. At a minimum, ornamental shrubs shall be applied along the front yard foundation or skirting of each dwelling. 
(4)	Single-family residential structures. All single-family residential structures shall be 1,400 square feet heated and cooled area along with a requirement that all single-family residential homes have an attached two car enclosed garage. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 5), 3-22-2004; Ord. No. 0-008-2020, § 1, 12-14-2020)
 
Sec. 30-142. RT Rural Transitional zoning district.
(a)	District intent. The purpose of this district shall be to provide a buffer zone between intensive commercial agricultural uses and suburban residential development in outlying areas of the community that are just beginning to be developed, that lack full access to municipal infrastructure, or that are located upon or near sensitive natural resources. Where agricultural and forestry uses are permitted, they shall be of a non-intensive scale that would be generally compatible with developing residential neighborhoods. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following identifies the uses permitted in the RT Rural Transitional zoning district: 
(1)	Single-family dwellings. 
(2)	Accessory residential dwelling units in compliance with all requirements specified in section 30-80. 
(3)	Single-family group homes, subject to the standards established in sections 30-6 and 30-76. 
(4)	Accessory uses and buildings, subject to the standards established in section 30-34. 
(5)	Home occupations, subject to the standards established in section 30-78. 
(6)	Non-commercial (for personal use by the property owners and not for sale or profit) agriculture, gardening, horse, and livestock raising as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupant thereof, provided that the subject lot contains not less than three acres of land, and all related accessory buildings are located in the rear yard and not closer than 50 feet to any property line of a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, MHP or PD; 40 feet to any other property line not zoned AG or RT; or 30 feet to any other property line within the AG or RT zone. 
(7)	Harvesting of timber, provided that such activities comply with all applicable best management practices promoted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and no clear cutting of land shall occur within 50 feet of the mean high-water mark of any lake or perennial stream. 
(8)	Public or private schools, including pre-schools, day nurseries and kindergartens, provided that any play area is enclosed on all sides by a fence to a height of at least four feet. 
(9)	Publicly owned and operated community structures and lands, including parks. 
(10)	Public utility structures and lands. 
(11)	Public or private golf course. 
(12)	Churches and other similar places of worship. 
(13)	Cemeteries. 
(14)	Boat docks and boat houses, as accessory uses to a residential use. 
(15)	Bed and breakfast inns. 
(16)	Residential care homes, domiciliary care facilities, or board and care homes. 
(17)	Short term rental of single-family residences for durations of not less than 90 days. 
(c)	Uses allowed by special exception. Each use permitted by special exception shall comply with all specified conditions or requirements of the applicable use. The following uses may be allowed by special exception in the RT zone, subject to approval of the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures specified in article VI of this chapter: 
(1)	Single-family manufactured homes (subject to the applicable requirements specified in section 30-77) on individual lots that do not adjoin a property zoned R-1 or R-2. 
(2)	Manufactured home subdivisions on lots that do not abut an R-1 or R-2 zone and subject to compliance with all applicable requirements specified in section 30-88. 
(3)	Commercial agricultural crop production and open pasturing or grazing of livestock, provided that the subject lot contains not less than five acres of land, and all pasture lands shall be properly fenced, such that no pastured livestock will be allowed to graze within 50 feet of any residential property line. 
(4)	Sale of products and commodities raised on the premises only, provided that any structure used for such sales shall not be closer than 30 feet to the front or side property lines. 
(5)	Campgrounds, provided that no camping sites or improved recreational areas will be located less than 100 feet from any property line that is not located within the AG or RT zone or less than 50 feet from any other property line and further provided that any property used as a campground shall not adjoin a property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3. 
(6)	Riding stables and academies, provided that the subject lot contains not less than three acres of land, and any structure, pen, or corral housing animals (but not including grazing areas) shall not be closer than 50 feet to any property line of a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, MHP or PD, or 30 feet to any other property line. 
(7)	Public or private fishing clubs, and other similar outdoor recreational activities excluding gun clubs and firing ranges, provided that all activities shall conducted at least 100 feet from any property line and further provided that any property dedicated to these uses shall not adjoin a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3 or MHP. 
(8)	Greenhouses and plant nurseries, provided that no greenhouse structure shall contain more than 750 square feet of floor area. 
(d)	Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be specifically prohibited within the RT zone: 
(1)	Open air storage or holding pits, bunkers, or ponds for the storage of animal manure or wastes. 
(2)	Concentrated animal feeding operations. 
(3)	Sanitary landfills and other solid waste facilities. 
(4)	Junkyards. 
(5)	Animal stockyards, feedlots, poultry houses, and slaughterhouses. 
(e)	Dimensional requirements. For this district there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	A minimum lot size of one acre (43,560 square feet) for all nonresidential use lots. The number of residential lots that may be created on any individual undivided property within the district shall not exceed one unit per one acre of gross land area. However, the size of each residential lot created on the development site may be reduced to not less than 18,000 square feet, provided that all residual land (the difference between one acre and the reduced lot size-25,560 square feet per lot) shall be permanently protected from future subdivision or development by means of a formal conservation easement managed by an established land trust or through dedicated common open space in accordance with section 30-84. For purposes of protecting valuable farmland, the planning commission shall authorize the creation of common open space for subdivisions containing fewer than 25 lots within this zoning district, provided that ownership and maintenance of the common lands will be retained by a local farm operator. Residential lots created through the reduced lot size provision shall be concentrated on lands that are not actively used or not ideally suited (by virtue of soil characteristics, distance from an operational farm complex, or other natural features) for active agricultural use. Lots not served by municipal sewer shall contain not less than the minimum required, plus any additional area deemed necessary by the county health department for proper siting and installation of on-site sewage disposal facilities. 
(2)	A minimum lot width of 125 feet. 
(3)	A minimum front yard setback of 45 feet from the edge of the right-of-way line along a major street and 30 feet from the edge of the right-of-way line along a minor street. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
(4)	A minimum side yard setbacks of 15 feet. 
(5)	A minimum rear yard setback of 40 feet. 
(6)	A maximum structure height of 45 feet or 2½ stories for all structures that are not exempt from height requirements, as specified in section 30-33(a). 
(7)	A maximum impervious surface area of 15 percent of the total lot area, up to a maximum of 8,000 square feet of total impervious surface area. 
(f)	Minimum standards for all dwellings.
(1)	A minimum dwelling unit gross floor area of 1,300 square feet. 
(2)	A minimum required roof pitch: 3:12. 
(3)	Landscaping. All dwelling sites shall be landscaped in a manner consistent with other adjoining residential home sites in the area or neighborhood. At a minimum, ornamental shrubs shall be applied along the front yard foundation or skirting of each dwelling. 
(4)	Single-family residential structures. All single-family residential structures shall be 1,400 square feet heated and cooled area along with a requirement that all single-family residential homes have an attached two car enclosed garage. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 6), 3-22-2004; Ord. No. 0-008-2020, § 1, 12-14-2020)
 
Sec. 30-143. R-1 Single-Family Residential district.
(a)	District intent. This zoning district is intended to promote low density suburban tract residential development for single-family uses in areas that have limited access to municipal infrastructure or are located in close proximity to sensitive natural resources. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following identifies the uses permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential district: 
(1)	Single-family dwellings. Where a new lot is being created for a single-family dwelling which adjoins a lot within the AG or RT zones upon which a commercial agricultural use is being conducted, the residential lot shall contain a buffer not less than 25 feet deep, as defined in section 30-6, along the common property line with the existing commercial agricultural use. 
(2)	Accessory residential dwelling units in single-family dwellings only and in compliance with all requirements specified in section 30-80. 
(3)	Single-family group homes, subject to the standards established in sections 30-6 and 30-76. 
(4)	Accessory uses and buildings, subject to the standards established in section 30-34. 
(5)	Home occupations, subject to the standards established in section 30-78. 
(6)	In-home child care centers, subject to the standards established in section 30-85. 
(7)	Churches and other religious structures. 
(8)	Cemeteries. 
(9)	Boat docks and boat houses, as accessory uses to a residential use. 
(10)	Non-commercial (not for profit or public sale) gardens or greenhouses as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupant thereof. 
(11)	Non-commercial (for personal use by the property owners and not for sale or profit) agriculture, gardening, poultry, horse, and livestock raising as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupant thereof, provided that the subject lot contains not less than three acres of land, and all related accessory buildings are located in the rear yard and not closer than 100 feet to any property line of a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, MHP or PD; 50 feet to any other property line not zoned AG; or 30 feet to any property line within the AG zone. 
(12)	Short term rental of single-family residences for durations of not less than 90 days. 
(c)	Uses allowed by special exception. The following uses may be allowed by special exception in the R-1 zone, subject to approval of the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures specified in article VI of this chapter. Each use permitted by special exception shall comply with all specified conditions or requirements of the applicable use. 
(1)	Riding stables and academies, provided that the subject lot contains not less than five acres of land, and any structure, pen, or corral housing animals (but not including grazing areas) shall not be closer than 100 feet to any property line. 
(2)	Public or private golf course. 
(3)	Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings (including libraries, fire stations, police stations), and similar public service facilities serving residential areas, provided that no building shall be located within 75 feet of any property line. 
(4)	Public utility structures and lands, provided that there is no outside storage area and a natural or landscaped buffer not less than 20 feet in width is provided for the side and rear yards. 
(5)	Public or private schools, including pre-schools, day nurseries, and kindergartens, provided that any play area is enclosed on all sides by a fence to a height of at least four feet. 
(6)	Bed and breakfast inns, provided that adequate off-street parking can be provided and the home to be used as a bed and breakfast inn is located not less than 50 feet from each adjacent residential structure on the same side of the street. 
(7)	Townhouses and condominiums subject to all applicable requirements contained in section 30-90(a) and provided that such uses shall serve as a transitional buffer between a nonresidential zoning district and the R-1 zone. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. For this district, there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	A minimum lot size of 18,000 square feet for lots served by municipal sewer. Lots not served by municipal sewer shall contain at least the minimum required, plus any additional area deemed necessary by the county health department for proper siting and installation of on-site sewage disposal facilities. 
(2)	A minimum lot width of 100 feet. 
(3)	A minimum front yard setback of 45 feet from the edge of a major street right-of-way line and 30 feet from the edge of a minor street right-of-way line. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
(4)	A minimum side yard setback of 15 feet. 
(5)	A minimum rear yard setback of 40 feet. 
(6)	A maximum structure height of 45 feet or 2½ stories for all structures that are not exempt from height requirements, as specified in section 30-33(a). 
(7)	A maximum impervious surface area of 20 percent of the total lot area, up to a maximum of 8,000 square feet of total impervious surface area. 
(e)	Minimum standards for all dwellings.
(1)	A minimum dwelling unit gross floor area of 1,500 square feet. 
(2)	A minimum exterior width of dwelling of 20 feet. 
(3)	A minimum required roof pitch of 4:12. 
(4)	Foundation/slab requirements. All dwellings shall be placed or constructed on a poured concrete slab or foundation in compliance with all applicable building code requirements. 
(5)	Landscaping. All dwelling sites shall be landscaped in a manner consistent with other adjoining residential home sites in the area or neighborhood. At a minimum, ornamental shrubs shall be applied along the front yard foundation or skirting of each dwelling. 
(6)	Single-family residential structures. All single-family residential structures shall be 1,400 square feet heated and cooled area along with a requirement that all single-family residential homes have an attached two car enclosed garage. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 7), 3-22-2004; Ord. No. 0-007-2008, §§ 1, 2, 7-14-2008; Ord. No. 0-008-2020, § 1, 12-14-2020)
 
Sec. 30-144. R-2 Two-Family Residential zoning district.
(a)	District intent. This zoning district is intended to promote moderate density residential development for single-family and duplex homes on individual lots in areas that have access to extensive municipal infrastructure and are in close proximity to places of employment and commercial districts. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following identifies the uses permitted in the R-2 Two-Family Residential zoning district: 
(1)	All uses permitted in the R-1 zone. 
(2)	Non-commercial (for personal use by the property owners and not for sale or profit) agriculture, gardening, poultry, horse, and livestock raising as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupant thereof, provided that the subject lot contains not less than three acres of land, and all related accessory buildings are located in the rear yard and not closer than 100 feet to any property line of a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, MHP or PD; 50 feet to any other property line not zoned AG; or 30 feet to any property line within the AG zone. 
(3)	Public or private golf course. 
(4)	Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings (including libraries, fire stations, police stations), and similar public service facilities serving residential areas, provided that no building shall be located within 75 feet of any property line. 
(5)	Public utility structures and lands, provided that there is no outside storage area and a natural or landscaped buffer not less than 20 feet in width is provided for the side and rear yards. 
(6)	Public or private schools, including pre-schools, day nurseries, and kindergartens, provided that any play area is enclosed on all sides by a fence to a height of at least four feet. 
(7)	Bed and breakfast inns, provided that adequate off-street parking can be provided and the home to be used as a bed and breakfast inn is located not less than 50 feet from each adjacent residential structure on the same side of the street. 
(8)	Townhouses and condominiums subject to all applicable requirements contained in section 30-90(a) and provided that such uses shall serve as a transitional buffer between a nonresidential zoning district and the R-1 zone. 
(9)	Short term rental of single-family residences for durations of not less than 90 days. 
(c)	Dimensional requirements. For this district, there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	A minimum lot size of 12,500 square feet for all lots served by municipal sewer. Lots not served by municipal sewer shall contain not less than the minimum required, plus any additional area deemed necessary by the county health department for proper siting and installation of on-site sewage disposal facilities. 
(2)	A minimum lot width of 85 feet. 
(3)	A minimum front yard setback of 45 feet from the edge of a major street right-of-way line and 30 feet from the edge of a minor street right-of-way line. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
(4)	A minimum side yard setbacks of ten feet. 
(5)	A minimum rear yard setback of 30 feet. 
(6)	A maximum structure height of 45 feet or 2½ stories for all structures that are not exempt from height requirements, as specified in section 30-33(a). 
(7)	A maximum impervious surface area of 25 percent of the total lot area, up to a maximum of 8,000 square feet of total impervious surface area. 
(d)	Minimum standards for all dwellings.
(1)	A minimum dwelling unit gross floor area of 1,300 square feet for all single-family dwellings and 800 square feet per unit for two-family dwellings. 
(2)	A minimum exterior width of dwelling of 20 feet. 
(3)	A minimum required roof pitch of 3:12. 
(4)	Landscaping: All dwelling sites shall be landscaped in a manner consistent with other adjoining residential home sites in the area or neighborhood. At a minimum, ornamental shrubs shall be applied along the front yard foundation or skirting of each dwelling. 
(5)	Single-family residential structures. All single-family residential structures shall be 1,400 square feet heated and cooled area along with a requirement that all single-family residential homes have an attached two car enclosed garage. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 8), 3-22-2004; Ord. No. 0-008-2020, § 1, 12-14-2020)
 
Sec. 30-145. R-3 Multifamily Residential zoning district.
(a)	District intent. The purpose of this district shall be to provide opportunities for a broad range of residential environments, including single-family, duplex, manufactured homes (on individual lots), and multifamily (including townhouse and condominium developments) housing in areas that are served by the full array of municipal facilities and services offered by the city and that are immediately adjacent to places of employment and commercial districts. This zone also may be used by the city as a transitional buffer zone between commercial and lower intensity residential zones. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following identifies the uses permitted in the R-3 Multifamily Residential zoning district: 
(1)	All uses permitted in the R-2 zone. 
(2)	Multifamily dwellings (including group homes housing three or more families). 
(3)	Condominiums in accordance with all applicable special requirements specified in section 30-90. 
(4)	Townhouses in accordance with all applicable special requirements specified in section 30-90. 
(5)	Boardinghouses and roominghouses. 
(6)	Educational, training, health, medical or nursing uses of public, charitable, or philanthropic nature, including rest homes and sanitariums. 
(7)	Nursing homes. 
(8)	College or school dormitories, including fraternities and sororities. 
(9)	Monasteries. 
(10)	Short term rental of single-family residences for durations of not less than 90 days. 
(c)	Uses allowed by special exception. The following uses may be allowed by special exception in R-3 zone, subject to approval of the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures specified in article VI of this chapter. Each use permitted by special exception shall comply with all specified conditions or requirements of the applicable use: 
(1)	Single-family manufactured homes on individual lots that do not adjoin or abut a property zoned R-1 or R-2, provided that the subject lot shall have a minimum width of not less than 100 feet and subject to compliance with all applicable requirements specified in section 30-77. 
(2)	Nonresidential child care centers, provided such uses are located on a corner lot with adequate off-street space for the loading and unloading of children and the use will comply with all applicable requirements specified in section 30-85. 
(3)	Manufactured home subdivisions on lots that do not abut an R-1 or R-2 zone and subject to compliance with all applicable requirements specified in section 30-88. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. For this district there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	A minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet for each single-family dwelling unit; 9,000 square feet for each two-family or duplex dwelling; 10,500 square feet for the first dwelling unit in each multifamily dwelling, plus 3,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit. Lots not served by municipal sewer shall contain not less than the minimum required, plus any additional area deemed necessary by the county health department for proper siting and installation of on-site sewage disposal facilities. 
(2)	A minimum development site size (for multifamily dwellings) of one acre. 
(3)	A minimum lot width of 75 feet for each single-family lot; 85 feet for each duplex lot; and 100 feet for each multifamily lot. 
(4)	A maximum density (for multifamily dwellings) of ten dwelling units per acre rounded down to the nearest whole unit. 
(5)	A minimum front yard setback of 40 feet from the edge of a major street right-of-way line and 30 feet from the edge of a minor street right-of-way line for any single-family or duplex lot; 45 feet from the edge of a major street right-of-way line; and 35 feet from the edge of a minor street right-of-way line for any multifamily lot. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
(6)	A minimum side yard setback of ten feet for any single-family or duplex lot; 20 feet for any multifamily lot. 
(7)	A minimum rear yard setback of 25 feet for any single-family and duplex lot; 35 feet for any multifamily lot. 
(8)	A minimum buffer along the adjoining R-1 zone (for multifamily dwellings) of 30 feet. 
(9)	A minimum separation distance between all buildings on a single lot of ten feet. 
(10)	A maximum percentage of lot covered by impervious surfaces of 28 percent. 
(11)	A maximum structure height of 45 feet or 2½ stories for all structures that are not exempt from height requirements, as specified in section 30-33(a). 
(e)	Minimum standards for all dwellings.
(1)	A minimum dwelling unit gross floor area of 1,200 square feet for all single-family dwellings and manufactured homes and 750 square feet per unit for all other dwelling structures. 
(2)	Minimum exterior width of dwelling: 14 feet. 
(3)	Minimum required roof pitch: 3:12 for all single-family and two-family dwellings. No minimum roof pitch required for multifamily dwellings. 
(4)	Landscaping. All dwelling sites shall be landscaped in a manner consistent with other adjoining residential home sites in the area or neighborhood. At a minimum, ornamental shrubs shall be applied along the front yard foundation or skirting of each dwelling. 
(5)	Single-family residential structures. All single-family residential structures shall be 1,400 square feet heated and cooled area along with a requirement that all single-family residential homes have an attached two car enclosed garage. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 9), 3-22-2004; Ord. No. 0-008-2020, § 1, 12-14-2020)
 
Sec. 30-146. MHP Manufactured Home Park zoning district.
(a)	District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide opportunities for the site development of attractive, affordable, moderate intensity, single-family manufactured home parks, where units are placed on rented lots and served by full municipal services, including water and sewer. It is the objective of this district to encourage an affordable, quality single-family environment, without creating a detriment to appearance and aesthetic quality of neighboring or nearby residential areas. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the MHP Manufactured Home Park district: 
(1)	Single-family manufactured homes, as defined in section 30-6, and subject to the minimum standards specified in section 30-77 provided that each new manufactured home placed within a manufactured home park shall have a fair market value that is at least 90 percent of the average fair market value of all manufactured homes on rented lots that abut the proposed unit's rental lot. 
(2)	One-family dwelling for the exclusive use of a watchman, caretaker, owner, or manager of a manufactured home park. 
(3)	Office, maintenance, and storage buildings incidental to a manufactured home park. 
(4)	Personal service facilities, such as laundromats (including coin operated dry cleaning) and refuse disposal areas, accessory to and intended to serve residents of the manufactured home park only. 
(5)	Recreational facilities designed and intended for use by residents of the manufactured home park only. 
(6)	In addition to the manufactured home spaces, off-street parking and loading spaces for vehicles in operating condition only, subject to the standards established in section 30-79. 
(7)	Not more than one accessory storage or utility shed of uniform construction for each manufactured home lot or space. Said storage or utility shed shall not contain more than 800 cubic feet of storage space. 
(8)	In-home child care facilities, subject to approval by the board of adjustment as a special exception and further subject to the applicable requirements contained in section 30-85, provided that adequate off-street space is provided for vehicles dropping off and picking up children and that the traffic impacts will not be excessive for the existing street and neighborhood character. 
(9)	Short term rental of single-family residences for durations of not less than 90 days. 
(c)	Dimensional requirements. For this district, there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	A minimum development site size of three acres. 
(2)	A maximum development density of no more than seven manufactured homes per gross acre of land shall be permitted within a manufactured home park. 
(3)	A minimum frontage for development site along the main street serving the manufactured home park of 100 feet. 
(4)	A minimum rental lot size of 6,000 square feet, plus any additional area that may be required by the county health department for the provision of on-site sanitary sewage disposal. 
(5)	A minimum rental lot width of 60 feet. 
(6)	Minimum front yard setbacks: 
a.	Ten feet from the edge of the right-of-way line of any internal street within the manufactured home park that does not provide through traffic access to more than one external public street. 
b.	20 feet from the edge of the right-of-way line of any external local street or internal street within the manufactured home park that provides through traffic access to more than one external public street. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
c.	For any manufactured home park with frontage along a street classified as a collector in the comprehensive plan, all structures shall be set back at least 50 feet from the centerline of the collector street. 
d.	For any manufactured home park with frontage along a street classified as an arterial in the comprehensive plan, all structures shall be set back at least 75 feet from the centerline of the arterial street. 
(7)	Minimum rental lot side and rear yard setbacks. No principal use structure within the park shall be located less than ten feet from any rental lot line. When lots are designed for homes to be placed at 45 degree or 60 degree angles to the street, side yard and rear yard requirements may be reduced to five feet, provided that not less than 30 feet of unobstructed yards will be provided between each manufactured home. 
(8)	Minimum frontage for each manufactured home space or rental lot of 50 feet for any lot or space adjacent to an internal or external street, except that the minimum frontage shall be reduced to 30 feet for any lot or space adjoining the turnabout at the end of a permanent cul-de-sac. 
(9)	Minimum separation distance between all buildings. 
a.	All residential manufactured homes within the park shall be separated by not less than 20 feet between opposing unit sides. 
b.	Accessory structures for any residential manufactured home within the park shall be sited not less than ten feet from any other structure nor less than five feet from any rental lot line. 
c.	All other buildings within the park (office, laundry facility, non-manufactured home residence) shall be at located not less than 30 feet from any other principal structure. 
(10)	Minimum buffer along all exterior boundaries of the manufactured home park of 30 feet along any R-1 boundary and 15 feet along all other boundaries of the manufactured home park. A landscaped strip within each buffer area of not less than eight feet wide shall be provided along the manufactured home park boundary lines that do not abut a public street. This landscaped strip shall be improved and regularly maintained to serve as a yearround visual screen or planing strip composed of evergreen shrubs and trees. Said shrubs shall be not less than four feet tall when planted, and shall attain at least 75 percent of their mature growth opaqueness and shall be at least six feet high within 18 months of planting, at the time of original construction of the park. 
(11)	Maximum percentage of development site covered by impervious surfaces of 40 percent. 
(12)	Maximum structure height of 25 feet or two stories for all structures that are not exempt from height requirements, as specified in section 30-33(a). 
(13)	Minimum dwelling unit gross floor area of 1,000 square feet. 
(14)	Minimum required roof pitch of 3:12. 
(d)	Site development requirements. In addition to the dimensional requirements listed in subsection (c) of this section and the applicable manufactured home standards contained in section 30-77, each manufactured home park shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	All proposed lots and buildings in a manufactured home park shall be served by municipal water. The minimum branch water line to an individual unit shall be three-fourths of an inch in diameter. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a cold water tap at least four inches above the ground or foundation slab. In addition, a cutoff valve shall be installed for each branch water line, along with a backflow prevention device approved by a nationally recognized test agency. In manufactured home parks where gas distribution systems are installed, the installation shall conform with the requirements promulgated by the state public service commission. 
(2)	The proposed park shall located on a site graded and improved to ensure proper drainage and freedom from standing water. 
(3)	All driveways and walkways within the park shall be paved and adequately lighted. All streets and public driveways within the park shall be lighted at night with electric lamps of not less than 25 watts. 
(4)	Each manufactured home lot shall be provided with an individual electrical service outlet supplying at least 220 volts. Each service shall be mounted on a treated pole or metal pedestal and shall have a disconnecting means consisting of a circuit breaker or a switch and fuses housed in a panel approved for exterior use. The power supply wiring from the service to the manufactured home shall be of a direct burial type, properly sized for service being connected and buried in the earth from the service to underneath the mobile home. If the supply cable is encased in metal or plastic pipe, the minimum depth buried shall be as required by the current adopted addition of the National Electrical Code. 
(5)	All manufactured homes placed in the park shall be placed or erected on a poured concrete slab in compliance with all applicable building code requirements. Upon written request by the applicant, the city council may waive the requirement for a concrete slab or pad for each manufactured housing unit, provided that such waiver is warranted to satisfy affordable housing needs in the city, the manufactured homes will be properly anchored in accordance with all state standards, a ground vapor retarder of 6 mil rated polyethylene sheeting or greater shall be installed over the entire area enclosed by skirting, and the waiver will not excuse the applicant from any other applicable anchoring requirement. 
(6)	For each rental lot, one off-street parking area a minimum of 240 square feet in area and 20 feet in width and providing parking for at least two vehicles shall be provided. Said off-street parking space shall be improved with a crushed stone, asphaltic concrete, or concrete surface. 
(7)	A dedicated area of not less than ten percent of the gross site area of a manufactured home park shall be reserved for common open space. Such common open space shall, at a minimum, be landscaped and appropriately improved to provide an area for healthful recreational use by the intended tenants of the park only. Examples of appropriate recreational area development include, but are not limited to, a playground for parks where young children will live or a paved walking/exercise trail for parks were senior citizens will live. This recreational area shall be designed and located so as to be free of traffic and above ground utility hazards, and should, where physical conditions permit, be located as centrally and conveniently within the park as is possible. The required recreation areas may be concentrated in one location or distributed in multiple sites within the park, provided that no individual recreational site shall contain less than 5,000 square feet. 
(8)	No portion of a manufactured home park site that is located within a 100-year floodplain shall be improved for residential use. 
(9)	Each manufactured home park shall provide adequate on-site containers for the collection of household garbage generated by the tenants of the park. All garbage containers shall be placed and kept within three- or four-sided enclosures with walls at least four feet high to provide proper screening of the containers. 
(10)	All manufactured home parks shall be located on public streets providing safe and convenient access. A manufactured home park shall possess frontage on at least one collector or arterial street, as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
(11)	All lots and/or spaces dedicated for manufactured homes within a manufactured home park shall possess frontage on an internal or external street. All internal streets within the park that provide through traffic access to more than one external street shall comply with all applicable street standards for the city. All other streets within the park shall, at a minimum, comply with the following requirements: 
a.	Minimum dedicated right-of-way width of 30 feet. 
b.	Minimum roadway or cartway width of 18 feet. 
c.	Roadway or cartway surface type. Streets providing access to ten or fewer manufactured home lots may be constructed with a compacted gravel surface. All other streets shall be paved. All roadway surface improvements shall be constructed in accordance with applicable city standards. 
d.	Waiver. The planning commission may authorize written approval for a reduction in the minimum width and surface requirements for internal private streets in a manufactured home park, where individual rental lots are clustered around a central common off-street parking area and served by alleys or for short cul-de-sac streets designed to serve not more than five manufactured home rental lots. 
(12)	Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire hydrant equipment in good working order, of such type, size, and number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable regulations of the city. Fire hydrants shall be placed within the manufactured home park so that no mobile home shall be more than 1,000 feet away from said hydrant. No open fires, except barbecue grills, shall be permitted within a manufactured home park. All manufactured home parks shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the city fire department. 
(13)	The manufactured homes may be installed within an approved manufactured home park only after at least 50 percent or ten of its lots or spaces (whichever is greater) have been completely improved or developed. This subsection shall in no way be construed to prevent development in stages of manufactured home parks, provided the total development plan is approved by the city planning commission and developed in increments of two acres minimum. 
(14)	No temporary or permanent addition of any type other than an awning of aluminum, canvas, or fiberglass shall be added or attached to a manufactured home within an approved manufactured home park. The awning shall not be greater than nine feet in width and shall not be enclosed with any material. 
(15)	The corners of each rental lot shall be marked with an iron pipe at least one-half inch in diameter and at least 24 inches long. The exterior boundaries of the development site shall be marked by a stone or concrete monument, not less than 24 inches in length, not less than four inches square or five inches in diameter, and marked on the top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable metallic material securely embedded. Each manufactured home lot shall be plainly and permanently numbered with letters and/or numbers not less than 2½-inch high, so they may be easily read from the street. The electrical service must also be permanently numbered for easy identification by meter readers. 
(16)	Any accessory storage structure placed on a manufactured home rental lot shall be a permanent structure providing a minimum of 80 square feet of secured storage space. The design and exterior appearance of all accessory storage structures shall be uniform and approved as part of the manufactured home park plan. 
(17)	All water, sewage, and garbage disposal facilities in the manufactured home park shall satisfy all standards promulgated by the state board of health as approved by the county health department. 
(18)	Each manufactured home rental lot shall contain one patio of concrete, or other suitable masonry material, having a minimum area of 150 square feet. 
(19)	Each park may devote a maximum of five off-street parking spaces to transient recreational vehicles and shall designate each parking area devoted to such use by sign or painting. This provision does not prohibit the use of any special parking area for visitor parking. 
(20)	Each park shall provide adequate storm shelter capacity for all residents of the manufactured home park, assuming at least three persons per single-wide manufactured home lot and at least four persons per double-wide manufactured home lot in the park. All storm shelters in the park shall be clearly identified on the manufactured home park site plan. 
(e)	Manufactured home park plan. A manufactured home park preliminary site plan shall be submitted in triplicate to the planning commission for review and approval prior to the issuance of a zoning permit by the enforcement officer. No manufactured home park shall be permitted except under license of the city upon approval by the planning commission, and in accordance with a permit issued by the county health department. The plan shall be drawn to scale and shall contain or include the following information. Such plan shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission only at a regular public meeting, but no specific public hearing shall be required for review and approval of the site plan only. 
(1)	A legend containing a site location map; the proposed name of the manufactured home park; the names of the developer, owner, and plan preparer, a north arrow; a scale; and an explanation of all symbols used on the plan. 
(2)	The location of all rights-of-way, streets, utility lines, hydrants, garbage containers, and other infrastructure improvements. 
(3)	The boundaries and dimensions of all rental lots and other required areas in the park, with topographical contours depicted at two-foot intervals. 
(4)	The locations of all properties adjoining the manufactured home park site, including the existing land use, structures, and zoning classifications of said properties. 
(5)	The boundaries of all buffers and common open spaces, including all proposed recreational improvements and landscaping/screening improvements. 
(6)	Plans and specifications for all proposed internal streets and accesses to external streets. 
(7)	Proposed drainage and stormwater management improvements, as required in section 30-42. 
(8)	The boundaries of all floodplains on the site. 
(9)	Proposed land disturbance and erosion control measures and improvements, as may be required under section 30-43. 
(10)	The location of any proposed office, showroom, or personal service facilities in the park. 
(11)	Plans and specifications for proposed water supply, sewage collection, garbage disposal, electrical system, and other such infrastructure facilities that will be provided within the park, including all information as may be required by the county health department to ensure compliance with all applicable health regulations or a permit issued by the county health department verifying full compliance of the proposed park with all applicable health regulations. 
(12)	The locations and capacities of all proposed storm shelters within the park. 
(13)	The required application filing fee. 
(f)	Operational requirements. In addition to the site development requirements specified in subsection (d) of this section, each manufactured home park shall comply with the following operational requirements: 
(1)	The owner or designated licensee of a manufactured home park shall provide adequate on-site supervision and management to maintain the park, including its facilities, equipment, and improvements, in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter, rubbish, and other potentially hazardous materials. 
(2)	All grounds and buildings within the manufactured home park shall be maintained in a manner that will not harbor insects and rodents, and will prevent accumulations of debris which provide habitat for the propagation of insects and rodents at levels that could constitute a nuisance to residents of the park or neighboring property owners. The park owner and/or operator shall be responsible for extermination measures to control pest populations in accordance with all applicable health and safety requirements. 
(3)	The park management shall supervise the placement of each manufactured home within the park, including the proper anchoring of the unit and its proper connection to all utility connections. 
(4)	The park management shall maintain a register during occupancy and for a period of 12 months after departure containing the following information on each rental lot or space in the park: 
a.	The name and mailing address of each lessee. 
b.	Date of entrance and departure. 
c.	License number of all manufactured home structures and other personal vehicles owned by lessee. 
d.	The states issuing such licenses. 
e.	Place of last location of each manufactured home and length of stay at the prior location. 
(g)	Applicability to existing parks. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any manufactured or mobile home park that was lawfully constructed and licensed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, nor shall compliance be required as a result of change of park ownership or if any manufactured home lot is vacated and then rented for another home. A manufactured home park shall be considered to exist if a detailed development plan has been submitted to the building official and a permit has been issued and substantial progress is being made toward completion of the development. It shall be necessary, however, for any manufactured home when placed on a lot after the adoption of this amendment or ordinance from which this section is derived, to comply with a setback provision so that all manufactured homes thereafter placed or situated shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any exterior property. This provision shall not exempt any preexisting manufactured home park from complying with the terms of this section when submitting plans for an expansion or redevelopment. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 10), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-147. VC Village Center zoning district.
(a)	District intent. The purpose of this district shall be to create development opportunities for one or more mixed use urban centers within the city. The district is designed for intensive site development fully served by supporting public facilities, including municipal water and sewer. All site development shall include facilities to support and encourage pedestrian access. Building design is an important factor and consideration within this district to ensure that a harmonious visual environment will be maintained, consistent with the city's overall design plans for the downtown area (as identified in the comprehensive plan). The inclusion of landscaping and civic improvements, such as street front public seating areas, public art and sculpture displays, and pocket parks is strongly encouraged as an integral component of the overall site development plan. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the VC Village Center zoning district: 
(1)	Two-family (duplex) dwellings. 
(2)	Townhouses and condominiums, subject to all applicable requirements contained in section 30-90(a). 
(3)	Accessory residential dwelling units in single-family dwellings only and in compliance with all requirements specified in section 30-80. 
(4)	Educational, training, health, medical or nursing uses of public, charitable, or philanthropic nature, including rest homes and sanitariums. 
(5)	Nursing homes. 
(6)	Retail establishments customarily serving residential neighborhoods, such as pharmacies or drug stores, grocery markets, convenience stores, clothing and apparel stores, gift shops, greeting card shops, bookstores, music stores, consignment shops, newsstands, toy stores, fish and tackle shops, craft and hobby shops, florist shops, video stores, furniture stores, and other similar establishments. 
(7)	Personal or professional service establishments, and businesses repairing and servicing small equipment, such as barbershops and salons, photocopiers or print shops, coin-operated laundromats, tailors, shoe repair shops, electronic, computer, or small appliance repair shops, photography studios, camera shops, health and fitness clubs, newspaper offices, radio station studios, television station studios, jewelry and watch repair shops, and other similar establishments. 
(8)	Professional offices such as banks, doctors' offices, dentist offices, accounting and tax preparation services, real estate offices, attorneys' offices, investment offices, consulting offices, and other similar establishments. 
(9)	Dine-in or carry-out restaurants, including cafes, delis, bakeries, coffee shops, ice cream parlors, pizza parlors, and other similar dining or food establishments. 
(10)	In-home and nonresidential child care centers, subject to the applicable requirements specified in section 30-85. 
(11)	Clubs or lodges, public and private. 
(12)	Public and private educational institutions and associated accessory uses. 
(13)	Churches and cemeteries. 
(14)	Public and semi-public institutions and offices, including government offices. 
(15)	Bed and breakfast inns. 
(16)	Group homes, subject to the standards established in sections 30-6 and 30-76. 
(17)	Hotels and motels. 
(18)	Public utility structures and lands, provided that there shall be no outside storage area and a buffer shall be provided along the side and rear yards. 
(19)	Automobile filling and service stations, provided that all structures, including pumps, shall comply with the setback line of any abutting street and that points of ingress and egress shall not be located closer than 50 feet to each other (centerline to centerline) nor less than 100 feet to any street intersection, and shall not exceed 25 feet in width. 
(20)	Marinas. 
(21)	Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces, subject to the standards established in section 30-79, provided that no equipment or inoperable vehicles are externally parked or stored. Not more than one-fourth of all required off-street parking spaces may be located within the front yard of the property. 
(22)	Accessory uses and buildings, subject to the standards established in section 30-34. 
(c)	Uses allowed by special exception. The following uses may be allowed by special exception in the VC zone, subject to approval of the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures specified in article VI of this chapter. Each use permitted by special exception shall comply with all specified conditions or requirements of the applicable use. 
(1)	Drive-through restaurants and drive-through windows for any other uses, provided that adequate access to a public road or street exists to provide safe circulation and that the proposed business will not adjoin a residential use property. 
(2)	Family entertainment and cultural uses such as dance studios, live performance theaters, museums, and other similar establishments that cater to both children and families (not adults exclusively) and that do not serve or offer alcoholic beverages for sale. 
(3)	Loft, efficiency, and studio apartments, provided that all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
a.	Such residential uses are located above the first floor of a multi-story commercial use building; 
b.	Appropriate soundproofing or sound attenuation measures have been installed to limit noise impacts that may be generated by ground floor commercial uses; 
c.	Adequate off-street parking for all proposed apartment units is provided in the rear yard of the lot; 
d.	Separate building entrances are available for the proposed apartments; 
e.	All exterior apartment windows and doors are secured by appropriate locks or security devices; 
f.	Adequate fire escape ladders are available for each apartment unit and hard-wired fire alarms and sprinkler systems are provided on all floors of the building; and 
g.	The lower floor commercial uses in the building will not operate between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(4)	Veterinary hospitals and clinics, commercial kennels, and the raising of other domestic animals for sale, provided that no portion of a building, structure, outdoor run, or pens used to house or exercise such animals shall not be located closer than 50 feet from any residential property line. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. For this district, there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	Minimum front yard setback. No specific setback required. However, buildings that will be located on a vacant lot between two lots that contain existing buildings (regardless of use) shall not be located farther from the street right-of-way line than the facade of the adjoining building with the deepest front yard setback nor closer to the street right-of-way line than the facade of the adjoining building with the shortest front yard setback. Where a public sidewalk is provided along the front yard of a lot, any building constructed on that lot shall be constructed as close to the street right-of-way line as is feasible and all off-street parking required for the proposed use shall be located in a side or rear yard of the property. Any existing or proposed on-street parking spaces that adjoin a lot line of the subject property shall be counted as partial satisfaction of the required off-street parking space requirements for the proposed use. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
(2)	Minimum side yard setback of ten feet along any side yard that adjoins a lot containing a residential dwelling. No other specific side yard setback shall be required. 
(3)	Minimum rear yard setback of 20 feet along any rear yard that adjoins a lot containing a residential dwelling. No other specific side yard setback shall be required. 
(4)	Maximum percentage of lot covered by impervious surfaces of 80 percent. 
(5)	Maximum structure height of 48 feet or four stories. 
(e)	Minimum standards for all dwellings.
(1)	Minimum dwelling unit gross floor area of 750 square feet per unit. 
(2)	Minimum exterior width of dwelling of 14 feet. 
(3)	Minimum required roof pitch of 4:12 for all two-family dwellings and 3:12 for all multifamily units. No required minimum pitch for mixed use buildings containing residential units. 
(4)	Foundation/slab requirements. All dwellings shall be placed or constructed on a poured concrete slab or foundation in compliance with all applicable building code requirements. 
(5)	Landscaping. All dwelling sites shall be landscaped in a manner consistent with other adjoining residential home sites in the area or neighborhood. At a minimum, ornamental shrubs shall be applied along the front yard foundation of each dwelling. 
(f)	Basic site design requirements. All buildings within the VC zone should be designed in a manner consistent with the applicable design guidelines outlined in the comprehensive plan. At a minimum, the following minimum design requirements must be satisfied: 
(1)	Parking. Not more than one-fourth of all off-street parking spaces for the proposed uses (as required in section 30-79) shall be provided within the front yard of the property. If the front yard of the property adjoins a street that includes a sidewalk, none of the required off-street parking spaces may be provided within the front yard of the property. Any on-street parking spaces that directly adjoin a property line of the subject property shall be counted as partial satisfaction of the required off-street parking space requirements for the proposed use. 
(2)	Maximum floor area for one story buildings. No single-story building within the VC zone shall contain more than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. Additional desired floor area shall be provided through additional stories, up to the maximum height allowed within the zone. 
(3)	Building facades. Metal siding materials shall not be used on any exterior building facades within the VC zone (except as may be necessary to allow special detailing, gutters, or window awnings). The exterior facades of all buildings shall be constructed of wood, brick, stone, stucco, or some material that resembles one or more of the aforementioned materials. Building facades that face a public sidewalk shall contain first floor windows of a scale and frequency suitable to encourage pedestrian window-shopping. 
(4)	Cornices and rooflines. All buildings containing 10,000 or more gross square feet or rising two or more stories in height shall possess decorative cornices along the roofline and/or articulated rooflines. Said details shall be architecturally compatible and consistent in design with similar use buildings within the VC zone that comply with the architectural guidelines specified in the comprehensive plan. 
(5)	Architectural style. The architectural style and design of each building shall incorporate elements or features that are compatible with or representative of historic architectural styles that exist within the metropolitan area. Architectural styles should be carefully selected to promote a consistent and compatible design theme throughout the village center, consistent with the guidelines specified in the comprehensive plan. 
(6)	Maximum building setbacks. The facades of a proposed principal use building shall be located as close to the street right-of-way as is feasible, with allowances made for building entrances, porticos, marquis, and other permanent exterior features of the building that protrude in front of the building facade. Buildings located on lots fronted by a public sidewalk shall be set back not more than 50 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
(7)	Special signage restrictions. The city wishes to encourage variety in signage within the VC zone, while discouraging the proliferation of freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be prohibited on any property within the VC zone, where the facade of the principal use building is located not more than 50 feet from the adjoining street right-of-way line. Freestanding signs on all other properties within the VC zone shall be in the form of a monument sign, the maximum height of which shall not exceed ten feet above the ground. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 11), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-148. B-1 Neighborhood Business zoning district.
(a)	District intent. The purpose of this district shall be to provide opportunities for small scale, low impact, commercial business, office, and service operations utilizing less than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area, (excluding accessory residential uses for the property owner, manager, or proprietor) and associated compatible uses that primarily serve neighborhood or local business needs. The local shopping zoning district is designed to serve small scale business opportunities in a neighborhood setting (rather than in a central business district or along a major highway corridor), where good traffic access is available (such as street corner locations where a neighborhood collector street intersects with another collector street or an arterial highway). The size of a B-1 zone should be limited to the areas immediately surrounding key neighborhood intersections, to help minimize the intrusion of commercial uses into stable residential areas. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the B-1 Local Business zoning district: 
(1)	Retail establishments customarily serving residential neighborhoods, such as pharmacies or drug stores, grocery markets, clothing and apparel stores, gift shops, greeting card shops, bookstores, music stores, pet stores, consignment shops, newsstands, toy stores, fish and tackle shops, craft and hobby shops, florist shops, video stores, small electronic and computer retailers and furniture stores. 
(2)	Personal or professional service establishments, and businesses repairing and servicing small equipment, such as barbershops and salons, child care centers, photocopiers or print shops, coin-operated laundromats, tailors, shoe repair shops, electronic or small appliance repair shops, pet grooming establishments, photography studios, camera shops, health and fitness clubs, newspaper offices, radio station studios, television station studios and jewelry and watch repair shops. 
(3)	Professional offices such as banks, doctor's offices, dentist offices, accounting and tax preparation services, real estate offices, attorney's offices, investment offices, consulting offices, and veterinary clinics (but not veterinary hospitals). 
(4)	Dine-in or carry-out restaurants that do not offer drive-through services and that do not offer alcoholic beverages for sale in any form such as cafes, delis, bakeries, coffee shops, ice cream parlors, pizza parlors, and other similar dining or food establishments. 
(5)	Family entertainment and cultural uses such as dance studios and other similar establishments that cater to children and families (not adults exclusively) and that do not serve or offer alcoholic beverages for sale. 
(6)	Clubs or lodges, public and private. 
(7)	Public and private educational institutions and associated accessory uses. 
(8)	Churches and cemeteries. 
(9)	Monasteries. 
(10)	Public and semi-public institutions and offices, including government offices, fire stations, police stations, and other similar uses. 
(11)	Bed and breakfast inns. 
(12)	Automobile filling and service stations, provided that all structures, including pumps, shall comply with the setback line of any abutting street and that points of ingress and egress shall not be located closer than 50 feet to each other (centerline to centerline) nor less than 100 feet to any street intersection, and shall not exceed 25 feet in width. 
(13)	Boardinghouses or roominghouses. 
(14)	Single-family and multifamily group homes, subject to the standards established in sections 30-6 and 30-76. 
(15)	Nursing homes. 
(16)	Residential uses permitted in an adjoining residential district; however, such residential uses shall be subject to and regulated by all applicable dimensional and dwelling unit requirements of such adjoining residential district, except that in the case where more than one such district is adjoining thereto, the least restrictive district requirements for such residential use shall apply. Any building used in whole or in part for more than one dwelling unit shall also comply with minimum lot area requirements for each additional dwelling unit. 
(17)	Condominiums and townhouses, in accordance with section 30-90. 
(18)	Multifamily and loft apartments. Apartments shall be allowed only on the second or other upper floor of any building housing or containing a permitted commercial use on the first floor, provided that all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
a.	Appropriate soundproofing or sound attenuation measures have been installed to limit noise impacts that may be generated by ground floor commercial uses. 
b.	Adequate off-street parking for all proposed apartment units is provided in the rear or side yard of the lot. 
c.	Separate building entrances are available for the proposed apartments. 
d.	All exterior apartment windows and doors are secured by appropriate locks or security devices. 
e.	Adequate fire escape ladders are available for each apartment unit and hard-wired fire alarms and sprinkler systems are provided on all floors of the building in accordance with all applicable fire and building codes. 
f.	The lower floor commercial uses in the building will not operate between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(19)	Studios engaged in the manufacture of handcrafted art, pottery, clothing, glass, metal, or wood products. 
(20)	Public utility structures and lands, provided that there is no outside storage area and a buffer is provided for the side and rear yards. 
(21)	Retail greenhouses and plant nurseries. 
(22)	Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces, subject to the standards established in section 30-79, provided that no equipment or inoperable vehicles are externally parked or stored. Off-street parking lots shall be located in the rear or side yard of the property. If no on-street parking spaces and sidewalks have been constructed along the front of the property, the property owner may establish off-street diagonal parking within the front yard of the property. No required off-street loading space shall be established within the front yard of the property. 
(c)	Prohibited uses. The following specific uses shall be prohibited in the B-1 zone: 
(1)	Body shops and junkyards. 
(2)	Laundry and dry-cleaning plants. 
(3)	Manufacturing uses. 
(4)	All uses allowed in the B-2 zone that are not specifically allowed in this district. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. For this district, there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	Maximum business size of not more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area devoted to the business use, including areas used for inventory storage and administrative offices. Accessory residential uses on any property shall not exceed the gross floor area of the primary commercial use on the lot. The subject lot shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed commercial building and all accessory uses, including on-site parking. 
(2)	Minimum lot size of no specific minimum area required. It is the intent of this section that lots of sufficient size be used for any business or service permitted, provided, however, that such use shall have adequate space for normal operations plus required space for off-street parking and loading, and yard requirements. Municipal water and sewer service is required for all lots where such service is available. Lots not served by municipal sewer shall contain not less than the minimum deemed necessary by the county health department for proper siting and installation of on-site sewage disposal facilities. 
(3)	Minimum front yard setback of 30 feet from the edge of the right-of-way line. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. However, every effort should be made to site commercial structures as close to the required front yard setback as is possible. Where a sidewalk exists along the front yard, the building storefront shall be located along the front yard setback line. Commercial buildings that will be located on a vacant lot between two preexisting, structurally sound buildings shall not be located closer to or farther from the right-of-way line than the buildings on the immediate adjoining side lots. 
(4)	Minimum side yard setbacks of 15 feet. Where the side yard of a nonresidential use property adjoins a residential zoning district, a side yard buffer along the residential zoning district line shall be provided. If the adjoining property is zoned and developed for a business or commercial use, interior side yards may on that side of the property may be reduced to zero feet; however, if the adjoining structure is not built to the side lot line, a minimum setback of at least 15 feet shall be maintained. 
(5)	Minimum rear yard setback of 20 feet. Where the rear yard of a nonresidential use property adjoins a residential zoning district, a rear yard buffer along the residential zoning district line shall be provided. 
(6)	Maximum percentage of lot covered by impervious surfaces shall be 60 percent. 
(7)	Maximum structure height of 35 feet or 2½ stories. 
(8)	Vehicular access. Vehicular approaches to the property shall be so designed and located that they will create minimum interference with traffic on the surrounding public street. To this end, no more than two driveways, each not to exceed 30 feet in width at the property line, shall be permitted on each street frontage of the property. No portion of an access curb cut shall be closer than 50 feet from the closest right-of-way line of an intersecting street or railroad. A design requiring backing of vehicles into a public street or highway shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 12), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-149. B-2 Highway Commercial zoning district.
(a)	District intent. This zoning district is intended to provide development opportunities for a mix of small and large scale commercial uses requiring large lots and good highway access, and which may serve a broader market that may extend well beyond the city's corporate limits. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following identifies the uses permitted in the B-2 zone: 
(1)	All nonresidential uses permitted by right and by special exception in the VC zone. Not more than one-third of all required off-street parking spaces may be located within the front yard of the property. 
(2)	Hospitals (which may include a commercial cafeteria and/or a commercial pharmacy), medical clinics, laboratories, sanitariums, and nursing homes. 
(3)	Movie cinemas, auditoriums, and theaters, including drive-in theaters. 
(4)	The manufacturing of articles sold at retail shall be permitted as an accessory use to the retail business, provided that such manufacturing activities occupy less than 30 percent of the gross floor area. All sales, storage, service or incidental manufacturing activities shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building on the property. 
(5)	Veterinary hospitals, clinics, and kennels, provided that all animals are kept within suitably designed, soundproofed and air-conditioned buildings. 
(6)	Athletic fields or stadiums, race tracks and speedways, and other recreational areas for public use, including golf driving ranges, bowling alleys, swimming pools, fish lakes and similar recreational uses, provided that the parcel contains at least ten acres of land, that all outdoor lighting provided for night use shall be properly directed and shielded as needed to prevent excessive glare on adjoining properties, and all activities are located at least 100 feet from any property line. 
(7)	Truck terminals and other transportation distribution centers. 
(8)	Commercial and public entertainment and recreation facilities, including parks, playgrounds, play fields, roller skating rinks, miniature golf courses, amusement parks, fairgrounds, and other similar facilities. 
(9)	Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks. 
(10)	Wholesale business and distribution establishments not involving over 20,000 square feet of area for storage of ware to be wholesaled or distributed. 
(11)	Mini-warehouses. 
(12)	Building contractor's office, except outside storage of heavy equipment, and building materials. 
(13)	Marinas. 
(14)	Shopping centers, consisting of less than five businesses. 
(15)	Laundry and dry-cleaning services. 
(16)	Mortuaries and funeral homes. 
(17)	Broadcast stations and transmission facilities. 
(18)	Vehicle or agricultural implement sales, including campers, recreational vehicles, and accessory equipment. 
(19)	Building supply and equipment rental establishments. 
(20)	Truck stops. 
(c)	Dimensional requirements. For this district, there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	Minimum front yard setback of 45 feet, plus any additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. Every effort should be made to site commercial structures as close to the right-of-way line as is possible, while retaining at least a minimal front yard setback to provide adequate space for landscaping, signage, and other similar on-site improvements. Any buildings that will be constructed on a vacant lot between two preexisting buildings shall not be located closer to or farther from the right-of-way line than the buildings on the immediate adjoining side lots. Not more than one-third of all required off-street parking spaces may be located within the front yard of the property. 
(2)	Minimum lot width of 100 feet. 
(3)	Minimum side yard setbacks of 15 feet. Where the side yard of a property adjoins a residential zoning district, a side yard buffer not less than 30 feet in width shall be provided along the residential zoning district line. 
(4)	Minimum rear yard setback of 20 feet for all lots less than 10,000 square feet in area and 40 feet for all other lots. Furthermore, where the rear yard of a B-2 zone property adjoins a residential zoning district, a rear yard buffer not less than 30 feet in width shall be provided along the residential zoning district line. 
(5)	Maximum percentage of lot covered by impervious surfaces shall be 65 percent. 
(6)	Maximum structure height of 45 feet. 
(7)	Curb cut access. Access to each commercial use located on a lot which is at least 10,000 square feet in area shall be only at clearly defined and marked entrances and exits no greater than 25 feet in width separated by a curb or similar barrier to vehicular movement of at least 50 feet in length; providing that this requirement shall not preclude the construction of special turnout lanes in the center of or along the side of the abutting roadway. Where public side street access is available, access to the property should be obtained from the side street. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 13), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-150. M-1 Light Manufacturing zoning district.
(a)	District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide opportunities for the development of industrial and manufacturing operations that will have minimal impacts on the natural environment and that will be located in areas served by all necessary municipal facilities and services. Such uses shall not produce discharges that require the issuance of a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) major operating discharge permit and shall not emit potentially noxious fumes, odors, or particulate matter into the air. The district also will provide opportunities for the development of limited commercial uses that are accessory and complementary to the associated primary industrial use. 
(b)	Permitted uses. The following identifies the uses permitted in the M-1 Light Manufacturing zoning district: 
(1)	Any industrial enterprise engaged in a manufacturing, assembly, or processing activity that does not produce discharges that require the issuance of a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) major operating discharge permit and does not emit fumes, odors, or particulate matter into the air that would be discernable beyond the boundaries of the property. 
(2)	Accessory commercial activities limited to the sale or servicing of products manufactured by the primary industrial use, provided such commercial activities occupy not more than 30 percent of the total floor area of the principal use building. All commercial activities shall be conducted entirely within the principal use building. 
(3)	Body shops. 
(4)	Indoor and outdoor gun clubs and shooting ranges, provided that all activities involving the discharge of firearms shall conducted more than 250 feet from any property line and directed away from any established residential uses. 
(5)	Warehousing and storage facilities, including mini-warehouses. 
(6)	Truck terminals and shipping facilities. 
(7)	Railroad yards. 
(8)	Lumber yards and mills. 
(9)	Fuel or building material storage and distribution facilities. 
(10)	Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces, subject to the standards established in section 30-79, provided that no equipment or inoperable vehicles are externally parked or stored. 
(c)	Dimensional requirements. For this district, there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	No minimum lot size is required. 
(2)	Minimum lot width of 100 feet. 
(3)	Minimum front yard setback of 20 feet from the edge of the right-of-way line. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
(4)	Minimum side and rear yard setback of 30 feet from all adjoining property lines and an additional 20 feet from any property line that abuts a residential zoning district (AG, RT, R-1, R-2, R-3 and MHP). All required setbacks along residential zoning districts shall be improved and maintained as a vegetated buffer to provide an effective yearround visual screen between the commercial use and the neighboring residential areas. 
(5)	Maximum percentage of lot covered by impervious surfaces shall be 40 percent. 
(6)	Maximum structure height of 45 feet. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 14), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-151. FHA Flood Hazard Area zone.
(a)	District intent. Within floodplain areas, special land use restrictions are desired to: minimize human exposure to flood hazards, prevent excessive pollution or contamination of surface water resources during floods, provide maximum transmission and absorption of floodwaters by restricting the intensity of impervious surfaces and manmade obstructions within floodplains, ensure that structures built within floodplains are properly floodproofed, to minimize private investment losses due to flooding, and ensure the city's continued participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. The purpose of this overlay zone is to impose special development standards and restrictions in areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as subject to special flood hazard to serve the aforementioned objectives. An overlay zone imposes special development requirements and restrictions in addition to the provisions of the underlying regular zoning district. Where the requirements of this district conflict with the requirements of an underlying regular zoning district or with other applicable ordinances and regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall be followed. All land use and development activities on lands within the FHA Flood Hazard Area zone shall also comply with all requirements of chapter 14. 
(b)	Boundaries. The boundaries of the flood hazard area zone shall encompass all areas of the city lying within a special flood hazard area or 100-year floodplain, as shown on the latest published flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map for the subject property, prepared for the National Flood Insurance Program by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(c)	Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited within the FHA Flood Hazard Area zone: 
(1)	On-site septic systems, leach fields, and temporary sewage holding tanks. 
(2)	Open air storage or holding pits, bunkers, or ponds for the storage of animal manure or wastes. 
(3)	Sanitary landfills and other solid waste facilities. 
(4)	Junkyards. 
(5)	Animal corrals, stockyards, and poultry houses. 
(6)	Multifamily residential structures. 
(7)	Nonresidential buildings exceeding 20,000 square feet in gross floor area. However, a nonresidential building containing more than 20,000 square feet of floor area may be partially located within a floodway fringe area, provided that not more than 20,000 square feet of total building floor area is located within said floodway fringe area, no portion of the building encroaches upon or extends into the floodway, and the building has been properly floodproofed in a accordance with all applicable requirements of chapter 14. 
(8)	Mini-storage facilities. 
(9)	Group homes, nursing homes, and other congregate care facilities. 
(10)	Public and private schools or educational buildings. 
(11)	Hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast inns. 
(12)	Warehouse facilities used for the storage of hazardous waste or materials. 
(13)	Residential uses not otherwise prohibited within the FHA Flood Hazard Area zone shall not be permitted within a floodway or a floodway fringe area, nor shall any such residential structure encroach upon a floodway or floodway fringe area. No existing residential structure shall be extended, moved, replaced, or rebuilt unless the lowest floor (including basements) of said structure complies with the applicable construction and elevation requirements of the flood damage prevention ordinance. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. For this district, there shall be the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)	Development activities and land uses within the FHA Flood Hazard Area zone shall comply with all requirements contained in the city flood damage prevention ordinance in addition to the specific requirements contained in this section. 
(2)	Maximum percentage of lot covered by impervious surfaces shall be 25 percent for nonresidential, nonagricultural, and mixed use developments; 15 percent for residential uses; five percent for agricultural and other open space uses. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 15), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-152. PD Planned Development.
(a)	District intent. The purpose of the PD Planned Development district is to encourage the development of innovative and creative land use designs in a mixed use environment. The district is intended to allow the unified planning and development of large tracts of land suitable in location, area, and character for the uses and structures proposed. A mix of uses and housing types is encouraged, provided that the proposed project is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the land uses proposed along the external boundaries of the development site will be compatible in intensity, character, and design with the neighboring uses. 
(b)	Permitted uses. Any uses allowed in the R-1, R-2 and VC zoning districts shall be permitted, provided that the uses are laid out and buffered to minimize potential noise, traffic, and aesthetic conflicts and the overall development scheme is consistent with the goals, objectives, and future land use map contained in the comprehensive plan. Proposed land uses along the boundaries of the development site shall be compatible in intensity, character, and design with the land uses allowed in the immediately adjoining regular zoning districts. All proposed land uses shall be shown and designated clearly on the master plan of the development. 
(c)	Design requirements and considerations. In order to change the regular district designation of a tract of land to PD Planned Development, and subsequently thereby use such tract of land, the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)	A master plan of development showing the exact manner in which the whole tract will be improved and used must accompany the request for change of zoning. Said master plan must be approved by the city council after review and recommendation by the planning commission and must be retained in the file of the city clerk as a part of the city's records. The required master plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.	Information to show and describe the location of the site to be developed as PD, including its legal description and a current perimeter survey prepared and certified by a surveyor who is licensed by the state. The survey must show all streets and street rights-of-way which are adjacent to the parcel, all easements and rights-of-way on the development site, the boundary lines of any and all lots of record that comprise the entire development site, and the locations of any existing buildings or structures which shall be incorporated into the proposed development. 
b.	A vicinity map showing the parcel in relation to surrounding property and a general description of the surrounding area, including the current zoning and land uses of all adjoining lands. 
c.	A statement of the planning objectives to be achieved by the proposed development. The statement should include a description of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and projections made by the applicant. 
d.	The density of land use to be allocated to all parts of the development site, together with tabulations by acreage and percentage of the parcel to be occupied by each proposed use to show compliance with all applicable dimensional requirements. 
e.	The location, size, and character of any common open space or any commonly owned facilities and the type of organization which will own and maintain any commonly owned open space or facilities. Such explanation shall document the applicant's intent to comply with all requirements for common open space, as specified in section 30-84. 
f.	The number, location, and layout of parking spaces and attendant driveways, handicap parking areas, off-street loading and unloading areas, and emergency vehicle parking areas as may be required of the proposed development under section 30-79. Information regarding the type, thickness, and imperviousness of surfacing materials to be used to improve all parking areas, driveways, and pedestrian ways shall also be provided. 
g.	The location, design, and dimensions of all proposed curb cuts that will provide access to the site and all proposed temporary culs-de-sac that will be constructed to reserve future street access to abutting undeveloped properties. 
h.	A landscaping plan, which shall show all proposed improvements to required buffers and other common open space lands, including the location of existing mature tree stands that will be retained and incorporated into the overall development plan. Such landscaping plan may be incorporated into a land disturbance and erosion control plan, if such plan is required under section 30-43. 
i.	Typical facade sketches of the outside appearance of any proposed commercial buildings, townhouse and condominium buildings, and multifamily dwellings. The architectural style and design of such buildings should be compatible, if not reflective of a common design theme that is generally compatible or complementary of (and, at a minimum, not inconsistent with) the predominant architectural styles in any established areas or neighborhoods surrounding the development site. 
j.	Detailed dimensional plans for any and all proposed signs within the development in compliance with the applicable requirements of section 30-81. 
k.	A detailed stormwater management plan showing the location of all 100-year floodplains on the site in compliance with all applicable requirements of section 30-42. 
l.	Proposed land disturbance and erosion control measures and improvements, as may be required under section 30-43. 
m.	Information to show the location and design of all proposed utility lines, including any required easements. 
n.	The substance of any proposed covenants, easements, or other restrictions which will be imposed upon the use or maintenance of the site and any buildings or other structures that will be constructed within the site. 
o.	A traffic impact study, if required under section 30-176(c)(2). 
p.	A general statement or demographic profile of the intended target market of the proposed development. 
(2)	Before any building or zoning permit for the construction of a planned development in any portion of a PD zone can be issued, a subdivision plat or plats, for the whole tract shall have been approved by the planning commission and recorded in accordance with the subdivision regulations, such plat or plats any information shown thereon shall correspond in all respects to the approved master plan of development, and the information recorded along with the subdivision plat to plats shall include the master plan of development. Where any information required by subsection (c)(1) of this section to be included in the master plan of development would also be required to be included in a required preliminary plat, reference on the preliminary plat to the specific portions or pages of the master plan of development containing said information shall be sufficient to satisfy the corresponding preliminary plat content requirements of the subdivision regulations. No permit of any type shall be issued for any use, activity, building, or site improvement that is not in accordance with the approved and recorded master plan of development. 
(3)	The master plan of development for a tract may be amended at any time by the city council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission, provided a notice is given and a public hearing held thereon in the same manner as for the original approval of the change of zoning for the subject tract to a PD zone classification. 
(4)	Landscaping and open space shall be essential parts of the master plan. At least 25 percent of the gross area shall be dedicated to open space/recreational uses such as landscaping, bike paths, walkways with or without exercise stations, swimming areas, and recreational courts. At least half of the required open space area shall consist of developable land area. Existing trees and natural features shall be preserved wherever possible. Said open spaces shall be integrated into the overall development design (not relegated to a corner of the site) to provide maximum access to the residents and workers of the development. At no point shall an open space area be less than 20 feet in width. 
(5)	Insofar as possible, vehicular traffic shall be separated from pedestrian traffic. Sidewalks should be provided along all internal streets providing through traffic access and between all residential and nonresidential use areas within the development. 
(6)	The vehicular traffic generated by the proposed development shall not exceed the capacity of access streets and shall not disrupt established residential areas. 
(7)	The capacity of existing or scheduled public utility systems, streets, or schools to serve the potential number of families, businesses, and workers in the proposed development shall be considered during the review and approval process. The city may deny a proposed PD master plan or require phasing of the project as may be needed to avoid public facility capacity shortfalls caused by a premature development project. Each PD master plan shall include letters from the superintendent of education, the chief of the fire department, the chief of police, the street/sanitation superintendent, and the parks and recreation director confirming that they have considered the scale of the proposed development and have determined that it will not exceed the capacity of the specific public facilities and services within their authority to serve the needs of the proposed development and the community at-large. Where such finding cannot be made by the aforementioned officials, the letter shall state, to the best of the official's knowledge, the nature of any potential infrastructure or service deficiencies and the prospective date by which the city can address the deficiencies, if specific improvements have been planned or envisioned. 
(8)	Every effort shall be made to maximize energy efficiency. Energy conservation measures which should be employed include: 
a.	Orienting buildings to maximize solar access; 
b.	Utilization of landscape design techniques and species that maximize protection from excess heat in the summer and allow solar exposure in the winter; 
c.	Minimizing the amount of roads and streets needed to serve the development; 
d.	Utilizing green site design to minimize thermal stress on surface waters from stormwater runoff and to minimize potential storage and release of excess heat from impervious surfaces; and 
e.	Dedication of areas for community gardens. 
(9)	Every planned development shall include management agreement provisions for the control and maintenance of all areas within the development under common ownership as prescribed in section 30-84(4). 
(10)	Access shall be provided to each separately platted building site by way of a publicity dedicated street plus a driveway or clearway of at least ten feet in width for residential uses, and 12 feet in width for nonresidential uses. 
(11)	Each planned development shall satisfy the off-street parking and loading space requirements for the specific proposed land uses as specified in section 30-79. 
(12)	Each planned development shall be served by a community sewer system or package sewage treatment plan sufficient to serve all planned uses in the development at buildout, as approved by the county health department. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements.
(1)	Minimum planned development site size. The minimum size of the planned development site shall be five acres. Not less than 80 percent of the gross land area of the proposed development site shall consist of developable land area. 
(2)	Minimum lot size within a planned development. No minimum building site is required, provided that the land use for building coverage and off-street parking and loading spaces as required in section 30-79, does not preclude adequate open spaces for landscaping, and for recreation facilities for the occupants of dwellings. The proposed minimum and average building sites, the resulting average net density (families per acre of residential land use), the total land used for ever purpose (including rights-of-way), the number of off-street parking and loading spaces for each use area, and the total and average land area covered by the building in each use area, shall be calculated and shown on the master plan of development. Specific minimum lot sizes may be imposed by the county health department for proper siting and installation of on-site sewage disposal facilities, where municipal sewer access is not available. 
(3)	Minimum building setback line.
a.	Minimum setback should be 30 feet from the edge of the right-of-way line for all residential uses; ten feet from the edge of the right-of-way line for all nonresidential uses. An additional setback may be required under the conditions specified in section 30-37. 
b.	Every effort should be made to site nonresidential structures as close to the minimum front yard setback line as is possible, while providing sufficient front yard space for landscaping, signage, and other similar on-site improvements. Where a sidewalk exists or will be provided along the front yard, the nonresidential building storefront shall not be located more than 50 feet away from the right-of-way line. Not more than one-fourth of all required off-street parking spaces may be located within the front yard of the property. 
(4)	Minimum yards. No building shall be closer than 15 feet to any PD zone boundary line, providing that no entrance of any building shall be closer than 25 feet to any such line. 
(5)	Minimum spacing between buildings. For dwellings, the open space between buildings shall not be less than 20 feet for one story buildings; 30 feet when either building is a two story building; 40 feet when either building is a three story building; and 40 feet, plus an additional ten feet for each story over three stories when either building is over three stories in height. The minimum dimension of the yard upon which any entrance or exit of a dwelling faces shall be 20 feet; such space shall not be counted as a yard for any other building. 
(6)	Maximum structure height. The maximum height for structures in this district shall be 45 feet. 
(7)	Maximum percentage of site covered by impervious surfaces. Impervious surfaces may cover no more than 60 percent of gross area of planned development site area; for any individual nonresidential use lot within the planned development, 40 percent. 
(e)	Planned development which includes RG residential garden homes. All single-family residential structures shall be 1,400 square feet heated and cooled area along with a requirement that all single family residential homes have an attached two car enclosed garage. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 16), 3-22-2004; Ord. No. 0-008-2020, § 1, 12-14-2020)
 
Sec. 30-153. RSC Regional Shopping Center zone.
(a)	District intent. The city recognizes that, as the city continues to grow and prosper, the desire for and marketability of large-scale regional shopping centers designed to serve the retail shopping needs of a regional population (within and beyond the city) will intensify. However, the city also recognizes that such facilities, by virtue of their size and nature, can generate significant impacts on established commercial centers, local growth rates and the pattern of growth in the city, traffic patterns and congestion, public facilities, and sensitive natural resources. Many of the impacts generated by regional shopping centers can be positive, negative, or both. The city seeks to minimize the negative impacts and maximize the positive impacts by developing standards to manage the city's transition to a regional commercial center in a way that is compatible with the city's quality of life and public image objectives. To implement this impact management scheme, the city has created a special zoning district to place general guidelines on the design and potential location of regional shopping centers. These guidelines are designed to prevent excess commercial development speculation and competition for the development of regional shopping centers, which could result in market saturation, destabilization of established commercial centers or areas, rapid fluctuations in local property values, and excessive demand on existing public facilities. 
(b)	Application of district. The Regional Shopping Center development district is a conditional overlay zone. An applicant may request an amendment to the zoning map to apply the Regional Shopping Center development district to a property located within the VC zone or B-2 zone that satisfies the following requirements. The planning commission and city council shall find that these requirements will be satisfied when evaluating a request for an amendment to the zoning map to apply the Regional Shopping Center development district before recommending approval to the city council. 
(1)	The proposed development site must be designated on the future land use map for commercial use. 
(2)	The proposed development site must contain at least three acres of land. At least 80 percent of the gross land area in the proposed development site shall consist of developable land area. 
(3)	The proposed development site must have at least 200 feet of frontage on an arterial highway or a major collector highway. 
(4)	The proposed development site must have direct access to municipal water and sewer. 
(5)	No portion of a regional shopping center development site shall contain a floodway, as delineated on the latest flood insurance rate map. 
(c)	Permitted uses. Commercial retail and service stores, professional offices, restaurants, theaters, family entertainment uses (which shall serve and appeal to children under 18 years of age), and public or semi-public uses. Exterior sales and displays shall be prohibited, except during special sales events, such as a sidewalk sale day. Traveling displays and cart vendors shall be allowed as accessory uses. A regional shopping center complex shall contain not less than five individual businesses or offices nor less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(d)	Application and review procedures. Once the city council has approved an amendment to the zoning map to apply the Regional Shopping Center development district to a development site, the owner or his duly authorized agent shall submit a development site plan for approval by the planning commission. The application must be approved by the planning commission within one year of the date of approval of the amendment to the zoning map by the city council or the planning commission may initiate further rezoning of the Regional Shopping Center development district property in accordance with section 30-246. The application and review procedures shall be the same as required for a planned development, as specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)	Special development standards. The following special development standards shall apply to all proposed regional shopping centers in addition to the applicable requirements of the regular zoning district: 
(1)	All areas of the proposed development site that do not satisfy the definition of developable land area shall be designated as open space, which must be retained and maintained in a natural vegetated state. The planning commission may allow the applicant to improve a portion of the designated open space to provide a park or passive recreational uses, such as a walking trail, garden area, or fenced playground, provided the proposed improvements satisfy the following requirements: 
a.	The proposed recreational improvements will not affect more than 50 percent of the designated open space areas; 
b.	No improvements will be made to lands that are classified as wetlands by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
c.	Public use of the improved recreational areas will not cause undue environmental stress on the remaining open space areas; and 
d.	The proposed recreational improvements will not result in the construction of impervious surfaces that will cover more than five percent of the total designated open space areas. 
(2)	The development will contain adequate stormwater management and erosion control facilities to address the requirements of sections 30-42 and 30-43. 
(3)	The development shall have at least two entrances from a public street that are at least 150 feet apart (as measured from accessway centerline to accessway centerline along the intersecting street line). The planning commission may require additional accessways as it deems necessary to accommodate safe entrance, egress, traffic circulation, and emergency access to the development. 
(4)	A 50-foot vegetative buffer and yearround visual screen shall be provided along all property lines that coincide with an existing residential or agricultural lot or a lot zoned for those uses. 
(5)	The exterior design of and construction materials used for all buildings that comprise the regional shopping center shall be, to the maximum extent feasible, consistent with neighboring commercial uses that comply with the design requirements of this section. Metal siding shall be prohibited and all roofing materials shall be designed to resemble standard residential roofing materials used within the city in terms of both texture and color. All large shopping centers and malls shall be designed with articulated rooflines and exterior windows and skylights to facilitate natural lighting, to facilitate exterior window shopping, and to promote a pleasing visual integration of the interior and exterior elements of the site. The exterior walls, windows, and cornices of the structure or structures shall incorporate historic architectural elements and features that are common in or characteristic of the city area. 
(6)	Exterior paint colors should be compatible with those used on other buildings in the area. The natural colors of brick and stone are more appropriate than bright hues. The choice of a base color and hue should begin with the natural color of the building itself, or traditional colors used on other buildings in the community. Built-in features, such as doors, window frames, moldings, and cornices can be contrasted with an accent color that is a shade lighter or darker than the base color. As a general rule, masonry surfaces (e.g., brick, stone, terra cotta) that are unpainted should not be painted, because applying paint to a masonry surface will turn a low maintenance material into a high maintenance surface. 
(7)	Extensive and colorful vegetative landscaping shall be utilized along the exterior of each building that contains more than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area to minimize or soften the visual impact of the building's scale on the surrounding neighborhood and to enhance its visual appeal. The colors of the landscaping shall be selected to complement the building color and the typical color schemes on adjoining properties, to the maximum feasible extent. Landscaping and building color should be used as a means of accenting and enhancing the building's visual appeal, while uniting the proposed commercial building with neighboring structures that comply with the design provisions specified in this section. 
(8)	Off-street parking shall be distributed around the site in a way that will minimize the front yard setback of the principal use building. Every effort should be made to site commercial structures as close to the street right-of-way as possible and to facilitate pedestrian access to and from the site. 
(9)	Every effort shall be made to preserve and protect existing, mature, native trees on the development site and incorporate them into the landscaping scheme for the property, especially where said trees are located along the exterior property lines of the site. Mature shade trees shall be used liberally within the landscaping plan for the property to help offset and mitigate the thermal impact of the building and associated impervious surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. V(§ 17), 3-22-2004)
 
Secs. 30-154—30-174. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT GUIDELINES
 
Sec. 30-175. Zoning permit required.
No construction, renovation (except repairs, not changing the character of the structure and not exceeding $1,000.00 in cost or value, or painting and wallpapering), reconstruction, or development activity governed by this chapter shall be conducted prior to the issuance of a zoning permit by the enforcement officer. No building materials or temporary structures for construction purposes shall be placed or stored on any lot prior to the issuance of a zoning permit by the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VI(§ 1), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-176. General administration.
(a)	Enforcement officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by an officer of the city as may be designated by the city council. This official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary in carrying out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)	Invalid permits.
(1)	No zoning permit, building permit, certificate of occupancy, or business license, or any other permit or license shall be issued by any city department, official, or employee except in full compliance with this article. 
(2)	Any permit or license issued by any city department, official, or employee, where issued in conflict with or violation of any terms of this article or other applicable codes or ordinances, shall hereby be declared null and void. 
(c)	Approval of plans and issuance of zoning permit.
(1)	The enforcement officer shall not issue a zoning permit for any proposed construction or development activity until an application and accompanying plans or documentation has been filed and reviewed in conformance with this article. To this end, the enforcement officer shall require that every application for a zoning permit for excavation, construction, use of land, moving, or alteration be accompanied by appropriate documentation of compliance with all other applicable codes, ordinances, and regulations and a map or plat drawn to scale and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the enforcement officer to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, use of land, moving, or alteration is in conformance with this chapter: 
a.	The actual shape, proportion, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
b.	The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved and of any buildings or other structures already on the lot. 
c.	The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures. 
d.	The setback and side lines of buildings on adjoining lots and such other information concerning the lot or the adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
e.	The locations of all existing zoning district boundaries that apply to the lot. 
(2)	Where a zoning permit application for a multifamily development containing in excess of 20 units, a commercial or institutional use building containing in excess of 15,000 square feet of gross floor area, or an industrial use building containing in excess of 50,000 square feet of gross floor area has been submitted, the applicant may be required by the enforcement officer to submit a special traffic impact study for review and consideration by the planning commission prior to approval of a zoning permit. The preparation cost of said traffic impact study shall be borne by the applicant. The traffic impact study shall determine the number of average daily vehicle trips and peak hour trips that will be generated by the proposed development (according to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation Manual) and assess the impacts that these trips will have on traffic volumes on all streets providing access to the development and the resulting impacts on the peak hour level of service for all impacted major intersections identified by the enforcement officer and/or city engineer. The study shall be prepared by a qualified consultant approved by the planning commission. The purpose of the study and review by the planning commission shall be to determine the adequacy of the surrounding street network to safely accommodate potential traffic generated by the proposed development, as well as the need for special restrictions on the scale or intensity of the development, the need for special conditions of approval, which may include special curb cut requirements, special restrictions on access to the development site from affected streets, special traffic controls at the main entrance to the development site, and the construction of special acceleration or deceleration lanes at the entrance to the development site. 
(3)	If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other city codes, the enforcement officer shall issue a zoning permit accordingly. The issuance of a zoning permit shall, in no case, be construed as waiving any provision of this chapter. 
(4)	If the application is rejected, the enforcement officer shall state in writing on the application the reason for rejection. 
(5)	Any zoning permit granted under this section shall become null and void within one year from the date of issuance of the permit, if no construction work has been initiated on the site for which the permit was issued. Exceptions may be made if the proposed development or construction has been delayed due to inclement weather or some natural disaster beyond the control of the applicant. The building official or enforcement officer shall make every reasonable effort to notify a holder of a building permit which is liable for voiding action before voidance is actually declared. 
(d)	Certificate of occupancy required.
(1)	No land/or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter constructed, moved, or altered in accordance with a zoning permit shall be occupied until the enforcement officer has issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land/or structure or part thereof is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)	Within three regular business days after the owner or his agent has notified the enforcement officer that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the enforcing officer to make final inspection of the development site, and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or premises or part thereof is found to conform with the provisions of this chapter and other city codes. 
(3)	If a certificate of occupancy is denied, the enforcement officer shall state in writing the reason for rejection. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VI(§ 2), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-177. Temporary land uses.
(a)	Temporary uses, as set forth in this section, are declared to possess characteristics which require certain controls in order to ensure compatibility with other uses in the districts within which they are proposed for location. The enforcement officer is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of zoning compliance for any of the following temporary uses: 
(1)	Carnival, circus, or fair in any commercial district, for a period not to exceed 21 days, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(2)	Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure in any district, for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(3)	Open lot sale of Christmas trees in any district, for a period not to exceed 45 days. 
(4)	Real estate sales office in any district, for a period not to exceed one year, provided that such office is placed on the property to which it is appurtenant. 
(b)	All temporary certificates of zoning compliance may be renewed, provided that it is determined that said use is clearly of a temporary nature, will cause no traffic congestion, and would not create a nuisance to surrounding uses. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VI(§ 3), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-178. Violation procedures.
Where a violation of the requirements of this chapter has been identified, either by complaint or by city staff inspection, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)	Investigation. If a complaint is received regarding an alleged violation of this chapter, the zoning enforcement officer shall investigate the complaint and document the extent of the violation. 
(2)	Initial notification of violation. Once a violation has been confirmed and documented by investigation, the zoning enforcement officer shall issue a stop work order (if applicable) and/or prepare a letter to the owner of record of the property stating the nature of the violation, the date that the violation was verified, and requiring that the property owner cure the violation within a specified number of days from the date that the letter was mailed. The deadline for correction of the violation shall be established by the zoning enforcement officer with due consideration and respect for the nature of the violation, the amount of work necessary to correct the violation, and the need for expeditious remedy of the violation to prevent undue public impacts. However, in no instance shall the deadline for correction of the violation be less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date that the letter was mailed. The letter also shall state that the owner must correct the violation, or the city will issue a citation. Finally, the letter shall afford the offending property owner an opportunity to schedule a meeting with the zoning enforcement officer within five business days to discuss objections to the violation or to make special arrangements to cure the violation. Such notification letter shall be sent to the property owner via certified mail, return receipt requested. The city may, at the discretion of the zoning enforcement officer, send a copy of the letter to the developer or tenant of the property (as the case may be) by first class mail. 
(3)	Re-inspection. The zoning enforcement officer shall, at the expiration of the prescribed deadline for correction of the violation, re-inspect the property for compliance with the notification of violation. 
(4)	Notice of citation. If, upon re-inspection, the zoning enforcement officer confirms that the violation has not been cured as ordered, the zoning enforcement officer shall prepare a notice of citation, which shall be sent to the offending property by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall state the date upon which the initial violation was confirmed, the nature of the violation (including references to the specific code provisions that have been violated), the required corrective measures, the dates upon which the initial notification of violation was sent and received, the time frame afforded to the property owner for correction of the violation, the date that the failure to correct the violation was confirmed, and the amount of the applicable fine, which shall be calculated from the date of citation and full payment of which shall constitute an additional remedial action for correction of the violation. The notice also shall require the property owner to fully correct the violation within ten days of the date of citation, or the owner will be required to appear before the municipal court, at a time and date to be determined by the municipal court, to answer the charge of violation as explained in the notice of citation. 
(5)	Court action. If the zoning enforcement officer confirms that the violation has not been cured within the time frame specified in the notice of citation, the zoning enforcement officer shall file a written complaint for relief of the violation with the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VI(§ 4), 3-22-2004)
 
Secs. 30-179—30-209. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
 
Sec. 30-210. Creation.
A board of adjustment is hereby established. The appointment, procedure, powers, and action of said board of adjustment shall be governed and controlled by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VII(§ 1), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-211. Composition and appointment.
The board of adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be appointed for a term of three years, except in the first instance as provided by law. In addition, two supernumerary members shall be appointed to serve on the board at the call of the chairman in the absence of regular members. Such supernumerary members shall be appointed to serve three-year terms and shall be eligible for reappointment. Appointed members may be removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VII(§ 2), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-212. Procedures of the board of adjustment.
(a)	Bylaws. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this article. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other time as the board may determine. The chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be opened to the public. 
(b)	Records. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep the records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be of public record and be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VII(§ 3), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-213. Appeals to the board of adjustment.
Appeals to the board of adjustment may be filed by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the enforcing officer. Such appeal and subsequent hearing of the appeal by the board of adjustment shall proceed as established by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80 and by the rules of the board. All appeals shall be submitted within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit forthwith to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. Such proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VII(§ 4), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-214. Powers and duties of the board of adjustment.
(a)	Administrative review. The board of adjustment may hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the enforcing officer in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)	Special exceptions. The board of adjustment may hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such board is required to pass under this article. In approving a use allowed by special exception, the board of adjustment may impose any of the following special conditions as may be reasonable and necessary, based on specific findings of fact, to mitigate potential negative impacts of the special exception use on neighboring permitted uses in the neighborhood or zoning district: 
(1)	Special setback requirements (to alleviate potential use conflicts, to provide safe isolation distances, or to facilitate traffic access and mobility); 
(2)	Special buffer, landscaping, or fencing requirements (to screen potentially conflicting uses); 
(3)	Special lighting or light shielding requirements (to prevent excessive glare on neighboring properties); 
(4)	Special parking requirements (to address special traffic or parking needs); 
(5)	Special limitations on signage (to enhance or soften the appearance of the proposed use); 
(6)	Special limitations on traffic access points to the property (to prevent traffic congestion and promote proper traffic circulation); 
(7)	Special restrictions on operating hours (to reduce potential use conflicts); 
(8)	Special soundproofing requirements (to prevent potential noise impacts); and 
(9)	Special stormwater management and/or erosion control requirements (to prevent excessive flooding or erosion impacts and/or to protect affected water resources). 
(c)	Variances.
(1)	The board of adjustment may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating all of the following: 
a.	That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
b.	That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter. 
c.	That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicants or the legal owners of the property. 
d.	That granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
(2)	No variance may be granted for a use of land/or building or structure that is not permitted by this chapter. 
(3)	In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 

(4)	The board of adjustment may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which construction work on the improvement for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. 
(d)	Decisions of the board of adjustment. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the enforcing officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect any variation in the application of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VII(§ 5), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-215. Appeals from actions by the board of adjustment.
Any interested party who is aggrieved by any action or decision of the said board of adjustment may make an appeal therefrom as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VII(§ 6), 3-22-2004)
 
Secs. 30-216—30-238. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. AMENDMENTS
 
Sec. 30-239. Procedures.
The regulations and the number, area, and boundaries of districts established by this chapter may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed by the city council, but no amendment shall become effective unless and until it is first submitted to the city planning commission for its recommendation. The planning commission, upon its own initiative, shall hold public hearings, public notice of which shall be provided, for the consideration of any proposed amendment to the provisions of this chapter or to the zoning map, and report its recommendations to the city council. The provisions Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-78, as the same may be amended, shall apply to all changes and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VIII(§ 1), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-240. Authorized petitioners.
A petition for amendment of this chapter or the zoning district boundaries may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or the owner of a property or his agent. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VIII(§ 2), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-241. Petition for amendment.
(a)	A petition for amendment, when initiated by the property owner or authorized agent of such owner, shall meet the application requirements of this section. 
(b)	Any persons, firm, or corporation desiring to petition for rezoning under the authority of this section must present such petition to the enforcement officer in writing, at least 14 days prior to the planning commission hearing. The petition shall be accompanied by the following information and materials: 
(1)	Name, signature, and address of the property owner and agent of the property owner, if any. 
(2)	Address and legal description of the property under consideration, accompanied by a copy of the applicable tax maps clearly identifying the property subject to rezoning. 
(3)	Present and proposed zoning and land use of the property under consideration. 
(4)	Reason for the rezoning request. 
(5)	A site plan, drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing the size and location of the property boundaries, public rights-of-way, and the proposed use and development layout. 
(6)	A certified check, payable to the city in the amount as set by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VIII(§ 3), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-242. Planning commission action.
(a)	Notice of public hearing. Where a zoning amendment or rezoning is petitioned by a property owner, the city clerk shall post, at least six days prior to the date of the scheduled planning commission hearing, a public hearing notice regarding the proposed rezoning in four conspicuous places within the city. The notice shall state the following information: 
(1)	The name of the petitioner. 
(2)	The location of the property and the nature of the petition. 
(3)	The current and proposed zoning and land use of the property. 
(4)	The time, date, and location of the planning commission hearing of the proposed zoning amendment. 
(b)	Scheduling of hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing at the first regularly scheduled meeting after compliance with the application and notice requirements of this section. 
(c)	Planning commission recommendation. The planning commission, by majority vote, shall recommend approval or denial of the requested zoning amendment or rezoning. Once a recommendation has been approved, the planning commission report its recommendations and the findings thereof to the city council. The planning commission report shall be transmitted to the city council within 30 days of the hearing, unless an extension period is granted by the city council. Otherwise, the proposed amendment shall be considered to have been recommended by the planning commission. To obtain an extension period from the city council, the planning commission shall entertain a motion to request such extension, then shall immediately forward such request to the city council for consideration at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VIII(§ 4), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-243. City council action.
(a)	Scheduling of public hearing. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed amendment at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. 
(b)	Public hearing notice. At least 15 days in advance of the passage of the amendment to the zoning ordinance, a notice of a public hearing on the proposed amendment shall be posted in full in four conspicuous places within the city, together with a notice stating the time and place that the amendment is to be considered by the city council and stating further that at such time and place all persons who desire shall have opportunity of being heard in opposition to or in favor of such amendment. The city council shall hold a public hearing at the first regularly scheduled meeting after compliance with the notice requirements of this section. 
(c)	Approval or denial. After the public hearing on a rezoning petition or proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance, the city council shall vote to approve or deny the amendment. Failure by the city council to vote in favor of a proposed amendment shall constitute denial of the amendment without a formal vote. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VIII(§ 5), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-244. Time limit.
After the city council has voted on an application for rezoning or other amendment to the zoning ordinance, another application for rezoning of the same tract or parcel of land, or change of the same portion of the zoning ordinance, will not be considered until a period of one year has elapsed from the date of such action by the city council. Provided, however, that the city council may adjust this time period, if, in the opinion of a majority of the city council, an unusual situation or circumstance exists. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VIII(§ 6), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-245. Initial zoning of annexed property.
(a)	Application for zoning. An application for zoning of property to be annexed shall accompany each petition for annexation. The application for zoning shall be made on a form available from the city clerk and be filed with the city clerk at least ten regular business days prior to the planning commission hearing. The city clerk shall transmit such petition and application to the planning commission, which shall hold a public hearing and give notice of such hearing in accordance with the notice requirements in section 30-242(a). 
(b)	Planning commission action. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing at the first regularly scheduled meeting after submission and acceptance of the application. The planning commission, by majority vote, shall report its recommendations to the city council as to whether the property to be annexed should be brought into the city in the zoning district requested by the applicant or, if the planning commission believes the requested zoning designation to be inappropriate in the R-1 Single-Family Residential zoning district. The planning commission report shall be transmitted to the city council within 30 days of the hearing date, unless the city council grants an extension of such period. Otherwise, the zoning classification requested by the applicant shall be deemed to have been recommended by the planning commission. 
(c)	City council action. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the recommended zoning of the property to be annexed. Such hearing shall not be held until the city council has annexed said property into the city but may be conducted immediately following adoption of the annexation ordinances. The city council shall give public notice of the hearing on the recommended zoning in accordance with section 30-243(b). Following such hearing, the city council shall decide by majority vote to accept or reject the recommended zoning. If the recommended zoning is accepted, such property shall be added to the zoning map. If the recommended zoning is rejected, such ordinances shall be remanded to the planning commission for reconsideration. 
(d)	Planning commission reconsideration. If the city council rejects the zoning recommended by the planning commission, the planning commission, within 30 days following annexation, shall review the zoning of the newly annexed property and, if determined necessary, initiate a petition to rezone the property to the most appropriate district, in accordance with section 30-241. No fee shall be paid by the applicant for any reconsideration and rezoning action by the planning commission conducted in accordance with this subsection. In determining the most appropriate zoning, the planning commission shall duly consider the following minimum items: 
(1)	The city comprehensive plan, as adopted by the planning commission, as well as other relevant land use and planning studies; 
(2)	The desires of the property owner subject to rezoning, as well as concerns of adjacent property owners; 
(3)	The purposes and considerations of zoning, as required by this article and Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-72, as amended. 
(e)	Action on planning commission petition. The planning commission and city council shall act on the planning commission petition to rezone the newly annexed property in accordance with the procedures set forth in sections 30-242 and 30-245. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VIII(§ 7), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-246. Speculative rezonings.
The city discourages the use of rezonings as a strategy to increase speculative land value, where the applicant has no actual or immediate intent to develop in accordance with the rezoning. Rezonings are intended to grant the applicant an opportunity to exercise appropriate alternative development options in situations where development in compliance with existing zoning is not possible or practicable, as long as the proposed uses are consistent with the comprehensive plan and the character of the surrounding area. The granting of this privilege by the city carries with it a good faith expectation that the proposed development will occur in a timely and deliberate manner. Therefore, when the city council grants approval of a rezoning, the applicant should acquire a zoning permit or final plat approval (whichever is applicable) and commence construction activities in compliance with that permit or approval within one year of the date upon which the rezoning is approved. If such actions have not been taken within the specified time frame, the planning commission may initiate actions to further rezone the subject property and/or to reinstate the original zoning classification. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. VIII(§ 8), 3-22-2004)
 
Secs. 30-247—30-270. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. LEGAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 30-271. Conflicting requirements.
In interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community. Where two or more specific requirements in this chapter conflict and this section does not otherwise specify which of the conflicting requirements prevail, then the requirement imposing the higher or greater restriction shall govern. Where other ordinances or regulations which may be adopted hereafter impose greater restrictions than those specified herein, compliance with such other ordinances or regulations is mandatory. Whenever the requirements of this chapter conflict or are in any way inconsistent with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted statutes, rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing higher standards, shall govern, unless otherwise specifically stated in this chapter. No certificate of zoning compliance or plat approval shall be issued or considered valid for any use or activity which is or would be otherwise illegal under the terms of any applicable local, state, or federal law. This section shall not lower the restrictions of plats, deeds, or private contracts, if such are greater than the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IX(§ 1), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-272. Violations and penalties.
Any failure to comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter shall constitute a violation of these regulations under Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-83, as amended. Any such violation shall be punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment of not more than six months, as provided in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-6, as amended. Where such a violation has been confirmed to exist by the enforcement officer, the violation shall be cured in accordance with the administrative procedures outlined in section 30-178. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IX(§ 4), 3-22-2004)
 
Sec. 30-273. Restrictive covenants and bylaws.
A property owner may impose bylaws, covenants, and deed restrictions upon any private property. Once any such bylaws, covenants, and deed restrictions have been recorded, they can be administered only by the owner of the property, and they may be enforced only by private legal action through a court of competent jurisdiction. The city and the city planning commission is in no way liable for and assumes no responsibility to approve, enforce, amend, or administer any duly adopted or recorded bylaws, covenants, and deed restrictions. Furthermore, advance knowledge by the city prior to final plat approval that any such bylaws, covenants, and deed restrictions will be imposed by the landowner shall in no way constitute implied authority or responsibility to approve, enforce, amend, or administer any subsequently adopted or recorded restrictive covenants or bylaws. Finally, no such authority shall be implied by the granting of a zoning permit for any development activity on a property for which special bylaws, covenants, or deed restrictions have been or will be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 0-231-04, art. IX(§ 5), 3-22-2004)

