TITLE 1 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
1. 04 
How Code Designated and Cited 
1. 08 
Rules of Construction 
1. 12 Subheadings of Sections 
1. 16 
Effect of Repeal of ordinances 
1. 20 
Severability of Parts of Code 
1. 24 
Amendments to Code 
1. 28 
Altering Code 
1. 32 
General Penalty 
1. 36 
Referendum Petitions 
CHAPTER 1. 04 
HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED 
Section: 
1. 04.01 
How code designated and cited 
1. 04.01 How code designated and cited. The ordinances embraced in the following
chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated " Clarksville Municipal Code", and may 
be so cited. STATE LAW REFERENCE-See Ark. Stats. 19-2424, et seq. Hdbk. Sec. 571-12, 
et. seq. 
CHAPTER 1. 08 
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION Section: 
1.08.01 Rulesofconstruction 
1.08.01 Rulesofconstruction. Intheconstructionofthiscode, andallordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
REFERENCES: 
STATE LAW REFERENCE: Ark. Stat. refers to the official Arkansas Statutes which are the laws passed by the General Assembly ofthe state of Arkansas. HDBK. Sec. refers to the Handbook for Arkansas Municipal Officials published by the Arkansas Municipal League which in most instances is a verbatim copy of the state law section. 
el' 
CITY. Thewords "thecity" or "thiscity" shallmeanthecityofClarksville, Arkansas. 
CITYCOUNCIL. Wheneverthewords "citycouncil" or "council" areused theyshall be 
construed to mean the city council ofthe city of Clarksville, Arkansas. 
COUNTY. Thewords "thecounty" or "thiscounty" shall meanthecountyofJohnson,
Arkansas. 
GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well as to males. 
MUNICIPALITY. The words " the municipality" or "this municipality" shall mean the 
City of Clarksville. 
NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the 
singular number. 
OATH. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear" and " sworn" shall be equivalent to the words " affirm" and " affirmed". 
OR, AND. 
"Or" mayberead "and", and "and" mayberead "or" ifthesenserequiresit. 
OTHER CITY OFFICIALS OR OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made to officials, 
boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., " 
Mayor, etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the city of Clarksville. 
PERSON. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, 
associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
SIDEWALK. The word " sidewalk" means a strip of land in front or on the side of a house or lot of land lying between the property line and the street. 
STATE. Thewords "thestate" or "thisstate" shallbeconstruedtomeantheStateof Arkansas. 
STREET. The word " street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lines, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or 
present. 
ell 
2­
CHAPTER 1. 12 
SUBHEADINGS OF SECTIONS 
Section: 
1. 12. 01 
Subheadings of sections 
1. 12. 01 Subheadings of sections. The subheadings of sections of this code which are underlined, are intended merely to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the subheadings, are 
amended or reenacted. 
CHAPTER 1. 16 
EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES 
Section: 
1. 16. 01 Effect ofrepeal of ordinances 
1. 16. 01 Effect ofrepeal of ordinances. The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive anyordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for 
an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
CHAPTER 1. 20 
SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE 
Section: 

1. 20.01 
Severability ofparts of code 

1.20.01 Severabilityofpartsofcode. Itisherebydeclared tobetheintentionofthecity 
council that the titles, chapters, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and ifany phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, chapter, title, or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent 
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, 
sentences, paragraphs, chapters, titles and sections ofthis code. 
CHAPTER 1. 24 

AMENDMENTS TO CODE 
Sections: 
1. 24.01 
Amendments to code 
1. 24.01 Amendments to code. All ordinances passed subsequent to this code 
which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code, may be numbered in accordance with the 
numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case ofrepealed titles, 
chapters, sections or subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed 
portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 

Amendment to any of the provisions of this code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number ofthis code in the following language:That section ofthe Clarksville Municipal Code is hereby amended to read as follows: The new provisions may then be set out in full. 
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, the followinglanguage may be used: " That the Clarksville Municipal Code is hereby amended by adding a 
section( or title or chapter) to be numbered 
which said section( or title or chapter) 
reads as follows: . . ." 

The new provisions may then be set out in full. 
All sections, titles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specificallyrepealed by section, title, or chapter number, as the case may be. 
CHAPTER 1. 28 
ALTERING CODE 
Sections: 
1. 28. 01 
Altering code 
1. 28.01 
Altering code. It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by 
additions or deletions, any part or portion ofthis code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance of the City Council, which shall cause the law of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in 
1. 32.01 hereof. 
4­
CHAPTER 1. 32 

GENERAL PENALTY 
Section: 
1. 32. 01 
General penalty 
1. 32. 01 Generalep nally. Whenever in this Municipal Code, the doing of any act or the 
omission to do any act or duty, is declared unlawful, and further, the amount ofthe fine shall not be fixed and no penalty declared, any person convicted for a violation of such provision ofthis 
code, shall beadjudgedtopay afineofnotmore thanFiveHundred ($500.00) Dollars andifthe act is continuous, not more than Two Hundred and Fifty($ 250.00) Dollars for each day of 
continuance. Provided, for any offense committed against the code, for which there is set forth by state law a similar offense, the penalty therefor shall be no less nor greater than that set forth 
by state law. 
STATE LAW REFERENCE-see Ark. Stats. 19-2409-
19-2411; Hdbk. 5-2. 9 -5-2. 11 
CHAPTER 1. 36 
REFERENDUM PETITIONS 
Sections: 
1. 36.01 
Filing date 
1. 36.02 
Notice of hearing 
1. 36.03 
City Council calls election 
1. 36.04 Upon defeat ofordinance 
1. 36.01 Filing date. All referendum petitions under Amendment No. 7 to the Constitution ofthe State ofArkansas, must be filed with the Clerk/Treasurer within thirty days
after the passage of such ordinance. 
1.36.02 Noticeofhearing. WheneveranyreferendumpetitionisfiledtheCityCouncil shall give notice by publication for one insertion of a time not less than five days after the publication of such notice at which they will hear all persons who wish to be heard on the question whether such petition is signed by the requisite number of petitioners. At the time 
named the City Council shall meet and hear all who wish to be heard on the question, and its decision shall be final, unless suit is brought in the chancery court of Johnson County within 
thirty days to review its action. 
5­
111' 
00, 
1. 36. 03 City Council-calls election. Ifthe City Council fi-nds that such petition is signed
by the requisite number ofpetitioners, it may order a special election or place the Question on the Ballot at the next Municipal General Election to determine by vote ofthe qualified electors whether the ordinance shall stand or be revoked. The date for any special election shall be not less than thirty days after the order therefore has been named by the Council, and said specialelections shall be had and conducted as general municipal elections held in the city of
Clarksville. 
1.36.04 Upondefeatofordinance. Ifanyordinancereferredtothepeopleisdefeatedat the polls, the City Council shall make a note of such fact and shall expunge such ordinance from 
its files by erasing the same with red ink. 
STATELAWREFERENCE-seeConst., Amend. No. 7, andArk. Stats. 17-4003.1, 19-2428 ­
19-2430; Hdbk. 5-4.1 -5-4.12. 
Apo, 
6­
S-44 
TITLE 2 CLASSIFICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
2.04 
City Classification 
2.08 City and Ward Boundaries 
2. 12 
Emergency Services 
2. 16 Social Security Coverage 

2.20 Unclaimed Property 
2. 24 
City Council 
2. 28 Mayor 
2.32 Clerk/Treasurer 
2. 36 City Attorney 
2. 40 Fire Department 
2.44 Police Department 
2.48 District Court 
2. 52 
Salaries of City Employees 
2. 56 Airport Commission 

2.60 Light and Water Commission 
0"', 

2.64 Tree Board 
CHAPTER 2.04 
CITY CLASSIFICATION 
Sections: 

2.04.01 Operation as first class city 
2.04.01 Operation as first class city The city shall operate as a city ofthe first class under 
thelawsofthestateofArkansas. STATELAWREFERENCE -SeeA.C.A. 14-37-104; Hdbk. 1­
1. 8 
CHAPTER 2. 08 
CITY AND WARD BOUNDARIES 
Sections: 

2. 08. 01 Map of city 
2. 08. 01 Map of city The boundaries and limits of the city and of the various wards shall be as set forth and described on the official map of the city on file in the office of the 
Clerk/Treasurer. 
PW 
12 
A.• 
Sections: 
2. 12. 01 
2. 12. 01 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
CHAPTER 2. 1.2 
EMERGENCY SERVICES 
Worker' s Compensation benefits for emergency services workers 
Worker' s Compensation benefits for emergency services workers 
Benefits payable for the injury of death of persons appointed and regularly enrolled in accredited emergency services organizations and covered by A.C.A. 12-75-101, 12-75-109, 12-75-106 while actually engaged in emergency service duties, either during training or during a period of emergency and subject to the 
order, or control of,or pursuant to a request of,and under the supervision and 
instruction of the Governor of the state of Arkansas; the State Office of Emergency Services, or the chief executive officer, or the designated Emergency Services Director, or a county of an accredited local government unit making use ofemergency service volunteer workers, shall belimitedtotheprovisionsofthe 
Arkansas Workers' compensation Act, ifsuch persons are regularly employed by a local government or the state of Arkansas, or if such person is a qualified emergency services volunteer worker of the state of Arkansas or an accredited 
local organization for emergency services, recovery shall be limited as hereinafter 
provided. 
The remedy provided herein shall be the exclusive remedy as against the state and 
political subdivisions thereof. 
For the purpose of workers' compensation coverage in cases of injury to or death 
of an individual, all duly registered and qualified emergency services volunteer 
workers shall be deemed local government of state employees and shall receive compensation and their survivors shall receive death benefits in like manner as regular local government or state employees for injury or death arising out of and 
in the course of their activities as emergency services volunteer workers. If a volunteer worker is injured or killed while subject to the order or control of an accredited local government, compensation and benefits shall be charged against the applicable local government' s experience rate and paid from the appropriate 
state workers' compensation fund. Ifthe emergency services volunteer worker 
was under the order of control of a state agency when injured or killed, 
compensation and benefits shall be charged against the experience rate ofthe state 
agency who exercised order or control at the time of injury or death and paid from 
the appropriate state workers' compensation fund. 
For the purpose of subsection( C) of this section, the weekly compensation 
benefits for such emergency services volunteer workers who receive no monetary 
compensation for services rendered as such workers shall be calculated based 
upon the wages received from their 
13 
regular or usual employments, the same as a regular local or state employee, with respecttoinjury, disabilityordeath. ThereimbursementofTwenty-FiveDollars 
25. 00) or less for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in response to an emergency 
situation, such as gasoline, oil, uniforms and required equipment, etc., shall not be construed as monetary compensation for the volunteer worker. 
E. In the event that any person wd to receive benefits through the application of 
subsection( C) of this section receives, in connection with the injury, disability or death giving rise to such entitlement benefits under an Act of Congress or federal program providing benefits for emergency services workers or their survivors, the benefits payable hereunder shall be reduced to the extent of the benefits received 
under such other act or program. Any person who performs the duties of such 
member oftrainee as an adjunct to his regular employment, and who otherwise 
would be entitled to receive Workers' Compensation benefits for his injury, 
disability, or death, if injured in the performance of such duties, shall be deemed to have been injured, disabled or killed in the course of his regular employment. 
F. 	An emergency services volunteer worker shall be deemed duly registered and qualified when he meets the following requirements: When he is a member of and has on file in either an accredited local emergency services organization, or in 
the Office of Emergency Services the following information: 
1. 	
Name and address 

2. 	
Date enrolled 

3. 	
Loyalty oath 

4. 	
Class of service assigned 


G. Payments, death and disability benefits as herein provided shall be made from the 
Compensation revolving fund for state employees. (Acts 1973, No.
Worker' s 
511, Sec. 22, page 1419; 1977, No. 408„ Sec. 6, page 855; 1981, No. 891, Sec. 5, 

page 2067.) 
CHAPTER 2. 16 
SOCIAL SECURITY COVERAGE 
Sections: 
2. 16.01 Contract 
2.16.02 Withholding taxes from wages 
2. 16.03 City to match withholding 
2.16.01	Contract TheCityClerkofthecityofClarksville, Arkansas, ishereby
authorized and directed to enter into a compact with the authorized state agency to extend Social Security coverage to the officers and employees of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, except the 
Aldermen, members of the Fire Department. ( Ord. No. 395,
following officers and employees: 
Sec. l.) 
2.16.02Withholdingtaxesfromwages TheCityClerkofthecityofClarksville, Arkansas, is further authorized and directed to deduct and withhold Social Security taxes or payments fromthewages and salariesoftheofficials andemployeesofthecityofClarksville, Arkansas; except no deductions shall be made from those officials and employees that are not 
covered by Social Security. (Ord. No. 395, Sec. 2.) 
2. 16. 03 City to match withholding The City Clerk is further authorized and directed to 
match the amount withheld from the officers and employees with an equal amount from the General Fund ofthe city of Clarksville, Arkansas, and remit the total and necessary amount to 
for further remittance to the Federal Security Administrator. (Ord. 
the authorized state agency 
No. 395, Sec. 3.) 
CHAPTER 2.20 
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 
2. 20. 01  Disposal  
2. 20. 02  Sale  
2.20. 03  Proceeds of sale to owner  
2. 20. 04  Proceeds remaining after six months  

2.20.01 Disposal The Police Chief,under the direction hereinafter set out, is hereby 
authorized and directed to dispose of at public auction all unclaimed personal property rightfully coming into the hands of his office and to dispose of other confiscated property confiscated under the orders of the City Court with the exception of confiscated liquor. 
STATE LAW REFERENCE -For procedure relating to liquor, See A.C.A. 3-3-312 
2.20.02 Sale All unclaimed personal property coming into the hands ofthe Police Chief will be held by him for a period of six( 6) weeks or longer. Ifproperty remains unclaimed, he shall periodically advertise such property in some newspaper of general circulation in the city 
once each week for three (3) consecutive weeks setting forth in the notice the time for the sale which shall not be earlier than five( 5) days after the last publishing of the notice and no later than ten( 10) days thereafter, designating an easily accessible place for the sale thereof, and giving a complete list and description of unclaimed articles to be sold. The Police Chief shall have the right to refuse any and all bids not satisfactory and will then proceed to advertise these items for sale at a later date. Terms of such sale shall be for cash only. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person who properly identifies any of the property as being their own before 
the sale from claiming and having property restored to them. 
S-36 
2.20.03 Proceeds of sale to owner The Police Chief shall deposit the receipt from the aforesaid sale of unclaimed property in the treasury and the Treasurer is to keep these funds in a specialaccountfor aperiodofsix (6)monthsandanypersonidentifyingashisownanyofsuch property within the six( 6) month period shall upon the presentation of satisfactory proof be paidby the city out ofthe special account the amount for which the property was sold. The Police 
Chief or some person designated by him shall keep in a well bound book an accurate record and description of each piece of unclaimed property passing through his office and the price for which it was sold and the date, the name and address ofthose who purchased same, as well as a complete record ofthose who identified and claimed any of the property before it was sold. 
2 20 04 Proceeds remaining after six months All proceeds from the sale remaining in the special fund for a period ofsix( 6) months shall by the Treasurer be transferred to the city's general fund and no further payment shall be made therefrom to anyone who thereafter claims 
ownership. 
CHAPTER 2. 24 
CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
2. 24.01  Council meetings -regular  
2. 24.02  Council meetings- special  
2.24.03  Freedom of information procedure  
2. 24.04  Order of business  

2 24 01 Council meetings_—regular The regular meeting of the Council shall be held at the Municipal Building on the second Monday of each month. 
2 40 02 Council meetings-special Special meetings ofthe Council may be held upon 
the call of the Mayor, or by any three members of the City Council by giving notice in 
accordancewiththeprovisionsoftheArkansasFreedom ofInformation as setforthin 2.24.03. 
Ord. No. 2001-427, Sec. 1.) 
2 24 03 Freedom of information procedure All meetings of the City Council shall be public meetings. Notice ofthe time, place and date of all special meetings shall be given to representatives of the newspapers and radio stations located in Johnson County, Arkansas, which have requested to be notified at least two (2) hours before the special meeting takes place. 
2.24.04 Orderofbusiness AtallmeetingsoftheCouncilthefollowingshallbetheorder 
of business unless the Council by a majority vote shall order otherwise. 
1. 
Call to order 

2. 
Roll call 

3. 
Approval of agenda and minutes of the previous meeting 

4. 
Old business 

5. 
New business 

6. 
Reports 

7. 
Adjournment 


CHAPTER 2. 28 
MAYOR 
Sections: 


2.28.01 Office created 
2.28.02 Election 
2. 28. 03 Duties 
2. 28. 04 Appointment of officers 

2.28.05 Salary 
2.28.01 Office created The office ofMayor is hereby created. 
2.28.02 Election On the Tuesday following the first Monday in November, 1978 and 
every four( 4) years thereafter, the qualified voters ofthe city of Clarksville, Arkansas, shall 

elect a Mayor for four( 4) years. 
2.28.03 Duties Aschiefexecutiveofthecity,theMayorshallpresideoverallmeetings 
of the City Council, and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by state statute or 
city ordinance. 
2 28 04 Appointment of officers The Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the City 
Council (where such approval or confirmation is required) all officers of the city whose election 
or appointment is not provided for by state statute or city ordinance. 
2.28.05Salary The rateofpayoftheMayorshallbedeterminedbyordinanceoftheCityCouncil from time to time in a manner that will comply with the Arkansas Constitution. 
CHAPTER 2.32 
CLERK/TREASURER 

Sections: 
2. 32.01  Offices combined  
2. 32. 02  Bond  
2. 32. 03  Compensation  
2.32.04  Duties  
2. 32.05  Collector  

2.32.01 Offices combined The offices ofCity Clerk and City Treasurer are hereby combined into one office to be known as the Clerk/Treasurer. 
2.32.02 Bond The Clerk/Treasurer shall give bond to the city in the amount required by state law to guarantee faithful performance of his duties. 
STATE LAW REFERENCE. A.C.A. 19-1-401 
232.03Compensation ThesalaryoftheClerk/Treasurershall besetbytheCityCouncil. 
STATE LAW REFERENCE -Constitutional Amendment No. 56 
2.32.04 Duties The duties ofthe Clerk/Treasurer shall be: 
A. 	To keep an accurate and complete record of the finances of the different 
departments of the city and of the receipts and disbursements of funds belonging to the different departments ofthe city, as designated by the City Council. 
B. 	To perform such other duties as may be required by the ordinances ofthe city or 
laws of the State. 
C. 	The Clerk/Treasurer shall meet with the City Council at its firsts meeting of said Council in each month and give a financial statement of the different departments at that time if so requested by the Council. 
2.32.05Collector TheClerk/Treasurershallbethecollectorofalloccupationaland privilege taxes and other taxes for the city. The Clerk/Treasurer shall keep records on all occupational and other taxes and moneys collected. 
CHAPTER 2.36 
CITY ATTORNEY 


Sections:  
2. 36.01  Elected  
2.36.02  Duties  
2. 36.03  Salary  

2.36.01 Elected The City Attorney shall be elected at the November, 1982 General Election and every four (4) years thereafter to a four( 4) year term commencing the next following January 1. 
2.36.02 Duties ItshallbethedutyoftheCityAttorneytoprosecuteallcasesinthe District Court for violation of the city ordinances, and to prosecute and defend, as the case mayrequire, for the city all cases in which the city may be interested, whether civil or criminal, in all 
the court, state and federal. 
2.36.03 Salary The rateofpayoftheCityAttorneyshallbedeterminedbytheCity Council from time to time in a manner that will comply with the Arkansas Constitution. 
CHAPTER 2. 40 
FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.40.01 Creation and personnel 
2.40.02 Appointment and removal ofFire Chief 

2.40.03 Duties ofFire Chief 
2.40.04 Compensationofvolunteerfirefighters 
2.40.05 Registrationofvolunteerfirefighters 
2.40.06 Firefighters' Pension and ReliefFund 
2 40 01 Creation and personnel The Clarksville Fire Department is hereby created and shallconsistofthefollowingpersonnel: OneFireChiefandanynumberofvolunteer firefighters as the Mayor and Council shall determine as necessary from time to time. 
40 Appointment and removal of Fire Chief The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayorunlessappointmentisdisapprovedbyatwo-thirds(2/3) voteoftheCouncilmembership.Such Fire Chief shall be subject to removal by the Mayor unless removal is overruled by the City Councilbyatwo-thirds(2/3) voteoftheCouncilmembership. 
2.40.03DutiesofFireChief TheFireChiefshallbetheheadofthedepartmentandshall be fully responsible for the operation and the equipment ofthe department.  It shall be his duty to 
determine all matters in connection with the operation of the department except the expenditure of city funds. He shall make periodic reports to the City Council showing the names of paid
firefighters, number of hours on duty, the condition of the equipment of the department, and such other matters as shall be determined necessary by resolution or ordinance of the City Council. 
2 40 04 Compensation for volunteer firefighters The volunteer firefighters shall be paidfor such services as they render based upon the number of calls answered. The Chief shall attend all City Council meetings for the purpose of furnishing any information required by the City 
Council. 
2 40 05 Registration of volunteer firefighters All volunteer firefighters shall be registeredwith the Fire Chief and their names, addresses and phone numbers shall be posted in the Fire 
Department and also on file with the Clerk/Treasurer. Such lists shall be kept up to date by the 
Fire Chief. 
2 40 06 Firefighters' Pension and Relief Fund The City Council shall, on or before the time fixed by law for levying county taxes, make out and certify to the County Clerk the rate of
taxation levied by the city on the real and personal property within the city, not to exceed one( 1)
mill on the dollar of the assessed value, for the purpose of paying pensions to retired firemen, and pensions to widows and minor children of deceased firemen and widows and minor children of deceased retired firemen, as provided by law. The City Council shall make the rate of taxation, not to exceed one ( 1) mill on the dollar of the assessed value of the real and personal 
property within the city, sufficient to raise and provide such amount of money as the Board of 
0' 	Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension and Relief Fund certifies to the City Council will be required to pay pensions to widows and minor children of deceased firemen and widows and 
minor children of deceased retired firemen, for the following year. Ifthe amount certified to the City Council by the Board of Trustees is more than a levy of one ( 1) mill will produce, the City
Councilshallmakethe fulllevyofone (1) mill. AllmembersoftheFireDepartment,whether past, present or future and whether they be paid, part paid or volunteer firefighters, their widows and minor children who meet the requirements established by the laws ofthe state for such 
eligibility, shall be included in the estimate of the amount of money required to pay pensions,
which said Board is required to submit to the City Council, and all persons eligible to receive 
such benefits shall be entitled to receive them. 
This code shall at all times conform to state law governing the Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund and any amendment to such state law shall automatically amend this code to assure 
compliance with state law. 
24-11-822; Amend. 31, Ark. Const.
STATE LAW REFERENCE -See A.C.A. 24-11-801 -
20 
S-46 
CHAPTER 2. 44 
POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sections: 
2. 44.01  Established  
2. 44. 02  Duties of Police Chief  
2.44. 03  Fees  

2.44.01 Established The city hereby establishes a Police Department which shall be known as the Clarksville Police Department and the duties thereof shall be to maintain police protection and police services within the city of Clarksville. 
2.44.02 DutiesofPoliceChiefThePoliceChiefshallbetheheadofthedepartmentand shall be fully responsible for the operation and the equipment of the department. It shall be his 
duty to determine all matters in connection with the operation of his department, except the expenditure of city funds therein. He shall attend the first Council meeting of the month and make his monthly report to the City Council concerning the operations and equipment of the department and such other matters as shall be determined necessary by ordinance ofthe CityCouncil. Other duties shall be such as are fixed by the laws of the state and ordinances of the 
city. 
2.44.03 Fees The Clarksville Chief ofPolice is hereby authorized to charge the same fees as those allowed the sheriffs of the several counties of the state of Arkansas as set out in 
A.C.A. 21-6-307forthe service andreturnofthecourtorders setfortherein. (Ord.No. 201.) 
CHAPTER 2. 48 
DISTRICT COURT 
Sections: 

2.48.01 District Court established 
2.48.02 Qualifications and powers ofDistrict Judge 
Corporation court
2. 48. 03 
2. 48. 04 Levy of fines 
S-46 
2.48.01 DistrictCourtestablished The cityofClarksvilleshallenterintoanagreementwith other cities situated in Johnson County, Arkansas, for the establishment of a District Court 
amended by Act 1354 of 1999. ( Ord. No. 99-397, Sec. 1.) 
pursuanttoA.C.A. 16-17-403(A) as 
2 48 02 Qualifications and powers of District Judge The agreement shall provide that the court shall be presided over by a District Judge to be elected by the voters ofthe entire 
county of Johnson County, Arkansas. ( Ord. No. 99-397, Sec. 2.) 
2 48 03 Corporation court After the passage of this ordinance and the execution of such agreements, then there shall be established in the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, a corporation 
court to be styled the District Court of Clarksville, Arkansas. ( Ord. No. 99-397, Sec. 3.) 
2.48.04 Levy of fines 
A. 	PursuanttoAct209of2009oftheGeneral Assemblyofthestate ofArkansas, an 
additional fineofTwentyDollars($ 20.00) shallbelevied andcollectedfrom each 
defendant who pleads guilty of nolo contendere, is found guilty of,or forfeits bond for any misdemeanor or traffic violation in the District Court within the city of Limits of the city of Clarksville, Johnson County, Arkansas. 
B. 	The additional fine levied by the city under this ordinance shall be deposited into a special fund within the City Treasury, and the revenues generated by the additional fine shall be used exclusively to help defray the cost of incarcerating 
city prisoners. 
C. 	The additional fine levied by the city under this ordinance shall apply to each charge, count, violation, or offense that a defendant pleads guilty or nolo contendere to, is found guilty of,or forfeits bond for, including each misdemeanor 
or traffic violation. ( Ord. No. 2010-602, Secs. 1-3.) 
21. 1 
CHAPTER 2. 52 

elk 
SALARIES OF CITY EMPLOYEES 
Sections: 
2.52.01 Includes pay for holidays 
2 52 01 Includes pay for holidays The appropriations made by the City Council for 
salaries shall include additional pay for holidays for all agents, servants and employees of the city, including but not limited to, uniformed employees as provided by the laws of the state of 
Arkansas. 
CHAPTER 2. 56 
AIRPORT COMMISSION 
0r• Sections: 
Created Appointments 
2. 56. 01 
2. 56.02 
Compensation

2.56.03 
Removal
2. 56.04 

2.56.05 Authority 
Revenue Additional powers 
2. 56.06 
2. 56.07 
Rules and regulations
2. 56. 08 Records and reports2. 56.09 
S-44 
2.56. 10  Budget preparation  
2. 56. 11  Meetings  
2. 56. 12  Employee benefits authorized  

2.56.01 Created There is hereby created a Commission to be known as the Clarksville Municipal Airport Commission to be composed of seven( 7) members. The members of the CommissionshallberesidentsofthecityofClarksville. However,theCityCouncilofthecity
of Clarksville may waive the residency requirement by a simple majority vote. At least three ( 3)
of the Commission members shall be fully experienced in aviation, maintaining some type of 
aeronautical rating. (Ord. No. 416, Sec. 1.) 
Of the two additional members first appointed in 2008, one shall have a term of four( 4)years and one shall have a term of five (5) years. Thereafter, their successors shall have a five 5) year term. (Ord. No. 2008-561, Sec. 1.) 
2.56.02 Appointments Said Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmedby athree-fourths (3/4) voteoftheduly elected andqualified membersoftheCity
Council and shall hold office for a term of five( 5) years; provided, however, that the Commissioners first appointed and confirmed after the passage of this act shall serve for terms of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 years each, to be designated by the Mayor and thereafter upon the expiration of theirrespective terms, their successors shallbeappointed andconfirmedfor atermoffive (5) 
years. ( Ord. No. 416, Sec. 2.) 
2.56.03 Compensation The City Council shall have authority to fix and prescribe the salaries to be paid to said Commissioners; provided, however, that unless and until the CityCouncil has made such a provision for their services. The Commissioners shall take and file the 
oathrequiredbylawinthestateofArkansas. (Ord.No. 416, Sec. 3.) 
2.56.04 Removal AnyCommissionerappointedbytheprovisionofthisordinancemay beremovedforcauseuponathree-fourths (2/4) voteofthedulyelectedandqualifiedmembers 
ofthe City Council. (Ord. No. 416, Sec. 4.) 
2.56.05 Authority The Commissioners hereinunder appointed shall have full and complete authority to manage, operate, improve, extend and maintain the municipal airport, its 
related properties and facilities, and shall have full and complete charge of said airport, its 
related properties and facilities, including the right to 
23 
employ or remove any and all assistants and employees of whatsoever nature, kind or character
and to fix, regulate and pay their salaries, it being the intention of this ordinance to vest in said 
commissioners unlimited authority to operate, manage, maintain, improve and extend said municipally owned airport, its related properties, and to have full and complete charge thereof. 
Ord. No. 416, Sec. 5.) 
2.56.06 RevenueAllrevenuederivedfromtheoperationofsuchairportor flyingfield, after paying the operating expenses and maintenance, shall be set aside and used for additional
improvements on such airport or flying field or for the retirement of any debt and interest,
(Ord. No. 416, Sec. 
incurred for the purchase and improvement of such airport or flying field. 
6.) 
2 56 07 Additional powers The Commission shall in addition to the above enumerated 
powers, have such other and further powers as are now by law given to the Board of Public 
Affairs and the City Council of any first class city, and they shall be governed by all existing

(Ord. No. 415, Se. 
statutes pertaining to the duties of Board of Public Affairs and City Council. 
7.) 
2 56 08 Rules and regulations The Commissioners shall adopt such rules and regulations as they may deem necessary and expedient for the proper operation and management of said 
municipal airport, its related properties and facilities and shall have authority to alter, change, or amend such rules and regulations at their discretion. Said Commissioners shall comply or cause to be complied with all civil air regulations of federal and state government to air worthiness of aircraft, certification of aircraft, and operation of aircraft. They shall protect all the aerial 
approaches to the airport in so far as it comes within their jurisdiction. ( Ord. No. 416, Sec. 8.) 
2 56 09 Records and reports Said Commissioners shall keep a record of all revenues and expenditures ofthe airport, its related properties and facilities and shall submit monthly reports to the Mayor and City Council. It shall be the duty of the airport Commissioners to prepare and 
file an annual report of the financial affairs and conditions of such municipal airport, its related 
15th 
properties and facilities, annually by the day of January and the 1St Monday in February 
thereafter; the said report shall be filed in the office of the Clerk or Recorder of such municipality, and shall be subject to the inspection of any citizen of the state. The report shall 
set out a full detailed, complete and current statement of all receipts of every kind since the last preceding report, showing the sources thereof, and all disbursements of every kind showing date,
amount, number and purposes of each voucher, to whom-issued and the date canceled, if canceled. Said report shall show the full financial condition ofthe airport, its related properties and facilities and the status of its bonded debt, if any, and of every other detail necessary to a full and thorough understanding from such report, of the actual financial condition of such municipal airport. The report shall be certified by the Airport Board 
S-32 
of Commissioners. The Commissioners shall also furnish such other and further reports, data 
be requested by the Mayor or City Council. (Ord. No. 416, Sec. 9.) 
and information as may 
2.56. 10 Budgetpreparation TheBoardofCommissionersshall submittothecity annually before the city prepares its budget, the amount of funds necessary for maintenance,
operation and management, of the municipal airport, its related properties and facilities, above 
the estimated revenue and the funds remaining on hand. ( Ord. No. 416, Sec. 10.) 
2.56.11 Meetings ThesaidBoardofCommissionersshall meetatleastmonthly,but other meetings may be held at any time by the Board or upon the call of the Mayor and City 
Council. ( Ord. No. 416, Sec. 11.) 
2 56 12 Employee benefits authorized The Commissioners are hereby authorized but not required to provide a plan for Social Security, old age pension and/ or retirement pay for part of 
all employees of said airport and flying field, its related properties and facilities. (Ord. No. 416, 
Sec. 12.) 
CHAPTER 2.60 
LIGHT AND WATER COMMISSION 
Sections: 
Clarksville Light and Water Commission of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas," and hereafter in 
2. 60.01  Created  
2. 60.02  Authority  
2.60.03  Powers; limitations  
2. 60.04  Bond funds  
2. 60.05  Removal of Commissioners; vacancies  
2.60.06  Compensation  
2.60. 01  Created There is hereby created a Commission to be designated as the  

Commission,"tobecomposedoffive (5) dulyqualified resident
this ordinance referred to as" 
electors of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, and from and after the passage of this ordinance, to 
consist of Ted Riley, whose term will expire Dec. 31, 1967; T.L. Smith, whose term will expireDec. 31, 1968; Kenneth King, whose term will expire Dec. 31, 1969; R.P. Walton, whose term will expire Dec. 31, 1970; Phil Taylor, whose term will expire Dec. 31, 1971. 
Beginning with Dec. 31, 1967, the City Council shall appoint one Commissioner each yearforatermoffive (5) years, andeachCommissionershall serveuntilhissuccessoris appointed. The Commissioners shall on Dec. 31, of each year, elect from their 
number a chairman and a secretary. No chairman shall serve two (2) years in succession. The 
Commission shall adopt rules for their meetings, and in event of any disagreement, the 
Commissioners shall control. ( Ord. No. 462, Sec. 1.) 
concurrence of three ( 3) 
2.60.02 Authority TheCommissionisherebyplacedinfullchargeand authorityofthe municipal electric system and water and sewer plants, with the power to operate and maintain them and to exercise all power necessary or incidental to the management, operation and control of the properties for the furnishing of water and electricity and the collection and treatment of 
sewage for the inhabitants of the city of Clarksville. ( Ord. No. 357.) 
2 60 03 Powers; limitations The Commission may from time to time make such enlargements of the plants and such extensions of the service thereof as may be necessary to serve the residents of said city with electric light, power, and water, but it shall not have the 
power to increase rates for such services without the approval of the City Council nor shall it 
have power to issue any revenue bonds or revenue notes. ( Ord. No. 357, Sec. 3.) 
Each year, after its annual audit report, the Commission shall present to the City Council a summary of its financial condition. The revenue produced and cost of service delivered by
each ofthe three departments shall be outlined in this report. Indications for any recommended 
rate adjustments shall be presented. ( Ord. No. 2002-447, Sec. 1.) 
2.60.04 Bond funds The Commission shall make provision, by creation of special fund 
for the payment of principal and interest of any revenue bonds issued by the city on behalf ofthe utility. It shall then determine the amount necessary and advisable to be set aside for the
reasonable and efficient operation of the plants. After provision for payment of bonds and interest and operation, the Commission shall set aside a reasonable sum for maintenance of the plants and for the depreciation account. Funds remaining after such provisions shall be considered as net revenues and may be used as necessary for the extension, improvement, and 
enlargement of the plants and distribution systems and may be held as reserve funds to be used for any purpose as authorized in Section 2.60.02 herein, or as may be expressly authorized by the 
City Council. ( Ord. No. 357, Sec. lc) 
2.60.05 Removal of Commissioners Vacancies in the event that the Commission or anymember thereof shall attempt to exercise their powers in a harmful manner, the Council shall have the right to conduct a hearing, and if it finds the charges to be true, ifmay remove such Commissionerbyatwo-thirds (2/3) voteofthetotalnumberofthemembersoftheCouncil, and 
shall appoint a new Commissioner to serve the unexpired balance of such Commissioner' s term. 
26 
S-39 
The Council shall have the power to fill any vacancy caused by the death, resignation or inability to serve of any Commissioner, by appointing a new Commissioner to serve the 
(Ord. No. 357.)
unexpired balance of such terms. 
2 60.06 Compensation No member ofthe Commission shall receive any compensation of any kind, including salary, benefits, services or property, but in the event that any member of 
the Commission shall incur any expense in the performance of this duties as a Commissioner, such expense may be allowed by approval of the Commission as a part of the cost of operation 
and paid out of the revenues of the systems. ( Ord. No. 357, Sec. 1.) 
CHAPTER 2.64 
TREE BOARD 
Sections: 
Definitions
2.64. 01 
2.64.02 Creation and establishment of a City Tree Board 

2.64.03 Termofoffice 
2.64.04 Compensation 
2.64.05 Duties andresponsibilities 
2.64.06 Operation 
2.64.07 Public tree care 
2.64.01 Definitions 
Street trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city. 
Park trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city or to which the public has 
free access as a park. (Ord. No. 220, Sec. 1.) 
2 64 02 Creation and establishment of a City Tree Board There is hereby created and established aCity Tree BoardforthecityofClarksville,Arkansas, whichshallconsistoffive (5)
members, citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the 
approvaloftheCouncil. (Ord.No. 220, Sec. 2.) 
2.64.03 TermofofficeThetermofthefive(5)personstobeappointedbytheMayorshallbethree (3) yearsexceptthatthetermoftwo (2) ofthemembers appointedtothefirst 
Boardshallbeforonlyone (1) yearandthetermoftwomembersofthefirstBoardshallbefor 
two (2)years. Ineventthatavacancyshalloccur duringthetermofanymember,hissuccessor 
shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the terms. ( Ord. No. 220, Sec. 3.) 
o 27 
S-31 
2.64.02 Creation and establishment of a City Tree Board There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, which shall consist of five( 5)
members, citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the 
approval of the Council. (Ord. No. 220, Sec. 2.) 
2.64.03 Term ofoffice The term ofthe five( 5) persons to be appointed by the Mayorshallbethree( 3) yearsexceptthatthetermoftwo (2) ofthemembersappointedtothefirst Board shall be for only one ( 1) year and the term of two members of the first Board shall be for 
two (2)years. Intheevent thatavacancyshall occurduringthetermofanymember,his 
shall be appointed for the unexpired portion ofthe term. ( Ord. No. 220, Sec. 3.) 
successor 
27. 1 
S-39 
Members ofthe Board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 
eation

2.64.04 Compn 
No. 220, Sec. 4.) 
2 64 05 Duties and responsibilities It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study,investigate, counsel and develop and/ or update annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in 
parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the City 
Council and upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city of Clarksville, state of Arkansas. The Board, when requested by the City
Council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special 
matter of question coming within the scope of its work. ( Ord. No. 220, Sec. 5.) 
2 64.06 Operation The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum 
for the transaction ofbusiness. ( Ord. No. 220, Sec. 6.) 
2.64.07 Public tree care The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The City Tree Board may remove or cause or
order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason 
of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public
( Ord. No. 220, Sec.
injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
improvements or is affected with any 
7.) 
S-46 
TITLE 3 
FISCAL AFFAIRS 
Chapters: 
3. 04 	Purchases 
CHAPTER 3.04 
PURCHASES 
Sections: 
3. 04. 01 Authority of Mayor 

3.04.02 20,000orunder 
3.04.03 Competitive bidding 
3.04.01 AuthorityofMayor TheMayororhisdulyauthorizedrepresentativeshallhave 
the exclusive power and responsibility to make purchases of all supplies, apparatuses, equipment, materials, and other things required for public purposes in and for the city and to make all necessary contracts for work and labor to be done or material or other necessary things 
to be furnished for the benefit of the city, or in carrying out any work or undertaking of a public 
nature thereof. (Ord. No. 2010-619, Sec. 1.) 
3.04.02 $20,000 orunder TheMayororhisdulyauthorizedrepresentativeshallnotbe required to invite competitive bidding for making purchases which do not exceed the sum of 
TwentyThousandDollars ($20,000.00). ( Ord.No. 2010-619, Sec. 2.) 
3.04.03 Competitivebidding Wheretheamountofexpenditureforanypurposeor 
contract exceeds the sum ofTwenty Thousand Dollars($ 20,000.00), the Mayor or his duly 
authorized representative shall invite competitive bidding thereon by legal advertisement in any 
local newspaper. 
A. 	Bids received pursuant to the advertisement shall be opened and read on the date set for receiving the bids in the presence ofthe Mayor or his duly authorized 
representative. 
S-46 
B. 	The Mayor or his duly authorized representative shall have exclusive power to award the bid to the lowest responsible bidder, but may reject any and all bids 
received. 
C. 	The City Council, by ordinance, may waive the requirements of competitive bidding in exceptional situations where the procedure is deemed not favorable or 
practical. (Ord. No. 2010-619, Sec. 3.) 
S-50 
TITLE 4 
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 

Chapters: 
4. 04  Electric Privileges  
4. 08  Gas Privileges  
4. 12  Telephone Privileges  
4. 16  Cable Television  
4.20  Tax on Private Clubs  
4. 22  Net Metering  
4. 24  Dealer in Used Articles  
4. 28  Business Permit  
4. 32  Wireless Communication Facilities  

CHAPTER 4.04 
ELECTRIC PRIVILEGES Sections: 
4.04.01 Electric privileges granted to Arkansas Valley Electric Cooperative Corp. 
4.04.02 RightsandresponsibilitiesofGrantorandGrantee 
4.04.03 RightsandresponsibilitiesofGrantorandGrantee 
4.04.04 Termination procedure 
4.04.05 Rights of Grantee 
4.04.06 Rates 
4.04.07 City not liable for negligence of Grantee 
4.04.08 Franchise tax 
4.04.09 In lieu of other payments 
4.04. 10 Contract 
4.04. 11 Electric privileges granted to Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company 

4.04. 12 Rights and responsibilities of Grantor and Grantee 
4.04. 13 Rights and responsibilities ofGrantor and Grantee 
4.04. 14 Termination procedure 
4. 04. 15 Rights of Grantee 
4.04. 16 Rates 
4. 04. 17 City not liable for negligence of Grantee 
4.04. 18 Franchise tax 
4. 04. 19 Contract 
4.04.20 Electric rates for Clarksville Light and Water Company 
4.04.21 Fuel Adjustment Clause 
S-39 
4 04 01 Electric privileges granted to Arkansas Valley Electric Cooperative Corp The cityofClarksville, Arkansas, (hereaftercalledGrantor) hereby grantstoArkansasValley 
Electric Cooperative Corporation, its successors and assigns (hereinafter called Grantee), the 
exclusive right, privilege and authority within that portion of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, 
that is presently served by Grantee pursuant to the authority granted by the Arkansas Public Service Commission( 1) to sell, furnish, transmit and distribute electric power and energy to all inhabitants and consumers within said limits, and( 2) to construct, maintain and operate a system for such purposes and to enter on, under and upon and use any and all of the streets, alleys, avenues, bridges and other public grounds and ways within said areas belonging to, or under the control of Grantor for the maintenance and operation of facilities and appliances necessary for the sale, transmission and distribution of said electric service ( hereinafter called facilities). Provided, however, that nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to preclude or limit the right of the city of Clarksville to establish and extend its own electrical facilities so as to 
sell, furnish, transmit and distribute electric power and energy to the inhabitants of said areas and portions of the city of Clarksville covered by this ordinance regardless of whether same might 
lessen the profits of Grantee or destroy the value of its investment in such areas; and provided 
further that the right and privilege granted hereby shall be subject to the vested right of the city 
of Clarksville to acquire the property, system and facilities of Grantee used or useful for the 
convenience of the public in such areas within the city of Clarksville upon ninety( 90) days' notice for just compensation and damages, including severance damages, if any, under the terms and conditions of purchase determined by the Arkansas Public Service Commission ifthe parties 
shall be unable to agree on terms or conditions of sale. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to grant to the Grantee any right or privilege to sell electricity at retail in any area within the city of Clarksville in which the Grantee was not providing such service prior to the 
passage ofthis ordinance and no extension or expansion of such services or facilities shall be 
made by Grantee without the approval of Grantor. ( Ord. No. 96, Sec. 1.) 
4 04 02 Rights and responsibilities of Grantor and Grantee Grantee shall, and does by 
acceptance hereof, agree to provide for the city and its inhabitants within said areas, adequate 
and reasonable electric service as a public utility and consents to a future purchase of its property 
actually used and useful for the convenience ofthe public in said areas by the city of Clarksville 
as provided by Act 324 of the 1935 Acts of the General Assembly of the state of Arkansas. 
Ord. No. 96, Sec. 2.) 
4 04 03 Rights and responsibilities of Grantor and Grantee All facilities of Grantee 
which may be located on public property, as authorized herein, shall be located so as to not 
unreasonably obstruct public use and travel. Grantee' s facilities and operations shall at all time 
meet the standards prescribed by the National Electrical Safety Code, and Grantee shall observe 
all ordinances of the city of Clarksville. Grantee shall promptly replace or repair all damages to 
public property caused by its operations hereunder without loss or expense thereby to Grantor 
Ord. No. 96, Sec. 3) 
4.04.04 Termination procedure The rights, privileges and authority hereby granted shall continuefrom the dateofpassageofthisordinance, andthereafter, untilterminated in accordance with provisions of Section 44 of Act 324 ofthe 1935 Acts of the state of Arkansas 
A.C.A. 14-200-103. ( Ord. No. 96, Sec. 4) 
4.04.05 Rights of Grantee Grantee is hereby given the right to trim, cut and remove trees, shrubbery or growth on or in public property which interfere or offer hazards to the 
operation of Grantee' s facilities used or useful for the rendition of electric service hereunder. Ord. No. 96, Sec. 4.) 
4.04.06 Rates The rates which are to be charged by Grantee for electric service to retail 
customers hereunder shall be those which are now lawfully approved or prescribed, and as said rates may, from time to time, be amended in accordance with law or by any regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof. (Ord. No. 96, Sec. 5) 
4 04 07 City not liable for negligence of Grantee Grantee shall indemnity the Grantor against any damage or injury to persons or property arising from the operation of Grantee and 
shall hold and save harmless the Grantor from any damage, injury, loss or expense caused by the negligence ofthe Grantee or its agents, servants or employees, in constructing, operating and maintaining said facilities or in repairing or replacing any streets, avenues, alleys, bridges or 
other public grounds. (Ord. No. 396, Sec. 7) 
4.04.08 Franchise tax Beginning April 1, 1981, and thereafter during the life ofthis franchise, the Grantee shall pay to the city of Clarksville each quarter, a franchise or privilege tax 
in an amount equal to: Four percent( 4%) ofthe preceding quarter's gross residential, commercial 
and industrial electric revenues as paid to the Grantee by residential, commercial and industrial customers located within the areas ofthe city of Clarksville served by Grantee. Residential, commercial and industrial electric revenues are those revenues so classified pursuant to Grantee' s uniform classification standards. Grantor shall have the right to examine and verify, from the records ofthe Grantee, any data relating to the gross revenues of Grantee from customers on which said franchise tax is due. In the event of a controversy between the Grantor and Grantee as to the amount of gross revenues received by Grantee in the city of Clarksville upon which said tax is due, Grantor shall have the option to refer said controversy to the Arkansas Public Service Commission, or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction of Grantee, 
or to pursue any and all other legal and equitable remedies available to Grantor. ( Ord. No. 96, 
Sec. 8.) 
4.04.09 InlieuofotherpantsSaidtaxshallbepaidinlieuofallothertaxes, licenses, charges, fees or impositions except general license or permit fees, special millage taxes, general ad valorem taxes and other general taxes or fees applicable to all citizens, taxpayers and business enterprises. Provided, that nothing 
herein shall be construed as an abandonment, relinquishment or waiver ofthe taxing authority of the city of Clarksville under the laws ofthe state of Arkansas. ( Ord. No. 96, Sec. 9.) 
4.04. 10 Contract Upon written acceptance by Grantee, this ordinance shall constitute a 
contract between Grantor and the Grantee, and its successors and assigns. ( Ord. No. 96, Sec. 
10.) 
4 04 11 Electric privileges granted to Oklahoma Gas and Electric Comnany The city of Clarksville, Arkansas( hereinafter called Grantor) hereby grants to Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company, its successors and assigns (hereinafter called Grantee), the right, privilege and authority within that portion of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, tat is presently served b Grantee pursuant to the authority granted by the Arkansas Public Service Commission( 1) to sell, furnish, 
transmit and distribute electric power and energy to all inhabitants and consumers within said 
limits, and ( 2) to construct, maintain and operate a system for such purposes and to enter on, 
under and upon and use any and all ofthe streets, alleys, avenues, bridges and other public 
grounds and ways within said areas belonging to, or under the control of Grantor for the 
maintenance and operation of facilities and appliances necessary for the sale, transmission and 
distribution of said electric service (hereinafter called facilities). Provided, however, that 
nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to preclude or limit the right of the city of 
Clarksville to establish and extend its own electrical facilities so as to sell, furnish, transmit and 
distribute electric power and energy to the inhabitants of said areas and portions of the city of 
Clarksville covered by this ordinance regardless ofwhether same might lessen the profits of 
Grantee or destroy the value of its investment in such areas; and provided further that the right 
and privilege granted hereby shall be subject to the vested right of the city of Clarksville to 
acquire the property, system and facilities of Grantee used or useful for the convenience of the 
publicinsuchareaswithinthecityofClarksvilleuponninety (90) days' noticeforjust 
compensation and damages, including severance damages, if any, under the terms and conditions 
of purchase determined by the Arkansas Public Service Commission ifthe parties shall be unable 
to agree on terms or conditions of sale. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to 
grant to the Grantee any right or privilege to sell electricity at retail in any area within the city of 
Clarksville in which the Grantee was not providing such service prior to the passage of this 
ordinance and no extension or expansion of such services or facilities shall be made by Grantee 
without the approval of Grantor. (Ord. No. 95, Sec. 1.) 
4 04 12 Rights and responsibilities of Grantor and Grantee Grantee shall, and does by 
acceptance hereof, agree to provide for the city and its inhabitants within said areas, adequate 
and reasonable electric service as a public utility and consents to a future purchase of its property 
actually used and useful for the convenience of the public in said areas by the city of Clarksville 
as provided by Act 324 of the 1935 Acts of the General Assembly of the state of Arkansas. 
Ord. No. 95, Sec. 2.) 
43 
4 04 13 Rights and responsibilities of Grantor and Grantee All facilities of Grantee which may be located on public property, as authorized herein, shall be located so as to not unreasonably obstruct public use and travel. Grantee's facilities and operations shall at all time meet the standards prescribed by the National Electrical Safety Code, and Grantee shall observe all ordinances of the city of Clarksville. Grantee shall promptly replace or repair all damages to public property caused by its operations hereunder without loss or expense thereby to Grantor 
Ord. No. 95, Sec. 3) 
4.04.14 Termination procedure The rights, privileges and authority hereby granted shall continue from the date of passage of this ordinance, and thereafter, until terminated in accordance with provisions of Section 44 of Act 324 of the 1935 Acts of the state of Arkansas 
A.C.A. 14-200-103. ( Ord. No. 95, Sec. 4) 
4. 04. 15 Rights of Grantee Grantee is hereby given the right to trim, cut and remove trees, shrubbery or growth on or in public property which interfere or offer hazards to the 
operation of Grantee' s facilities used or useful for the rendition of electric service hereunder. Ord. No. 95, Sec. 5.) 
4.04.16 Rates The rates which are to be charged by Grantee for electric service to retail customers hereunder shall be those which are now lawfully approved or prescribed, and as said rates may, from time to time, be amended in accordance with law or by any regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof. (Ord. No. 95, Sec. 6) 
4 04. 17 City not liable for negligence of Grantee Grantee shall indemnity the Grantor against any damage or injury to persons or property arising from the operation of Grantee and shall hold and save harmless the Grantor from any damage, injury, loss or expense caused by the negligence of the Grantee or its agents, servants or employees, in constructing, operating and maintaining said facilities or in repairing or replacing any streets, avenues, alleys, bridges or 
other public grounds. (Ord. No. 95, Sec. 7) 
4.04.18 Franchisetax BeginningApril 1, 1981, andthereafterduringthelifeofthis franchise, the Grantee shall pay to the city of Clarksville each quarter, a franchise or privilege tax 
in an amount equal to: Four percent( 4%) ofthe preceding quarter's gross residential, commercial 
and industrial electric revenues as paid to the Grantee by residential, commercial and industrial 
customers located within the areas of the city of Clarksville served by Grantee. Residential, 
commercial and industrial electric revenues are those revenues so classified pursuant to 
Grantee' s uniform classification standards. Grantor shall have the right to examine and verify, 
from the records of the Grantee, any data relating to the gross revenues of Grantee from 
customers on which said franchise tax is due. In the event of a controversy between the Grantor 
and Grantee as to the amount of gross revenues received by Grantee in the city of Clarksville 
upon which said tax is due, Grantor shall have the 
S-49 
option to refer said controversy to the Arkansas Public Service Commission, or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction of Grantee, or to pursue any and all other legal and equitable remedies 
available to Grantor. 
Said tax shall be paid in lieu of all other taxes, licenses, charges, fees or impositions except general license or permit fees, special millage taxes, general ad valorem taxes and other general taxes or fees applicable to all citizens, taxpayers and business enterprises. Provided, that 
nothing herein shall be construed as an abandonment, relinquishment or waiver of the taxing 
authorityofthecityofClarksvilleunderthelawsofthestateofArkansas. (Ord.No. 95, Sec. 9.) 
4.04.19 Contract Upon written acceptance by Grantee, this ordinance shall constitute a 
contract between Grantor and the Grantee, and its successors and assigns. ( Ord. No. 95, Sec. 
10.) 
4 04 20 Electric rates for Clarksville Light and Water Company The following electric energy rates and terms and conditions of electric service are hereby fixed as rates to be charged for electric energy by the Clarksville Light and Water Company, which rates the City Council hereby finds and declares to be reasonable and necessary minimum rates to be charged beginning 
April 1, 2014. ( Ord. No. 2014-716.) 
RATE SCHEDULE R-I (RESIDENTIAL) 
Availability: At any point on the Company' s distributing system. 
Application: For residential service to single residences or individual family apartments 
supplied through one ( 1) meter, including incidental family use on the appurtenant premises. 

The rate schedule is not applicable to commercial type use on the appurtenant premises 
such as chicken brooding. Where a portion of the residence premises, not separately metered, is 
used for non-residential purposes, the predominant use of the service, as determined by the 
Company, shall determine the rate schedule applicable to all service. Service is for the use of the 
customer and may not be shared and may not be resold to others. Not applicable to standby or 
supplementary service. 
Character of service: 
Service will normally be single-phase sixty( 60) cycle, at approximately 120/240volts. However,three-phaseservicemaybefurnishedifapprovedbythe 
Clarksville Light and Water Company. 
5-49 
n• 
Net monthly rate: For consumption beginning with April billing cycle meter readings 
each year 
April 1, 2014 
Base/ customer charge 7. 50 
0. 0608
First 1000 Kwh 
0. 0442
All additional Kwh 
Base/ customer charge monthly bill: A fixed charge of Seven Dollars and Fifty Cents 
7. 50) will be charged on a monthly basis regardless of consumption quantity. 
Fuel adjustment: The above energy charges will be increased or decreased to reflect the 
charge in the cost of fuel and purchased power incurred by the Company for the supply of 
service hereunder, as prescribed in Fuel Adjustment Clause. 
Taxes: The net monthly bill is subject to the addition of all taxes levied on power bills. 
Payment: Payment shall be due fifteen( 15) days from the billing date and if not paid on or before the fifteenth( 15 h) day following the billing date, a late charge of ten percent( 10%) may be added to the bill. 
Contract period: Month to month except as otherwise required by a line extension 
agreement. ( Ord. No. 2014-716.) 
RATE SCHEDULE R-2 ( RESIDENTIAL) 
Availability: At any point on the Company' s distributing system. 
Application: For residential service to single residences or individual family apartments supplied through one ( 1) meter, including incidental family use on the appurtenant premises where such electric service is in the primary source for heating the entire residence or apartment dwelling unit( including the water heater). 
The rate schedule is not applicable to commercial type use on the appurtenant premises 
such as chicken brooding. Where a portion of the residence premises, not separately metered, is 
used for non-residential purposes, the predominant use of the service, as determined by the Company, shall determine the rate schedule applicable to all service. Service is for the use of the customer and may not be shared and may not be resold to others. Not applicable to standby or 
supplementary service. 
Character of service: 
Service will normally be single-phase sixty( 60) cycle, at approximately 120/240 volts. However, three-phase service may be furnished if approved by the 
Clarksville Light and Water Company. 
46 

S-49 
Net monthly rate: 
A. 	For meter readings in the months of May, June, July, August, September and 
October: 
April 1, 2014 Base/ customer charge 7. 50 First 1000 Kwh 
0. 0608 
All additional Kwh 0.0442 

B. 	For meter readings in the months of November, December, January, February, March and April: 
April 1, 2014 Base/ customer charge 7. 50 First 1000 Kwh 
0.0608 
All additional Kwh 

0. 0342 
Base/ customer charge monthly bill: A fixed charge of Seven Dollars and Fifty Cents 
7. 50) will be charged on a monthly basis regardless of consumption quantity. 
Fuel adjustment: The above energy charges will be increased or decreased to reflect the charge in the cost of fuel and purchased power incurred by the Company for the supply of service hereunder, as prescribed in Fuel Adjustment Clause. 
Taxes: 	The net monthly bill is subject to the addition of all taxes levied on power bills. 
Payment: Payment shall be due fifteen( 15) days from the billing date and if not paid on or before the fifteenth( 15 h) day following the billing date, a late charge of ten percent( 10%) may be added to the bill. 
Contract Period: Month to month except as otherwise required by a line extension 
agreement. (Ord.No. 2014-716.) 
RATE SCHEDULE C ( COMMERCIAL) 
Availability: At any point on the Company' s distributing system. 
Application: For small commercial for lighting and power purposes supplied through one 1) point of delivery. Available to multi-residential dwellings when metered through one ( 1) supply point. Not applicable to resale, shared, standby or supplementary service. 
S-49 
Character of service: 
Single or three-phase, sixty( 60) cycles and at one( 1) standard 
delivery voltage required by customer and available at customer' s service location where service isdeliveredandmeteredatvoltageslessthan 12,500y/7,200withamaximumdemandnotto exceed fifty( 50) KW. Notwithstanding the voltage and maximum demand limitations will not apply to educational institutions (public schools, universities, etc.) 
Net monthly rate: For consumption beginning with April billing cycle meter readings 
each year 
April 1, 2014 
Base/customer charge 10.00 
0. 0597
First 1000 Kwh 
All additional Kwh 0. 0518 
Base/customer chargeemonthlybill: AfixedchargeofTenDollars ($10.00) willbe 
charged on a monthly basis regardless of consumption quantity. 
Three-phaseservice: Whenthree-phaseserviceissupplied, amonthlychargeofThirty dollars($ 30.00) will be added to the net monthly charges applicable to single-phase service. In the event a primary line extension is necessary, customer will reimburse company for the excess 
construction cost of the three phase primary line, either in cash or under a service facilities 
contract. 
Fuel adjustment: The above energy charges will be increased or decreased to reflect the charge in the cost of fuel and purchased power incurred by the Company for the supply of service hereunder, as prescribed in Fuel Adjustment Clause. 
Taxes: The net monthly bill is subject to the addition of all taxes levied on power bills. 
Payment: Payment shall be due fifteen( 15) days from the billing date and if not paid on 
15ffi) 
or before the fifteenth( day following the billing date, a late charge of ten percent( 10%) 
may be added to the bill. 
Contract period: Month to month except as otherwise required by a line extension 
agreement. ( Ord. No. 2014-716.) 
RATE SCHEDULE P ( LARGE COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL) 
Availability: At any point on the existing facilities having adequate capacity and suitable voltage for delivery of service from the Company' s distribution system. 
Application: For electric service required by customer on the premises supplied through one ( 1) point of delivery. Not applicable to resale, shared, standby or supplementary service. 
AN", 
S-49 
Character of service: 
Single-phase or three-phase sixty( 60) cycle and at one ( 1) standard delivery voltage required by customer and available at customer' s service location where service 
is delivered and metered. 
Net Monthly Rate: For consumption beginning with April billing cycle meter readings 
each year 
April 1, 2014 
Base/customer charge 100.00 
Per KW demand charge 3. 50 
0.0276
First 100 hrs. of use of billing 
Next 260 hrs. of use of billing 0. 0233 
All additional Kwh 0.0215 
Base/customerchargemonthlybill AfixedchargeofOneHundredDollars ($100.00) 
will be charged on a monthly basis regardless of consumption quantity plus the demand charge as computed under the above schedule, or such amount as may be required by the Company when necessary to justify the investment required to provide the service. 
Determination of maximum demand: The customer' s maximum demand shall be the 
maximum rate at which energy is used for any period of thirty( 30) consecutive minutes of the month for which the bill is rendered as above by the Company' s demand meter, but shall not be considered to be less than fifty( 50) KWH. 
Determination of billing demand: The billing demand upon which the demand charge is based shall be the maximum demand as determined above corrected for power factor as set forth under Power Factor Clause, provided that no billing demand shall be considered as less than the highest billing demand previously determined during a twelve ( 12) month period ending with the 
current month. 
Power Factor Clause: The consumer shall at all times take and use power in such a 
manner that the power factor shall be as nearly one hundred percent( 100%) as possible, but 
when the average power factor as determined by continuous measurement of lagging reactive 
kilovolt ampere hours is less than ninety-five percent( 95%) of the billing demand shall be 
determined by multiplying the maximum demand, measured by the demand meter for the billing 
period by ninety-five percent( 95%) and dividing the product thus obtained by the actual average 
power factor expressed in percent. The company may, at its option, use for adjustment the 
power factor as determined by test during periods of normal operation of the consumer' s 
equipment instead of the average power factor. 
S-49 
Primary service discount: When all of the following conditions are met, a discount of five percent( 5%) of the net monthly bill computed will be allowed: 
A. The customer takes service at 12,500y/7,200 volts. 
B. The customer owns, maintains and operates all equipment on customer' s side of 
the point of delivery. 
When the customer qualifies and elects to take primary service, but the Company chooses 
to meter on the load side of the customer' s transformers, the five percent( 5%) discount shall be 
allowed, but the KWH billed shall be increased by the amount of the transformer losses 
computed as follows: 
One percent( 1%) of the total KVA rating of the customer' s transformers times seven hundred thirty (730) hours. 
Secondary service/primary metering discount: When the customer does not qualify for the five percent( 5%) primary discount and the Company chooses to meter on the supply side of the Company' s transformers, the five percent( 5%) primary service discount will not be allowed, but the KWH shall be decreased by the amount ofthe transformer losses computed as follows: 
One percent( 1%) ofthe total KVA rating ofthe Company' s transformers times seven 
of
hundred thirty( 730) hours. The decreased in KWH shall not exceed five percent( 5%) 
metered KWH. 
Fuel adjustment: The above energy charges will be increased or decreased to reflect the charge in the cost of fuel and purchased power incurred by the Company for the supply of service hereunder, as prescribed in Fuel Adjustment Clause. 
Taxes: The net monthly bill is subject to the addition of all taxes levied on power bills. 
Pant: Payment shall be due fifteen( 15) days from the billing date and if not paid on 
15th) 
or before the fifteenth( day following the billing date, a late charge of ten percent( 10%) 
may be added to the bill. 
Contract period: Contracts under this schedule shall be for not less than one ( 1) year, but longer contracts ( subject also to special minimum guarantees) may be necessary in cases 
warranted by special circumstances or unusually large investments by the Company. (Ord. No. 
2014-716.) 
5-49 
RATE SCHEDULE L (SECURITY LIGHT SERVICE) 
Availability: At any customer at any point on the Company' s distributing system. 
Application: For unmetered, automatically controlled outdoor lighting service burning all night. Not applicable to seasonal or temporary service. 
Character of service: 
Company will install, own, operate and maintain fixtures, including any necessary lamp replacements. The specified rate does not include the setting of any pole; 
customer will be billed for any new poles to be installed.  
Net monthly rate:  
High pressure sodium light:  6.88 for 150 Watt  
13. 25 for 400 Watt  
Metal halide light:  24.37 for 1, 000 Watt  

Fuel Adjustment Clause: The fuel adjustment clause shall be made monthly based on a 
six (6) month period ending with the preceding month. The base cost for a six( 6) month period is $0.0294745 per KWH after adjusting for transmission and distributing system losses. The current cost per KWH is calculated by dividing the" total power cost" by the" total KWH sold" 
using power cost and KWH sold for s six (6) month period ending with the previous month). Total power cost" includes fees and other charges made by the wholesale power suppliers to the Company-owned generation costs. The adjustment is found by subtracting the" base energy 
cost" from the" current energy cost." The adjustment is applied to all KWH as determined under each rate schedule. The adjustment is not applied to Rate Schedule L, Security Light Service. 
Ord. No. 2014-716.) 
RATE SCHEDULE CITY ( CITY OF CLARKSVILLE) 
Availability: At any point on the Company' s distributing system. 
Application: For service as needed and agreed upon by the city and the Clarksville Light and Water Company. 
Character of service: For service needed and agreed upon by the city and the Clarksville Light and Water Company. 
Net monthly rate: For meter readings to begin with the October 1, 2013, billing cycle. 
City rate 0.0572 per KWH 
These rates shall begin with the October 1, 2013, billing cycle meter readings. ( Ord. No. 
2013-703, Sec. 1-2.) 
5-13 
Sections:
Section : 
CHAPTER 4.08 
GAS PRIVILEGES 


4.08. 01  Gas franchise granted to Arkansas Western Gas Company  
4. 08. 02  Not an exclusive right  
4. 08. 03  Responsibilities of Grantee  
4. 08. 04  Responsibilities of Grantee  
4.08. 05  Responsibilities of Grantee  
4.08. 06  Information, definitions  
4.08.07  Rates  
4.08.08  Tax  
4.08.09  In lieu of other payments  
4.08. 10  Gas franchise granted to ARKLA, Inc.  
4.08. 11  Not an exclusive right  
4.08. 12  Responsibilities of Grantee  
4.08. 13  Responsibilities of Grantee  
4.08. 14  Responsibilities of Grantee  
4. 08. 15  Information, definitions  
4.08. 16  Rates  
4.08. 17  Tax  
4.08. 18  In lieu of other payments  

4 08 01 Gas franchise granted to Arkansas Western Gas CoM The city of 
Clarksville, Arkansas (hereinafter called Grantor), hereby grants to the Arkansas Western Gas 
Company its successors and assigns, (hereinafter called Grantee), the right, privilege and 
authority( 1) to sell, furnish, transmit and distribute natural gas to all inhabitants and consumers within Clarksville, Arkansas; and( 2) to lay, construct, equip, operate, repair, and maintain a system of gas mains, pipes, conduits, feeders, and the appurtenances for the purpose of supplying 
and distributing natural gas for all purposes to the residents of the said City and from any points beyond said city limits in order to enable the Grantee to distribute and sell natural gas to said city 
and the residents or inhabitants thereof and to others, and for such purposes to enter on, under and upon and use any and all streets, alleys, roads, avenues, highways, sidewalks, bridges and other public grounds of said city; provided, however, that Grantee shall comply with all ordinances ofthe city ofClarksville in regard to permits for opening or cutting streets or other public ways and that where alleys are accessible for laying mains and pipes, the same shall be 
laid in the alleys instead of the streets so long as economically feasible. ( Ord. No. 98, Sec. 1.) 
4.08.02 Not an exclusive right Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to granttheGrantee anyexclusiveright orto preclude orlimittherightofthecityofClarksville 
52 
S-13 
to grant similar privileges to other companies or for the city itself to establish and develop facilities so as to sell, furnish, transmit and distribute natural gas to inhabitants of the city of Clarksville regardless of whether either of same might lessen the profits of Grantee or destroy 
the value of its investment in said city. The right and privilege hereby granted shall be subject to the rights of the city of Clarksville to acquire the property, system and facility of Grantee as presently provided by Act 324 ofthe 1935 Acts of the state of Arkansas should Grantor elect to 
do so. ( Ord. No. 98, Sec. 2.) 
4.08. 03 ResponsibilitiesofGrantee Granteeshall, anddoesbyacceptancehereof, agree to provide to the inhabitants of the city of Clarksville, adequate and reasonable natural gas 
service. ( Ord. No. 98, Sec. 3.) 
4.08.04 Responsibilities of Grantee All facilities of Grantee which may be located on 
public property as authorized hereinabove shall be located so as to not unreasonably obstruct travel and other public uses. Grantee shall at all times keep and display the necessary danger 
signals and proper guards around all excavations and obstructions and shall as soon as 
practicable, restore all openings on highways, roads, streets, avenues, alleys and other public 
grounds to the same or better condition as before said openings were made, in the manner as may be required by the Superintendent of the streets of Grantor. When it shall be necessary for the safety of the citizens, to divert or detour traffic from the area of excavations, Grantee shall have the power to do so by giving notice to Grantor at the time of application for the permit to make such excavation or at the time such necessity becomes known to Grantee. 
4.08.05 ResponsibilitiesofGrantee TheGranteeshalldono injurytoanyhighway, road, street, avenue, alley, lane, bridge, stream or water course, park or public place, except as specifically allowed, nor with any public or private sewer or drainage system or water lines now 
or hereafter laid or constructed by the said city or by any authorized person or corporation, but 
no sewer or water pipes, electric conduits, telephone or TV cables shall be so laid as to interfere 
unnecessarily with any gas main or pipes which shall have been laid prior to the time of the 
laying of such electric conduit, telephone and TV cables, sewer or water pipes. The Grantee 
shall fully indemnity and save harmless the city from any and all claims for damage for which 
said city shall or might be made or become liable by reason of the granting of the franchise or 
any negligence or carelessness on the part of said Grantee or because of any act or omission or 

( Ord. No. 98,
the Grantee in the construction and operation of its system of mains and pipes. 
Sec. 5.) 
4.08.06 Information, definitions The Grantee shall furnish promptly to the proper 
authorities any and all information which may be asked for by them in regard to the size, location 
or 
S-39 
depths of any of the pipes, mains, conduits or service pipes in any form whatsoever and any other information in regard to its occupation of roads, highways, streets, avenues or public 
grounds of said city which they may demand. Whenever the word " Grantee" occurs in this ordinance, it shall mean and it shall be understood to be the Arkansas Western Gas Company, its successors, lessees or assigns and whenever the words" authorities" or" proper authorities" occur 
in this franchise, they shall mean and shall be understood to mean the authorized officer or 
officers, committeeorboardrepresentingthecityofClarksville, Arkansas, orGrantor. (Ord. 
No. 98, Sec. 6.) 
4.08.07 Rates The rates which are to be charged by Grantee for natural gas service to 
retail customers hereunder shall be those rates which now lawfully approved or prescribed and as may from time to time be amended in accordance with law or by any regulatory authority having 
jurisdiction thereof. (Ord. No. 98, Sec. 7.) 
4.08.08 Tax Beginning April 1, 1981, and thereafter during the life ofthis franchise, the Grantee shall pay to the city of Clarksville each quarter, a franchise or privilege tax in and 
amount equal to four percent( 4%) ofthe preceding quarter' s gross residential, commercial and 
industrial gas revenues as paid to Grantee by all residential, commercial and industrial customers served by Grantee in the city of Clarksville. Grantor shall have the right to examine and verify, 
from the records ofthe Grantee, any data relating to the gross revenues of Grantee from 
customers on which said tax is due. In the event of a controversy between the Grantor and 
Grantee as to the amount of gross revenues received by Grantee in the city of Clarksville, upon 
which said tax is due, Grantor shall have the option to refer said controversy to the Arkansas Public Service Commission, or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the Grantee or to 
pursue any and all other legal and equitable remedies available to Grantor. (Ord. No. 98, Sec. 8.) 
4.08.09 Inlieuofotherpayments Saidtaxshall bepaidinlieuofallothertaxes, licenses, charges, fees or impositions except general licenses of permit fees, special millage taxes, general ad valorem taxes and other general taxes or fees applicable to all citizens, taxpayers and business enterprises. Provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as an abandonment, relinquishment or waiver ofthe taxing authority of the city of Clarksville under 
the laws of the state of Arkansas. ( Ord. No. 98, Sec. 9.) 
4.08.10 GasfranchisegrantedtoARKLA, Inc. ThecityofClarksville, Arkansas 
hereinafter called Grantor), hereby grants to the ARKLA, Inc., its successors and assigns, 
hereinafter called Grantee), the right, privilege and authority ( 1) to sell, furnish, 

S-13 
transmit and distribute natural gas to all inhabitants and consumers within Clarksville, Arkansas; and( 2) to lay, construct, equip, operate, repair, and maintain a system of gas mains, pipes, conduits, feeders, and the appurtenances for the purpose of supplying and distributing natural gas for all purposes to the residents ofthe said City and from any points beyond said city limits in order to enable the Grantee to distribute and sell natural gas to said city and the residents or 
inhabitants thereof and to others, and for such purposes to enter on, under and upon and use any and all streets, alleys, roads, avenues, highways, sidewalks, bridges and other public grounds of said city; provided, however, that Grantee shall comply with all ordinances of the city of 
Clarksville in regard to permits for opening or cutting streets or other public ways and that where alleys are accessible for laying mains and pipes, the same shall be laid in the alleys instead of the 
streets so long as economically feasible. ( Ord. No. 230) 
4.08. 11 Not an exclusive right Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to grant the Grantee any exclusive right or to preclude or limit the right of the city of Clarksville 
to grant similar privileges to other companies or for the city itselfto establish and develop facilities so as to sell, furnish, transmit and distribute natural gas to inhabitants of the city of Clarksville regardless of whether either of same might lessen the profits of Grantee or destroy the value of its investment in said city. The right and privilege hereby granted shall be subject to the rights of the city of Clarksville to acquire the property, system and facility of Grantee as presently provided by Act 324 of the 1935 Acts of the state of Arkansas should Grantor elect to 
do so. ( Ord. No. 230) 
4.08.12 ResponsibilitiesofGrantee Granteeshall, anddoesbyacceptancehereof, agree to provide to the inhabitants ofthe city of Clarksville, adequate and reasonable natural gas 
service. ( Ord. No. 230.) 
4.08. 13 Responsibilities of Grantee All facilities of Grantee which may be located on 
public property as authorized hereinabove shall be located so as to not unreasonably obstruct travel and other public uses. Grantee shall at all times keep and display the necessary danger 
signals and proper guards around all excavations and obstructions and shall as soon as 
practicable, restore all openings on highways, roads, streets, avenues, alleys and other public 
grounds to the same or better condition as before said openings were made, in the manner as may be required by the Superintendent of the streets of Grantor. When it shall be necessary for the safety ofthe citizens, to divert or detour traffic from the area of excavations, Grantee shall have the power to do so by giving notice to Grantor at the time of application for the permit to make 
such excavation or at the time such necessity becomes known to Grantee. ( Ord. No. 230.) 
54. 1 
S-13 
4.08. 14 Responsibilities of Grantee The Grantee shall do no injury to any highway, road, street, avenue, alley, lane, bridge, stream or water course, park or public place, except as specifically allowed, nor with any public or private sewer or drainage system or water lines now or hereafter laid or constructed by the said city or by any authorized person or corporation, but 
no sewer or water pipes, electric conduits, telephone or TV cables shall be so laid as to interfere unnecessarily with any gas main or pipes which shall have been laid prior to the time of the laying of such electric conduit, telephone and TV cables, sewer or water pipes. The Grantee shall fully indemnity and save harmless the city from any and all claims for damage for which said city shall or might be made or become liable by reason of the granting of the franchise or any negligence or carelessness on the part of said Grantee or because of any act or omission or 
the Grantee in the construction and operation of its system of mains and pipes. ( Ord. No. 230) 
4. 08. 15 Information, definitions The Grantee shall furnish promptly to the proper authorities any and all information which may be asked for by them in regard to the size, location ordepthsofanyofthepipes, mains, conduitsorservice pipes inanyformwhatsoever andany 
other information in regard to its occupation of roads, highways, streets, avenues or public 
grounds of said city which they may demand. Whenever the word" Grantee" occurs in this ordinance, it shall mean and it shall be understood to be the Arkansas Western Gas Company, its successors, lessees or assigns and whenever the words" authorities" or" proper authorities" occur 
in this franchise, they shall mean and shall be understood to mean the authorized officer or 
officers, committeeorboardrepresentingthecityofClarksville, Arkansas, orGrantor. (Ord. 
No. 230) 
4.08. 16 Rates The rates which are to be charged by Grantee for natural gas service to retail customers hereunder shall be those rates which now lawfully approved or prescribed and as may from time to time be amended in accordance with law or by any regulatory authority having 
jurisdiction thereof. (Ord. No. 230) 
4.08.17 Tax BeginningApril 1, 1981, andthereafterduringthelifeofthisfranchise,the Grantee shall pay to the city of Clarksville each quarter, a franchise or privilege tax in and 
amount equal to four percent( 4%) of the preceding quarter' s gross residential, commercial and 
industrial gas revenues as paid to Grantee by all residential, commercial and industrial customers served by Grantee in the city of Clarksville. Grantor shall have the right to examine and verify, from the records of the Grantee, any data relating to the gross revenues of Grantee from 
customers on 
54.2 
S-13 
which said tax is due. In the event of a controversy between the Grantor and Grantee as to the amount of gross revenues received by Grantee in the city of Clarksville, upon which said tax is due, Grantor shall have the option to refer said controversy to the Arkansas Public Service Commission, or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the Grantee or to pursue any 
and all other legal and equitable remedies available to Grantor. (Ord. No. 230) 
4.08.09 In lieu of other payments Said tax shall be paid in lieu of all other taxes, licenses, charges, fees or impositions except general licenses of permit fees, special millage taxes, general ad valorem taxes and other general taxes or fees applicable to all citizens, taxpayers and business enterprises. Provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as an abandonment, relinquishment or waiver of the taxing authority ofthe city of Clarksville under 
the laws ofthe state ofArkansas. ( Ord. No. 230) 
CHAPTER 4. 12 
TELEPHONE PRIVILEGES 
Sections: 
4. 12. 01  Authority granted for operation of telephone system  
4. 12. 02  Grantee responsibilities  
4. 12. 03  Grantee responsibilities  
4. 12. 04  Standards for work  
4. 12. 05  Maintenance of equipment  
4. 12. 06  Not an exclusive right  
4. 12. 07  Tax  
4. 12. 08  In lieu of other charges  
4. 12. 09  Contract  
4 12 01 Authority granted for operation of telephone system The city of Clarksville, Arkansas, (hereinafter called Grantor) hereby grants to the continental Telephone Company of Arkansas, its 


54. 3 
successors and assigns, ( hereinafter called Grantee), the right, privilege and authority to 
construct, maintain and operate its poles, posts, cables, wires and all other necessary overhead apparatus on, over and along; and its conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, cables, wires, manholes, distributing poles and all other necessary underground appliances on, in, under and through the 
streets, alleys, avenues, roads, highways and other public grounds belonging to or under the control of Grantor so as to provide, furnish, transmit and sell telephone services to the 
inhabitants and residents of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas. ( Ord. No. 99, Sec. 1.) 
4. 12. 02 Grantee responsibilities Grantee shall at all times, and does by the acceptance hereof, agree to provide to the inhabitants of the city of Clarksville, full, reliable, adequate and reasonable telephone service as a public utility, comparable to or exceeding the normal and usual services provided by other utilities engaged in the providing oftelephone services in this area. Should the quality of service provided by Grantee fail at any time to meet or exceed the normal and usual standards for companies engaged in the providing of like telephone services, or fail to meet the standards of service which any other person, entity or company demonstrates that it is willing and ready to meet in the city of Clarksville, the franchise herein granted shall immediately terminate and be of no further force or effect and Grantor shall thereafter be free to 
grant similar right and franchise, either exclusive or competitive with Grantee, as Grantor shall elect, to any other person, company or entity as Grantor in its ole discretion shall deem to be in 
thebestinterestofitscitizens. (Ord.No. 99, Sec. 2.) 
4. 12. 03 Grantee responsibilities All poles, posts and other overhead apparatus and all 
conduits, pipes, cables and other underground structures and appliances shall be so located that, they will not interfere with the safety, use or convenience of any other public use of the street, alley or other public area; Grantee shall comply with all ordinances in regard to the obtaining of permits and posting of bonds before cutting, opening or excavating any street, alley or other public way, and in installing and maintaining its system and facilities, shall not cut, open, encumber or obstruct any more of any street, alley, or other public place than shall be necessary 
to enable Grantee to perform essential and required construction, repairs and maintenance with 
reasonable economy and efficiency with due consideration for the safety, convenience and economy of Grantor and its inhabitants; nor shall Grantee permit such opening, excavation or encumbrance to remain for any longer period than shall be necessary to do the work for which said opening shall have been made, provided, that Grantee shall have adequate personnel, equipment and supplies available to promptly complete such work and close such opening 
without interruption or delay. (Ord. No. 99, Sec. 3.) 
4. 12. 04 Standards for work All work done in the city of Clarksville under the provisions 
of this ordinance shall be subject to the supervision of the Street Superintendent of the city of Clarksville or other representative as may be designated by the 
City Council. Grantee shall replace and properly relay any sidewalk, curb and gutter or pavement displaced or damaged by Grantee in the construction, repair or maintenance of its system as may be directed by the Street Superintendent or other representative of Grantor and shall post a bond as provided by ordinance to secure Grantor against loss or expense by reason 
thereof. (Ord. No. 99, Sec. 4.) 
4. 12. 05 Maintenance of equipment Grantee shall maintain all poles, cables, wires, 
conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, manholes, distributing poles and all other apparatus erected or 
constructed under the provisions of this ordinance, in good and safe order and condition; and shall at all times fully indemnify, protect and save, harmless the city of Clarksville from and against all loss and expenditures arising from the erection, construction and maintenance of its 
system in said city, or from its neglect or failure to maintain the said apparatus in good and safe 
order and condition. (Ord. No. 99, Sec. 5.) 
4. 12. 06 Not an exclusive right Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to grant unto the said Continental Telephone Company of Arkansas any exclusive right or privilege or to 
prevent a grant of similar privileges to other companies. ( Ord. No. 99, Sec. 6.) 
4. 12. 07 Tax Beginning April 1, 1981, and thereafter during the life of this franchise, the Grantee shall pay to the city of Clarksville each quarter, a franchise or privilege tax in and 
amount equal to four and one-half percent( 4'/2%) of the preceding quarter' s basic local service 
excluding extension, terminal equipment, toll, yellow pages and other miscellaneous equipment revenues within the city of Clarksville. Grantor shall have the right to examine and verify, from the records of the Grantee, any data relating to the basic revenues of Grantee from customers on which said tax is due. In the event of a controversy between the Grantor and Grantee as to the amount of basic revenues received by Grantee in the city of Clarksville, upon which said tax is due, Grantor shall have the option to refer said controversy to the Arkansas Public Service Commission, or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the Grantee or to pursue any 
and all other legal and equitable remedies available to Grantor. (Ord. No. 101, Sec. 1.) 
4.12.08 Inlieuofothercharges Saidtaxshallbepaidinlieuofallothertaxes, licenses, charges, fees or impositions except general licenses ofpermit fees, special millage taxes, general ad valorem taxes and other general taxes or fees applicable to all citizens, taxpayers and business enterprises. Provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as an abandonment, relinquishment or waiver of the taxing authority of the city of Clarksville under the laws of the state of 
Arkansas. ( Ord. No. 99, Sec. 8.) 
4. 12. 09 Contract Upon written acceptance by Grantee, this ordinance shall constitute a 
contract between Grantor and the Grantee and its successors and assigns. ( Ord. No. 99, Sec. 9.) 
5-24 
CHAPTER 4. 16 
CABLE TELEVISION 
4. 16. 01 Short title 
4. 16.02 Definitions 
4.16.03 Grantofauthority 
4. 16.04 Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances 
4. 16. 05 Territorial area involved 
4. 16.06 Franchise terms 
4. 16.07 Franchise non-exclusive 
4. 16.08 Written notice 
4. 16.09 Repair of streets and property 
4. 16. 10 Notice ofrate increases or service modification 
4. 16. 11 Damages and defenses 
4. 16. 12 Liability insurance 
4. 16. 13 City' s right to revoke 
4. 16. 14 Revocation procedures 
4. 16. 15 Removal upon revocation 
4. 16. 16 Force majeure 
4. 16. 17 Maps 
4. 16. 18 Service area 
4. 16. 19 Relocation of system facilities 
4. 16.20 Service and public facilities 
4. 16.21 Franchise payment to city 
4. 16.22 Unauthorized connections or modifications 
4. 16.23 Severability 
4. 16.24 Passage and effective date 
4. 16.25 Modifications 
4. 16.26 Fee payments 
4. 16.27 Service standards 
4. 16. 01 Short title This ordinance shall be known and cited as The City of Clarksville Cable Television Franchise Ordinance. Within this document it shall also be referred to as" this Franchise" or" The Franchise Agreement." ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. I.) 
4.16.02 Definitions ForthepurposeofthisFranchiseAgreement, thefollowingterms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent 
with the context, words used in present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words" shall" and" will" are mandatory and" may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be 
given their common and ordinary meaning. 
City means the city of Clarksville, a city in Johnson County, state of Arkansas. The City ow Council is the authority of the city. 57 
S-24 
Force majeure means a strike, acts of God, acts of public enemies, orders of any kind of agovernmentoftheUnited StatesofAmericaorofthe stateofArkansas oranyoftheir departments, agencies, political subdivision, riots, epidemics, landslides, lightening, earthquakes, fires, hurricanes, tornadoes, volcanic activities, storms, floods, washouts, droughts, civil confluent, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a system. 
System means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable television 
service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city. (Ord. No. 310, Sec. II.) 
Gross receipts means all service fees, installation charges and all other fees or charges collected by the Grantee from the subscribers of the system. Gross receipts shall include but not be limited to the following services: 
A. 	Basic service 
B. 	Standard service 
C. 	Pay television service 
D. 	Pay per view service 
E. 	Subscriber equipment charges 
Gross receipts shall not include: 
A. 	Uncollected revenue( bad debt) 
B. 	Excise taxes 
C. 	Sales taxes or any other taxes or fees, including franchise fees, which are imposed on the Grantee or any subscriber by any governmental unit and collected by the 
Grantee for such governmental unit. 
Person means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship or organization authorized to do business in the state of Arkansas or any natural person. 
Public property means any real property other than a street owned b any governmental 
unit. 
Street means the surface of and the space above and below any street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any public easementorright-of-waynoworhereafterheldby the cityofClarksville,Arkansas, which shall entitle Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, confluent, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and 
other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a system. 
S-24 
System means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable television 
service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city. 
4. 16. 13 Grant of authority 
A. 	For the purposes of constructing, operating and maintaining a system in the city, Grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, relocate reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the streets within the city such 
lines, cables, conductors, ducts, confluent, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, 
appliances, pedestals, attachments and other operating equipment as are necessary and pertinent to the operation of the system. 
B. Such system shall be located and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere 
with the lives or property of persons or the public or as to interfere with any improvements the city has made or may deem proper to make or to hinder unnecessarily or obstruct the free use of streets, alleys, bridges and other public 
property. 
C. 	Construction and maintenance of the system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the 
National Board of Fire Underwriters and such applicable ordinances and 
regulations ofthe city of Clarksville affecting electrical installations which may presently be in effect or may be enacted by the city of Clarksville. 
D. 	Installation and house-drop hardware shall be uniform throughout the city except 
the Grantee shall be free to change its hardware and installation procedures as improvements therein are developed and except where changes are permitted or 
required by regulations and ordinances of the city of Clarksville presently in effect or which may be enacted hereafter. 
E. 	Nothing in this agreement shall amend, alter or replace the agreement made effective January 1, 1073, between Clarksville Light& Water Company and 
Warner Cable of Clarksville, predecessor of Time Warner Entertainment 
L.P. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. III.)
company, 
4.16.04 Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances This franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and conditions contained herein. Grantee' s rights are subject to the police 
powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Grantee shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the 
City pursuant to the power. (Ord. No. 310, Sec. IV.) 
S-24 
4. 16. 05 Territorial area involved This franchise is granted for the territorial boundary of the city. In the event of annexation by the city, any new territory shall become part ofthe area 
covered. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. V.) 
4. 16.06 Franchise terms 
A. 	This franchise shall commence upon the effective date of this ordinance and shall 
expire ten( 10) years thereafter unless renewed, revoked or terminated sooner as herein provided, or extended according to (B) below. 
B. 	In lieu of renewal, this franchise may be extended by the City for an additional term often( 10) years upon written request by Grantee within six (6) months of the expiration of the franchise. Grantee shall confirm its request that it still possesses the fiscal and technical capability to operate a system in the City 
pursuant to the terms and conditions herein. Approval of Grantee' s extension request shall not be unreasonably withheld by the City. 
C. 	This franchise shall be renewed in accordance with applicable state and federal law. (Ord. No. 310, Sec. VI.) 
4. 16. 07 Franchise non-exclusive The franchise granted herein is non-exclusive. The 
City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, one or more additional franchises for a system throughout the City in accordance with state and federal law and under substantially the 
same terms and conditions as contained herein. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. VII.) 
4. 16. 08 Written notice All notices or demands required to be given under this franchise agreement shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to the persons designated below or upon the date actually received as evidenced by registered or certified mail receipt 
addressed as follows: 
If to the city: City of Clarksville, P. O. Box 409, Clarksville AR 72830 
If to the Grantee: 	Time Warner Cable Communications, P. O. Box 6929, Englewood, CO 80155-6929 
Attn: 	Director of Government Affairs and Warner Cable Communications 1101 North El Paso, P.O. Box 864, Russellville AR 72801 
Attn: 	System General Manager( 3) 
Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party given as 
provided in this section. (Ord. No. 310, Sec. VIII.) 
Am. 
S-24 
4. 16. 09 	Repair of streets and property 
A. 	Wherever the Grantee shall take up or disturb any pavement, sidewalk or other improvement of any street, avenue, alley, or other public place, the same shall be replaced or repaired and the surface restored in compliance with City' s specificationswithinforty-eight( 48) hours aftercompletionofthe Grantee' s 
work. Upon failure ofthe Grantee to make such restoration within such time or begin such restoration within such time, ifthe restoration cannot be made within 
suchtimeorupontheGrantee'sdelayofmorethantwenty-four( 24) hoursinthe 
continuation of a restoration begun, the City may serve upon the Grantee notice of 
the City' s intent to cause the restoration to be made, and unless the Grantee within 
twenty-four( 24) hours after receipt of such notice begin or resume the proper 
restoration to be made, the City may cause the proper restoration to be made, 
including the removal of excess dirt, and the expense of same shall be paid by 
Grantee upon demand by the City. 
B. 	The Grantee shall at all times comply with any and all rules and regulations which 
the City has made or may make to apply to the public generally with reference to the removal of replacement of pavements and to excavations in streets and other 
public places not inconsistent with their use for the purposes contemplated by this 
ordinance. During the course of any work or repairs conducted by Grantee. 
Grantee shall at all times erect adequate barriers, fences, boardings, signals and 
other safety devices for the protection ofthe public. (Ord. No. 310, Sec. IX.) 
4. 16. 10 Notice of rate increases or service modification Prior to implementing any rate increase or service modification, Grantee shall give the following notice: 
A. 	At least twenty ( 10) days' advance written notice to the City; and 
B. 	At least twenty (20) days' advance notice to subscribers. 
Ord. No. 310, Sec. X.) 

4. 16. 11 	Damages and defenses 
A. 	Grantee shall at all times indemnify and hold the City harmless from all claims, actions, suits, liability, loss, expenses or damages of every kind and description, including reasonable attorney' s fees, which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any person or persons arising out of the negligence and alleged contractual dispute of the Grantee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, operation and maintenance of the system and by reason of license, copyright, property right or patent of any article or system used in the construction or operation of said system, provided the City gives the Grantee prompt notice of any such claims, actions and suits, without limitation, in writing 
as provided herein. 
S-24 
B. 	In order for the City to assert its rights to be indemnified and held harmless, the City must: 
1. 	Promptly notify Grantee of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise 
to such right; 
2. 	Afford Grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any 
compromise, settlement, resolution or disposition of such claim or 
proceeding; and 
3. 	Fully cooperate in the defense of such claim and make available to 
Grantee all such information under its control relating thereto. (Ord. No. 
310, Sec. XI.) 
4. 16. 12 Liability insurance 
A. 	Grantee shall maintain, throughout the term of this franchise agreement, liability insurance insuring the city and the Grantee with regard to all damages mentioned in Section XII above in the following minimum amounts: 
1. 	
TwoMillionDollars($2,000,000.00) forallothertypesofliability. 

2. 	
TwoMillionDollars ($2,000,000.00) forallothertypesofliability. 


B. Upon request of the City, Grantee shall furnish to the city satisfactory evidence 
that an insurance policy has been obtained and is in full force and effect. (Ord. 
No. 310, Sec. XII.) 
4. 16. 13 Citright to revoke In addition to all other rights which the City has pursuant to law or equity, the City reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto in the event that: 
A. 	Grantee violates any material provision ofthis franchise agreement; or 
B. 	Grantee practices any fraud upon the City or any subscriber; or 
C. 	Grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XIII.) 
4. 16. 14 Revocation procedures 
A. 	The City shall notify the Grantee of its intention to revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific 
violation so as to afford Grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation. 
S-24 
B. 	Granteeshallhaveninety (90) dayssubsequenttoreceiptofthenoticeinwhichto correct the violation before the City may formally revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise. Grantee may, within thirty( 30) days of receipt of the notice, notify the 
City that there is a dispute as to whether a violation has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by Grantee to the City shall stay the ninety( 90) day period described 
above. 
C. 	The City shall hear Grantee' s dispute and shall determine whether a default or violation by Grantee has occurred. In the event the City shall determine that a default or violation has occurred the City shall supplement the decision with 
written findings of fact. 
D. 	Ifafter hearing the dispute Grantee has been found to be in default, Grantee shall then have ninety( 90) days from such a determination to remedy the violation or failure. At any time after that ninety( 90) day period the City may, by formal action at a public hearing affording reasonable notice and opportunity for Grantee 
to be heard, revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XIV.) 
4. 16. 15 Removal upon revocation Upon the revocation of this franchise as herein provided, Grantee shall remove all ofits above-ground attachments and wires from poles used as 
authorized herein. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XV.) 
4. 16. 16 Force majeure Ifby reason of a force majeure any party is unable in whole or in part to carry out its obligations hereunder, that party shall not be deemed to be in violation of default during the continuance of such inability. (Ord. No. 310, Sec. XVI.) 
4. 16. 17 Mans Upon the request ofthe City, Grantee shall maintain on file with the city a true and accurate map or set of maps showing all system equipment installed and in place in 
streets and other public places. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XVII.) 
4. 16. 18 Service area 
A. 	Residentsinthoseareaswithanaveragedensityofatleasttwenty-five (25) 
homes per aerial mile or twenty-five (25) homes per underground mile, as measured from the nearest point of usable trunk, shall be provided service upon 
payment ofthe standard installation charge and applicable monthly fees; except 
that installations requiring underground drops or aerial drops in excess of one 
hundredandfifty (150) feetshallbeconsideredanon-standardinstallationtobe 
charged at Grantee' s actual cost of installation. 
B. Service to home not meeting those density requirements above shall be provided 
on a time plus material basis. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XVIII.) 
62. 1 
5-24 
4. 16. 19 Relocation of system facilities 
A. 	For publics works Whenever because of public necessity or the welfare of the public generally, the City shall elect to change or alter the grade of any street, alley, or public way, or to sell or vacate any street, alley, easement or public way, 
or to construct or re-construct facilities and other public improvements, Grantee 
shall, after forty-five (45) days' prior written request from the City, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, and other fixtures at its own 
expense. 
B. 	Temporary relocation Grantee shall, upon the request of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, or any person holding a building, moving or demolition permit issued by the City, temporarily raise, lower, relay, relocate or remove its wires, cables, and other facilities, to accommodate the moving or demolition of the building, as the Grantee shall determine. The expense of such temporary relocation of Grantee' s facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same, except in the case where the City is moving or demolishing a building without issuing of a permit, and Grantee shall have the authority to establish the reasonable cost of 
such changes and require such payment in advance. Grantee shall be given no 
less than fifteen( 15) days' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary 
changes. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XIX.) 
4.16.20 Serviceto publicfacilities 
A. 	Upon the request of the City, any law enforcement agency of the City or any public elementary or secondary school facility, Grantee shall provide one ( 1) cable extension to the exterior ofany building housing the requesting party, free of charge for installation and monthly basic service, provided the building is readily serviceable and located within one hundred fifty( 150) feet of Grantee' s 
distribution system. 
B. The cost of installing service to the interior of said buildings shall be free for one 1) outlet. The cost of any extra interior wiring of additional outlets, shall be determined by Grantee according to the amount of labor and materials required to install the number of service outlets requested. The requesting parry shall 
reimburse Grantee for the reasonable cost of labor and materials to wire such 
interior extensions. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XX.) 
4. 16.21 Franchise payment to city 
A. 	In consideration ofthe rights herein granted, and as compensation to the city of Clarksville for use of its streets, alleys, easements and other public places, and in 
lieu of any occupational or license tax, or any other utility tax, the Grantee shall 
pay to the City an amount equal to three percent (3%) of Grantee' s gross annual 
receipts. Payments shall be made quarter-annually, and shall be due and payable not later than thirty (30) days after the last day of each calendar quarter. 
62.2 
S-24 
B. 	Should federal law permit the payment of franchise fees according to a higher percentage of gross annual receipts, the City may decide to increase the percentage of franchise fee payment, not to exceed the maximum allowed by federal law, at the end of each calendar year. Grantee shall begin paying the new franchise fee percentage upon ninety( 90) days' advance written notice from the City. 
C. 	For the purpose of verifying the accuracy of the amount of said fees, the duly authorized agent of the City shall have the right to examine Grantee' s receipt records at Grantee' s place of business upon reasonable notice. The records of 
Grantee shall be closed to the City three ( 3) years after the anniversary date thereof, and after an examination of such records has been made by the City. Ord. No. 310, Sec. XXI.) 
4. 16.22 Unauthorized connections or modifications 
A. 	It shall be unlawful for any person, without the expressed consent of the Grantee to make any connection, extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise with or to any segment of the system for 
any purpose whatsoever. 
B. 	It shall be unlawful for any person, to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct or damage any part, segment or content of the system for any purpose whatsoever. 
C. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain a system 
without having first applied for and received a franchise from the City. (Ord. No. 
310, Sec. XXII.) 
4. 16. 23 Severability Ifany term, condition or section ofthis franchise agreement or the 
application thereof to by person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application of such term, condition or section to 
persons or circumstances other than those as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable 
shall not be affected thereby, and this franchise and all the terms, conditions and sections hereof shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and to be complied with. Nothing contained in this franchise agreement shall require Grantee to violate or waive its First Amendment rights 
or any statue, regulation, rule or decision of any federal, state or local governmental entity, agency or court having jurisdiction. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XXIII.) 
4. 16. 24 Passage and effective date This franchise agreement, having been published s required, shall take effect and be in force from and after thirty( 30) days following its final 
passage and approval. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XXIV.) 
62.3 
S-50 
4. 16.25 Modifications The terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement shall not be deemed to be modified by course of conduct of any party. All modifications to the 
terms and conditions of this agreement shall be in writing. (Ord. No. 310, Sec. XV.) 
4. 16. 26 Fee payments Payment of Grantee' s franchise fee under this agreement shall not 
be deemed to excuse Grantee from payment of any business or occupation tax which may in the future be imposed by the City or an ad valorem taxes assessed with respect to the real or personal 
property of the Grantee by the City. (Ord. No. 310, Sec. XVI.) 
4. 16. 27 Service standards 
A. 	That Grantee shall meet the Federal Communications Commission( FCC) 
Customer Service Standards as promulgated by 1992 Cable Act. 
B. 	Grantee agrees to maintain a local payment center and service technician for the duration of this agreement. ( Ord. No. 310, Sec. XVIL) 
CHAPTER 4.20 
TAX ON PRIVATE CLUBS 
Sections: 
4.20.01 
City tax levied 
4.20.01 Citytaxlevied AllprivateclubswithinthecityofClarksville, Arkansas, serving 
alcoholic beverages shall pay to the city a supplemental tax equal to one-half(%2) ofthe amount 
paid to the state. Proceeds from this tax shall be deposited into the city' s General Fund. 
62.4 
CHAPTER 4.22 
NET METERING 
Sections: 
4. 22. 01 Definitions 
4.22.02 General provisions 
4.22. 03 
Net metering requirements 
4.22.04 
Interconnection of net metering facilities to existing electric power 
systems 
4.22.05 Interconnection agreement terms and conditions 
4.22.01 Definitions 
Billing period The billing period for net metering will be the same as the billing period 
under the customer' s applicable standard rate schedule. 
Biomass facility A facility that may use one or more organic fuel sources that can either be processed into synthetic fuels or burned directly to produce steam or electricity, provided that the resources are renewable, environmentally sustainable in their production and use, and the process of conversion to electricity results in a net environmental benefit. This includes, but is not limited to, dedicated energy crops and trees, agricultural food and feed crops, agricultural 
crop wastes and residues, wood wastes and residues, aquatic plants, animal wastes, and other accepted organic, renewable waste materials. 
Commercial customer A customer served under utility' s standard rate schedule 
applicable to commercial service. 
Commission The Arkansas Public Service Commission. 
Electric utility Clarksville Light& Water engaged in the business of supplying electric energy to the ultimate customer. Utility is an interchangeable term. 
Fuel cell facility A facility that converts the chemical energy of a fuel directly to direct current electricity without intermediate combustion or thermal cycles. 
Geothermal facility An electric generating facility in which the prime mover is a steam turbine. The steam is generated in the earth by heat from the earth' s magma. 
Hydroelectric facility An electric generating facility in which the prime mover is a 
water wheel. 
The waterwheel is driven by falling water. 
62. 5 
r 
Micro turbine facility A facility that uses a small combustion turbine to produce 
electricity. 
Net metering Measuring the difference between electricity supplied by an electric utility and the electricity generated by a net metering customer and fed back to the electric utility over the applicable billing period. 
Net metering facility A facility for the production of electrical energy that: 
A. 	Uses solar, wind, hydroelectric, geothermal or biomass resources to generate 
electricity including, but not limited to, fuel cells and micro turbines that generate electricity ifthe fuel source is entirely derived from renewable resources; and, 
B. 	Hasageneratingcapacity ofnotmorethan twenty-five (25)kilowattsfor residential or three hundred( 300) kilowatts for non-residential use; and, 
C. 	Is located in Clarksville; and, 
D. 	Can operate in parallel with an electric utility' s existing transmission and distribution facilities; and, 
r 
E. 	Is intended primarily to offset part or all ofthe net-metering customer requirements for electricity; or, 
F. 	Is designated as eligible for net metering service pursuant to A.C.A. 23-18­604( B)( 3). 
Net excess generation The amount of electricity that a net metering customer has fed back to the electric utility that exceeds the amount of electricity used by that customer during the billing process. 
Paralleloperation Theoperation ofon-sitegenerationbyacustomerwhilethe customer is connected to the utility' s distribution system. 
Residential customer A customer served under the utility' s standard rate schedules 
applicable to residential service. 
Solar facility A facility in which electricity is generated through the collection, transfer and or storage of the sun' s heat or light. 
Wind facility A facility in which an electric generator is powered by a wind-driven turbine. ( Ord. No. 2015-740, Sec. 1.) 
62. 6 
4.22.02 General provisions The following policy provisions are hereby adopted in order 
to establish rules and procedures allowing net energy metering and interconnections to the Clarksville Light& 
Water electric utility. ( Ord. No. 2015-740, Sec. 2.) 
4.22.03 Net metering requirements 
A. 	Electric utility requirements The Clarksville Electric Utility which offers 
residential, commercial electrical service or industrial service shall allow net 
metering facilities to be interconnected using an approved meter capable of registeringtheflowofelectricityintwo (2) directions. 
B. 	Metering requirements 
1. 	Metering equipment shall be installed to both accurately measure the electricity supplied by the electric Utility to each net-metering customer and also to accurately measure the electricity generated by each net-metering Customer that is fed back to the electric Utility over the applicable billing period. Non-residential meters must be capable of 
measurement of demand. 
2. 	Accuracy requirements for both forward and reverse registration modes shall be as defined in the Arkansas Public Service Commission' s special 
rules— electric. A test to determine compliance with this accuracy requirement shall be made by the Utility either before or at the time the net metering facility is placed in operation in accordance with these rules. 
3. 	Customer will pay the difference between a standard meter used by Clarksville Light& Water for the class of Customer and the required 
meter outlined above. 
C. 	Billing for net metering 
1. 	On a monthly basis, the net metering Customer shall be billed the charges applicable under the currently effective standard rate schedule and any appropriate rider schedules. Under net metering, only the kilowatt-hour 
kWh) units of a Customer' s bill are affected. 
2. 	Ifthe kWh' s supplied by the electric Utility exceeds the kWh' s generated by the net metering facility and fed back to the electric Utility during the billing period, the net metering Customer shall be billed for the net kWh' s supplied by the electric Utility in accordance with the rates and charges 
under the Customer' s standard rate schedule. 
62.7 
3. 	If the kWh' s generated by the metering facility and fed back to the electric Utility exceeds the kWh' s supplied by the electric Utility to the net metering Customer during the applicable billing period, the Customer shall not receive any compensation from the Utility for such net metering excess delivered kWh' s during the billing period, but shall be credited with any excess net accumulation in the next billing period. Any net excess credit remaining at the end of the calendar year will be credited 
back at the electric utilities average cost per kWh of purchased power the 
previous fiscal year( fiscal year October 1 
to September 30). Any amount 
inexcessofthatshallexpireattheendofthecalendaryear. (Ord.No. 
205-740, Sec. 3.) 
4.22.04 Interconnection ofnet metering facilities to existing_electric powersystems 
A. 	Requirements for initial interconnection of a net meteringfacility 
1. 	
A net metering customer shall execute a Standard Interconnection Agreement for Net Metering Facilities (Appendix A) prior to interconnection with the Utility' s facilities. 

2. 	
A net metering facility shall be capable of operating in parallel and safely commencing the delivery of power into the Utility system at a single point of interconnection. To prevent a net metering Customer from back-feeding a de-energized line, a net metering facility shall have a visibly open, lockable, manual disconnect switch which is accessible by the electric utility and clearly labeled. 

3. 	
The Customer shall submit a Standard Interconnection Agreement to the 


electric Utility at least thirty( 30) days prior to the date the Customer 
intends to interconnect the net metering facilities to the Utility' s facilities. 
The Standard Information, Sections 1 through 4 of the Standard 
Interconnection Agreement must be completed for the notification to be 
valid. The Customer shall have all equipment necessary to complete the interconnection prior to such notification. Ifmailed, the date of 
notification shall be the third day following the mailing of the Standard 
Interconnection Agreement. The electric Utility will provide a copy of the 
Standard Interconnection Agreement to the customer upon request. 
4. Following notification by the customer as specified in( 3), the utility shall 
review the plans of the facility and provide the results of its review to the customer within thirty( 30) days. Any items that would prevent parallel operation due to violation of safety standards and/ or power generation 
62. 8 
B. 
C. 
S-50 
limits shall be explained along with a description of the modifications necessary to remedy the violations. 
5. 	The net metering facility, at the net metering customer' s expense, shall 
meet safety and performance standards established by local and national 
Electrical Codes including the National Electrical Code( NEW), the 

Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE), the National 
Electrical Safety Code( NESC), and Underwriters Laboratories (UL), and 
shall be inspected annually by the customer or his/her professional installer. 
6. 	The net metering facility at the net metering customer' s expense shall meet all permitting, safety and performance standards adopted by the utility and pursuant to these rules that are necessary to assure safe and reliable operation ofthe net metering facility to the utility' s system. At any time ifa safety inspection reveals or the utility identifies an unsafe condition at the net metering facility, said customer and the City Inspector 
will be notified and at the customers expense a licensed installer shall be 
secured to complete the necessary repairs as soon as practical. Ifthe City Electrical Inspector deems immediate repair, a necessity to remain operational, said net metering facility shall be switched off until the owner has made satisfactory repairs. 
Requirements for modifications or changes to a net meteringfacility 
Modifications or changes made to a net metering facility shall be evaluated by the electric utility prior to being made. The net metering customer shall provide detailed information describing the modifications or changes to the electric utility in writing prior to making the modifications to the net metering facility. The utility shall review the proposed changes to the facility and provide the results of its evaluation to the customer within thirty( 30) days of receipt of the customer' s proposal. Any items that would prevent parallel operation due to violation of applicable safety standards and/or power generation limits shall be explained along with a description ofthe modifications necessary to remedy the violations. 
Requirement for new customer at location to comply with regulationWhen anation 
existing net metering customer leaves Clarksville' s service, the new customer at that address will be required to comply with the rules as a new customer and new service. ( Ord. No. 2015-740, Sec. 4.) 
62.9 
4.22.05 Interconnection agreement terms and conditions This Interconnection Agreement for Net Metering Facilities(" Agreement") is made and entered into this_ 
day of 20_, by Clarksville Light& 

Water(" Utility") and 
Customer"), a 

specify whether corporation or other), each hereinafter sometimes 
referred to individually as" Party" or collectively as the" Parties." In consideration ofthe mutual 
covenants set forth herein, the Parties agree as follows: 
A. The net metering facility The net metering facility meets the requirements of 
A.C.A. 23-18-603( 5) and the electric Utility' s net metering rules. 
B. 	Governing provisions The parties shall be subject to the provisions ofA.C.A. 23­
18-604 and the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement, the net metering rules and the Utility' s applicable rates. 
C. 	Interruption or reduction of deliveries The Utility shall not be obligated to accept and may require Customer to interrupt or reduce deliveries when necessary in order to construct, install, repair, replace, remove, investigate or inspect any of its equipment or part of its system, or if it reasonably determines that curtailment, interruption, or reduction is necessary because of emergencies, forced outages, 
force majeure or compliance with prudent electrical practices. Whenever 
possible, the Utility shall give the Customer reasonable notice ofthe possibility 
that interruption or reduction of deliveries may be required. Notwithstanding any 
otherprovisionofthisAgreement, ifatanytimetheUtility reasonablydetermines 
that either the facility may endanger the Utility' s personnel or other persons or 
property or the continued operation of the Customer' s facility may endanger the 
integrity or safety of the Utility' s electric system, the Utility shall have the right to 
disconnect and lock out the Customer' s facility from the Utility' s electric system. 
The Customer' s facility shall remain disconnected until such time as the Utility is 
reasonably satisfied that the conditions referenced in this section have been 
corrected. 
D. 	Interconnection Customer shall deliver the as-available energy to the Utility at the Utility' s meter. 
1. 	
Utility shall furnish and install a meter capable of net metering. Customer shall install a Utility furnished meter socket for the Utility' s meter and any related interconnection equipment per the Utility' s technical requirements, including safety and performance standards. 

2. 	
The Customer shall submit a Standard Interconnection Agreement to the 


electric Utility at least thirty( 30) days prior to the date the Customer intends to interconnect the net metering facilities to the Utility' s facilities. 
62. 10 
The Standard Information, Section( A) through( D) of the Standard Interconnection Agreement must be completed for the notification to be 
valid. The Customer shall have all equipment necessary to complete the interconnection prior to such notification. Ifmailed, the date of 
notification shall be the third day following the mailing of the Standard Interconnection Agreement. The electric Utility shall provide a copy of the Standard Interconnection Agreement to the Customer upon request. 
3. 	
Following notification by the Customer as specified in requirements for initial interconnection, the Utility shall review the plans of the facility and provide the results of its review to the Customer within thirty( 30) calendar days. Any items that would prevent parallel operation due to violationofapplicable safetystandards and/ orpowergenerationlimits shall be explained along with a description ofthe modifications necessary to remedy the violations. 

4. 	
To prevent a net metering Customer from back-feeding a de-energized line, the Customer shall install a manual disconnect switch with lockout 


capability that is accessible to Utility personnel at all hours. 
5. 	Customer at his own expense shall meet all safety and performance 
standards established by local and national Electrical Codes including the National Electrical Code( NEC), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers ( IEEE), the National Electrical Safety code( NESC), and 
Underwriters Laboratories( UL). 
6. 	Customer shall not commence parallel operation of the net metering facility until the net metering facility has been inspected and approved by the Utility. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Utility' s approval to operate the Customer' s net metering facility in parallel with the Utility' s electrical 
system should not be construed as an endorsement, confirmation, 
warranty, guarantee, or representation concerning the safety, operating characteristics, durability or reliability of the Customer' s net metering facility. 
7. 	Modifications or changes made to a net metering facility shall be evaluated by the Utility prior to being made. The Customer shall provide detailed information describing the modifications or changes to the Utility in writing prior to making the modifications to the net metering facility. The Utility shall review the proposed changes to the facility and provide the results of its evaluation to the Customer within thirty( 30) calendar 
62. 11 
E. 
F. 
G. 
days of receipt of the Customer' s proposal. Any items that would prevent paralleloperation duetoviolationofapplicable safety standard and/or power generation limits shall be explained along with a description of the modifications necessary to remedy the violations. 
Maintenance and permits The Customer shall obtain any governmental 
authorizations and permits required for the construction and operation of the net 

metering facility and interconnection facilities. The Customer shall maintain the 
net metering facility and interconnection facilities in a safe and reliable manner 
and in conformance with all applicable laws and regulations. CLW recommends 
that the Customer have an annual inspection ofthe net metering facility. At any 
time CLW may request a professional inspection be completed at the expense of 
the net metering facility owner. Ifan inspection is completed, it shall be signed 
by both the Electrical Inspector and net metering facility owner and filed with 
Clarksville Light& 
Water. At any time ifa safety inspection reveals, or the Utility identifies an unsafe condition at the net metering facility, said Customer and the City Inspector will be notified and at the Customer' s expense a licensed installer shall be secured to complete the necessary repairs as soon as practical. If the City Electrical Inspector deems immediate repair a necessity to remain operational, said net metering facility shall be switched offuntil the owner has made satisfactory repairs. 
Access to premises The Utility may enter the Customer' s premises to inspect the 
Customer' s protective devices and read or test the meter. The Utility may 
disconnect the interconnection facilities without notice ifthe Utility reasonably believes a hazardous condition exists and such immediate action is necessary to protect persons, or the Utility' s facilities, or property ofthe others from damage or interference caused by the Customer' s facilities or lack ofproperly protective 
devices. 
Indemnity and liability Each parry shall indemnify the other party, its directors, officers, agents and employees against all loss, damages expense and liability to third persons for injury to or death of persons or injury to property caused by the indemnifying party' s engineering design, constriction ownership or operations of, or the making of replacements, additions or betterment to, or by failure of any of such party' s works or facilities used in connection with this Agreement by reason of omission or negligence, whether active or passive. The indemnifying party shall on the other party' s request defend any suit asserting a claim covered by this indemnity. The indemnifying party shall pay all costs that may be incurred by the other party in enforcing this indemnity. It is the intent ofthe parties hereto that, where negligence is determined to be contributory, principals ofcomparative 
62. 12 
negligence will be followed and each parry shall bear the proportionate cost of 
any loss, damage, expense and liability attributable that party' s negligence. 
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to create any duty to, any standard of care with reference to or any liability to any person not a party to this Agreement. Neither the Utility, its officers, agents or employees shall be liable for any claims, demands, costs, losses, causes of action or any other liability of any nature or kind, arising out ofthe engineering, design construction, ownership, maintenance or operation of,or making replacements, additions or betterment to, the Customer' s facilities by the Customer of any other person or entity. 
H. 	Notices All written notices shall be directed as follows: 
Clarksville Light& Water 
Attention: General Manger 
P.O. Box 1807 
400 West Main Street 
Clarksville AR 72830 
Customer notices to Utility shall refer to the Customer' s electric service account number set forth in Section( A) of this Agreement. 
I. 	Term of Agreement The term of this Agreement shall be the same as the term of the otherwise applicable standard rate schedule. This Agreement shall remain in effect until modified or terminated in accordance with its terms or applicable 
regulations or laws. 
J. 	Assi indent This Agreement and all provisions hereof shall inure to and be 
binding upon the respective parties hereto, their personal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns. The Customer shall not assign this Agreement or any part hereofwithoutthepriorwrittenconsentoftheUtility, and suchunauthorized 
assignmentmayresultinterminationofthisAgreement. (Ord. No. 2015-740, 
Sec. 5.) 
62. 13 
Sections: 
4.24. 01 
4.24.02 
4.24.03 
4.24.04 
4.24. 05 
4.24.06 
4.24.07 
S-50 
CHAPTER 4.24 
DEALERS IN USED ARTICLES 
Daily report Inspection of reports 
Unlawful transactions Penalty Unlawful operations 
Penalty Definitions 
4.24.01 Daily report All pawnbrokers, junk dealers and dealers in second hand articles doing business in the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, are hereby required to keep a daily report 
r 
62. 14 
rk 	showing fully the name, age, address, sex, driver' s license number, color and general physical description of each person who shall have pawned, pledged or sold any article during that day, 
togetherwithafulldescriptionofthearticlepledgedpawnedorsold. (Ord. No. 66, Sec. 1.) 
4.24.02 Inspectionofreports Thedailyreportsrequiredtobekeptin4.24.01ofthis ordinance shall be furnished to the Chief of Police upon request. In addition, these reports shall 
be kept in duplicate; such duplicate reports shall at all times be subject to the inspection of any 
member of the Clarksville Police Force or the City Attorney. (Ord. No. 66, Sec. 2.) 
4.24.03 Unlawfultransactions Itshallbeunlawfulforanypawnbroker,junkdealeror dealer in second hand articles, agent or employee, to accept any pawn or pledge or buy from any minor or to knowingly advance any money, or other thing of value, upon the property of a minor, 
except with the written consent of the parent of guardian of said minor. ( Ord. No. 66, Sec. 3.) 
4.24.04 Penalty Anyperson, firmorcorporationviolatinganypartofthisordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine not to exceed 
Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for each offense. Each day after a report is requested by the Chief of Police that any pawnbroker, junk dealer or dealer in second hand articles shall fail, refuse or neglect to furnish such reports as herein provided, or each day such persons or corporations shall refuse to keep or provide a duplicate of said reports for the inspection of the officers named shall 
constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. No. 66, Sec. 4.) 
4.24.05 Unlawful operations It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to locate, own, run or operate junkyard or automobile graveyard, as defined herein within the city limits of Clarksville, Arkansas. This section ofthis ordinance shall not apply to any such 
business existing as ofApril 14, 1980. ( Ord. No. 86, Sec. 1.) 
4.24.06 Penalty Anyperson, firmorcorporationviolatinganyprovisionofthis ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined in any 
sumnot lessthanFiftyDollars ($50.00), normorethanOneHundredDollars ($100.00) each 
day. Each day that such offense shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be 
punishable as such. (Ord. No. 86, Sec. 2.) 
4.24.07 Definitions As used in this ordinance: 
Automobile graveyard shall mean any establishment or place ofbusiness which is maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or inoperable motor vehicles or the parts of bodies from such motor vehicles. 
S-34 
Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, aluminum, tin, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris and waste or junked or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof or iron, steel of other old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous materials. 
Junk motor vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is inoperable, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or damaged so that it is unable to start or move under its own power. Vehicles are 
excluded from this definition as long as they are registered and bear current license permits. 
Junkyard shall mean an establishment or place of business which is maintained, used or 
operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, junk motor vehicles, or for the maintenance 
and operation of an automobile graveyard. 
Public view shall mean that an object or objects may be readily seen and their character distinguished by normal unaided vision by observing it from a public thoroughfare or a vehicle 
on a public thoroughfare, or from private property within the immediate area. ( Ord. No. 86, Sec. 
3.) 
CHAPTER 4.28 
BUSINESS PERMITS 
Sections: 
4.28. 01  Definitions  
4.28. 02  Permit required  
4.28.03  Procurement of permit  
4.28. 04  Application  
4.28. 05  Non-transferable  
4.28. 06  Penalties  
4.28. 07  Display  
4.28.01  Definitions The term" person" as used herein shall refer to any sole  

proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, firm or other legal entity which engages in, carries on or follows any trade, business, vocation, profession or calling within the city of Clarksville, except such persons who are exempt from payment of occupation taxes and licensing procedures by the laws of the state of Arkansas or the laws ofthe United States. The terms shall 
not include self-employed minors eighteen( 18) years of age or younger. ( Ord. No. 98-375, Sec. 
1.) 
64 
S-39 
4.28.02 Permit required It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, individual or corporation, within the city limits of the city of Clarksville to engage in, carry on or follow any trade, business, vocation, profession or calling without first having obtained a permit required for the privilege of engaging in, carrying on or following such trade, business, profession, vocation 
or calling in said city. ( Ord. No. 98-375, Sec. 2.) 
4.28.03 Procurementofpermit 
A. 	All permits provided for in this ordinance shall be issued in the office ofthe City Clerk in the Clarksville City Hall. The permits shall be issued for a term beginning as of January 1, 1999. The city of Clarksville will send notices to all known businesses within the city limits. 
B. 	Businesses shall be given a 60-day period beginning December 1 through January 31 annually to renew their business license at no charge. 
C. 	A new business shall have 60 days to make application for a business license at 
no charge. A business license form shall be completed and turned into the City Clerk' s office before a building permit application shall be granted. 
D. 	Until a business license form is completed and turned into the City Clerk' s office, the Clarksville Light and Water Company shall not provide utility service to said business location. Any change in the customer' s billing information must be accompanied by a change in the business license from the City Clerk' s office. 
E. 	Any information which changes during the course of the year shall be updated by 
filing an amendment to the business license from at the City Clerk' s office. Ord. No. 98-375, Sec. 3.) 
4.28.04 Application Application for a business license permit under this ordinance shall 
be made to the city of Clarksville in writing, upon forms to be furnished by the city. Each application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
A. 	Name of the business and physical address of the business 
B. 	Mailing address (ifdifferent from the physical address) 
C. 	Business telephone number 
D. 	Name of business owner 
E. 	Business owner' s home telephone number 
F. 	Secondary contact person( s) 
G. 	Secondary contract person(s)' home telephone number(s) 
H. 	Owner ofthe building the business is located( ifdifferent from the business 
owner) 
5-34 
I. 
Franchise business and franchise business and franchisee 
J. 	Type of business 
K. 	Hazardous materials 
L. 	Proof of Arkansas sales tax permit( ifapplicable) 
M. 	Ifhome business, how many rooms are being utilized for this business 
N. 	Any other information requested by the city of Clarksville 
The City Clerk shall maintain an alphabetical list of merchants in the city of Clarksville 
and other information obtained through the business license. ( Ord. No. 98-375, Sec. 4.) 
4.28.05 Non-transferable No permit issued under the guidance ofthis ordinance shall be 
transferred from one business to another. In the event of a business " change of location," a new 
application for a business license shall be obtained from the City Clerk of the city of Clarksville, 
noting the change in address. ( Ord. No. 98-375, Sec. 5.) 
4.28.06 Penalties 
A. 	All businesses will be given an annual sixty( 60) day period to renew their business license agreement with the City Clerk' s office at the Clarksville City Hall. Failure to register for a business license by the deadline date of January 31, shall be subject to a Twenty-Five Dollar($ 25.00) penalty made payable to the city 
of Clarksville. 
B. 	All new businesses will be given an annual sixty( 60) day period in which to submit information provided under this ordinance to the City Clerk' s office at the Clarksville City Hall. Failure to register for a business license by the conclusion 
ofthe60daynoticeshallbesubjectto aTwenty-FiveDollar($25.00)penalty 
made payable to the city of Clarksville. 
C. 	Thirty (30) days shall be given to the business owner to pay the late fee penalty. If after thirty( 30) days, no payment is received by the city of Clarksville, the owner of the business shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in Clarksville District Court, shall be fined in an amount not less than Twenty-Five 
Dollars($25.00) normorethanFiveHundredDollars ($500.00), andeachdayof 
violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
D. 	Anypersonviolatingtheprovisionsofthisordinanceand/oranypersonwho makes a false affidavit or statement or report to the city as a part of the procedures recognized by this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not less than Twenty-Five Dollars 
25.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), and each day of 
violation shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. No. 98-375, Sec. 6.) 
S-36 
4.28.07 Dismay Eachbusinesspermitshallbepostedinaconspicuousplacewhere such business or corporation is carried on and the holder of such permit shall immediately show the same to any officer ofthe city upon being requested to do so. The city shall provide a placard to each business submitting an application for a business license in the city of Clarksville. The city 
of Clarksville shall offer renewal stamps available annually. 
Businesses which fail to post the business license placard in a conspicuous place shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount of not less 
thanTwenty-FiveDollars ($25.00), normorethanFiveHundred Dollars ($500.00) , andeach 
dayofviolationshallconstituteaseparateoffense. (Ord.No. 98-375, Sec. 7.) 
CHAPTER 4.32 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 
Sections: 
4.32.01 Definitions 
4.32.02 Special use permit application 
4.32.03 Required information 
4.32.04 Limitations 
4.32.05 Conditions 
4.32.06 Additional requirements 
4.32.07 Removal ofabandoned Wireless Communication Facilities 
4. 32. 08 
Non-conforming Wireless Communications Facilities 
4.32.09 RevocationofspecialUsePermit 
4.32. 10 
Penalty 
4.32. 11 
Starting time 
4. 32. 01 Definition 
Wireless Communication Facility A wireless communication facility is defined as any unstaffedfacilityforthetransmissionand/orreceptionofwirelesstelecommunication services, usually consisting of an Antenna Array, connection cables, an Equipment Facility, and a Support 
Structure, also known as elevation. (Ord. No.
an antennae or tower, to achieve the necessary 2000-409, Sec. 1.) 
S-36 
4.32.02 	Special use permit application The application for a special use permit shall be 
made to the office ofthe Mayor by the owner or agent of the proposed Wireless Communication Facility. The application shall include four( 4) copies of the required site plan. The fee for 
processing a special use application is Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). 
The required survey and site plan shall be submitted on paper no larger than twenty-four 
24) inchesbythirty-six( 36) inchesandnosmallerthantwelve (12) inchesbytwenty-four( 24) inches. The site plan shall be drawn to scale of no less than one ( 1) inch equal twenty (20) feet unless the City Council approves a different scale. The survey and site plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following information. 
A. 	The land to be included in the proposed land use along with a written legal description of the land. 
B. 	The location and dimensions of all public right-of-way on or abutting the planned 
area. 
C. 	Location of all points of vehicular entrance and exit to the site. The location and 
dimensions of all existing casements and public improvements within the site. 
D. 	The location of permanent or temporary structures or proposed structures to be located on the site. 
E. 	Location of all security fencing around the site. 
Ord. No. 2000-409, Sec. 2.) 

4.30.03 Required information The complete application, including all supportive information, must be received by the Mayor at least thirty( 30) working days before the date that work is to commence. The special use application shall contain the following information: 
A. 	The survey and site plan of the property prepared by a certified land surveyor or 
registered civil engineer. 
B. 	The street address or addresses of the entire property. 
C. 	The present zoning classification ofthe property, using such words as 
residential," " industrial," and" commercial" along with the numeral and letters in lieu of letters such as " R-2 MF." 
S-36 
D. 	A description of the proposed special use, including the description of any construction of temporary structures to be erected on the property. This description shall include a scaled site plan containing a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations and other documentation showing the location and dimensions ofthe wireless communication facility and all improvements associated therewith, including information concerning specifications, antenna locations, equipment facility and shelters, landscaping the screening, topography, adjacent uses and existing vegetation. Applicants proposing to collocate on an existing Wireless Communication Facility shall include a Radio Frequency Intermodulation Study with their application. 
E. 	A copy of the appropriate FCC license or license application. 
F. 	The projected route of truck traffic to and from the operation site including the projected number of trips. The number of trips and route may be regulated by the City Council. 
G. 	The name of the subcontractor responsible for site preparation( a separate special 
use permit is required). 
H. 	A drawing or other rendering depicting the Wireless Communication Facility. Said drawing should indicate any artificial illumination or signage, logo, decal, 
symbol or any other message of a commercial or non-commercial nature. 
I. 	A drawing and description of the height of the Wireless Communications Facility as well as its width at the base and a detailed description of the length and type of 
guide wires or other item used to stabilize the Wireless Communication Facility. 
J. 	Adescriptionanddrawingofopaquesecurityfencenotlessthansix (6) feetin 
height. 
K. 	The pertinent and relevant Federal Aviation Regulations and proof that the 
Wireless Communication Facility complies. 
L. 	A statement agreeing to allow collocation of other Wireless Communications Facility users. The statement shall include the applicant' s policy regarding collocation of other providers and the methodology to be used by the applicant in determining reasonable rates to be charged other providers. The collocation 
agreement shall be considered a condition of issuance of a special use permit. 
69 
S-36 
M. In addition to the above information, the applicant shall submit supportive 
information that shall be deemed necessary by the City Council. If additional information is requested, an additional seven( 7) working days shall be required 
fortheprocessingoftheapplication. (Ord.No. 2000-409, Sec. 3.) 
4.32.04 Limitations The City Council may impose reasonable conditions and restrictions upon the application under consideration with the intent of minimizing the impact of the special use permit operation upon nearby property or public property. The limitations placed upon a special use permit may include, but are not limited to: 
A. 	limitations on height 
B. 	limitations on width at base 
C. 	landscaping and screening 
D. 	collocation with other wireless communication providers 
E. 
useofpre-existing structures 
F. 	method of controlling traffic (flagman or traffic control device may be required at 
contractor' s expense) 
G. 	weight limits may be placed on all haulers to minimize damage to public facilities reasonable weight limits to be determined by the Mayor or his designated agent) 
H. 	the number of hours that site preparation work can be conducted on the premises may be regulated by the City Council to minimize harmful effects on nearby 
property owners. (Ord. No. 2000-409, Sec. 4.) 
4.32.05 Conditions The applicant must be in compliance with the FAA regulations and must also meet the following conditions: 
A. 	All Wireless Communication Facilities shall be engineered, designed and constructed to be capable of sharing the facility with other providers, to collocate 
with other existing wireless communication facilities and to accommodate the 
future collocation of other Wireless Communication Facilities. Applicants 
proposing a new Wireless Communication Facility shall demonstrate that it has 
made a reasonable good faith attempt to find a collocation site. Competitive conflict and financial burden are not deemed to be adequate reasons against 
collocation. 
B. All Wireless Communication Facilities with support structure up to a height of 
150 feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least the three( 3) antenna array. All Wireless Communication Facilities with support structure that exceed 150 feet in height shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least four( 4) antenna array. (Ord.No. 2000-409, Sec. 5.) 
69. 1 
S-39 
4.32.06 Additional requirements All reasonable conditions required for a special use 
must be met before any operations may begin. The owner or applicant filing for a special use permit shall sign a binding agreement with the city of Clarksville that all damages to public property related to this operation, for which the owner or applicant is legally responsible, shall be 
repairedattheexpenseoftheapplicant. TheMayorshalldeterminetheconditionofpublic 
facilities (includingphotosanddocumentation)priortotheinitiationoftheoperation. Abond, for a reasonable amount, shall be required for the amount determined by the City Council. Immediately after completion of the Wireless Communication Facility, repairs will commence on the damage that has been done to the public property. Failure of the applicant to correctly repair all damaged public facilities, for which it has been determined responsible, may result in 
the revocation of all existing or future permits for said company and the City Attorney is authorized to take what means are necessary to insure that the public facilities are repaired. Ord. No. 2000-409, Sec. 6.) 
4.32.07 Removal ofabandoned Wireless Communication Facilities Any Wireless 
Communication Facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve ( 12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the Wireless Communication Facility owner shall remove the Wireless Communication Facility within ninety( 90) days after notice from the city to remove the Wireless Communication Facility. Ifthe abandoned Wireless Communication Facility is not removed within 90 days, the city may remove it and recover its costs from the Wireless Communication Facility owner. Ifthere are two or more users of a single Wireless Communication Facility, these provisions shall not become effective until all providers cease to use the Wireless Communication Facility. Ifthe owner of an abandoned Wireless Communication Facility cannot be located or is no longer in business, the requirements of this section shall be the responsibility ofthe landowner on whose property the Wireless 
CommunicationFacilityislocated. (Ord.No. 2000-409, Sec. 7.) 
4.32.08 Non-conforming Wireless Communication Facilities Wireless Communication Facilitiesconstructedand inexistence onthe dateoftheadoptionofthis ordinancewhichdonot 
complywiththerequirementsofthisordinance (non-conforming Wireless Communications Facility) are subject to the following conditions: 
A. 	Expansion Non-conforming Wireless Communication Facilities may continue in 
use for the purpose now use, but may not be expanded without complying with this ordinance except as further provided in this section. 
B. 	Additions Non-conforming Wireless Communications Facilities may add additional antennas (belonging to the same provider or other providers) subject to 
a separate special permit application. 
69.2 
S-36 
C. Repairs or reconstruction Non-conforming Wireless Communications Facilities 
which become damaged due to any reason or cause, may be repaired and restored to its former us, location, and physical dimensions subject to the provisions of this ordinance. Provided, however, that if the damage of the Wireless Communication Facility exceeds fifty percent( 50%) ofthe replacement cost, said Wireless 
Communication Facility may only be reconstructed or repaired in compliance 
with this ordinance. 
D. Any Wireless Communication Facility not in use for six (6) months shall be 
deemed abandoned. All rights as a non-conforming use shall cease at this point. Ord. No. 2000-409, Sec. 8.) 
4.32.09 Revocation of Special Use Permit Any Special Permit issued pursuant to this ordinance may be revoked after a hearing as provided hereinafter. If the Mayor and the City Council find that any permit holder has violated any provision of this ordinance, or has failed to 
make good firth reasonable efforts to provide or seek collocation, the Mayor and City Council may revoke the Special Use Permit upon such terms and conditions, if any, that the Mayor and the City Council may determine. Prior to initiation of revocation proceedings, the City shall 
notify the permit holder, in writing, of the specific areas of non-compliance and specify the date by which such deficiencies must be corrected. The time for correction of deficiencies shall not exceed sixty( 60) days. The permit holder shall provide the City with evidence that the required 
corrective action has been taken. Should the permit holder fail to correct any deficiencies in the time required, the Mayor and the City Council shall convene a public hearing to consider revocation of the Special Use Permit. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to notice by 
publication in a newspaper with general circulation in the City not less than ten( 10) days prior to the hearing and by written notice to the special permit holder. Other interested person may comment. The Mayor and City Council may impose reasonable restrictions with respect to time 
and procedure. ( Ord. No. 2000-409, Sec. 9.) 
4.32.10 Penalty The fineorpenaltyforviolatinganyprovisionsofthisordinanceshall, 
upon conviction in the District Court, not exceed One Thousand Dollars ($ 1, 000.00) for any 
other specified offense or violation; further, that if a thing prohibited or rendered unlawful is, in its nature, continuous in respect to time, the fine or penalty for allowing the continuance thereof 
inviolationofthisordinance shallnot exceed One ThousandDollars ($1, 000.00) foreachday 
that it may be unlawfully continued. (Ord. No. 2000-409, Sec. 10.) 
4.32. 11 Startin ime The Wireless Communication Tower construction must begin 
tgwithinsix(6) monthsoftheauthorizationunless aspecialtimelimits(lessthansix (6) months) 
has been imposed by the Mayor or his designated agent. ( Ord. No. 2000-409, Sec. 11.) 
69. 3 
TITLE 5 
HEALTH AND SANITATION 
Chapters. 
5. 04 	Administration 
5. 08 	Definitions 
5. 12 	General Requirements 
5. 16 	Nuisances 
CHAPTER 5.04 
ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
5. 04. 01 Introduction 
5.04.02 Code Enforcement Officers 
5.04.03 Inspections 
5.04.04 Violations 
5. 04.05 Administrative procedures 
5. 04.06 Condemnation 
5.04.07 Emergency procedures 
5. 04.01 Introduction 
A. 	General These regulations shall be known as the city of Clarksville' s Nuisance Abatement and Property Maintenance Code and may be referred to herein as" The 
Code" or" this Code." These regulations are intended to ensure public health, safety and welfare premises within the city of Clarksville, Arkansas. 
B. 	Applicability The provisions of this code shall apply to all residential and nonresidential structures and all premises within the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures and facilities for sanitation, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners and occupants; and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
70 ' 
S-50 
Structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in existing buildings 
shall comply with all local, state, and federal codes as administered by the city of Clarksville Building Official. Where different standards or requirements are imposed by this Code and other competent authority or by different sections of 
this Code, the most restrictive standard or requirement shall govern. 
C. 	Historic buildings, structures and districts Existing buildings or structures 
designated by the city of Clarksville, the state of Arkansas, or the United States government to be historic or within a designated historic district shall be exempted from the literal requirements of such provisions of this Code that a property body( such as the Historic Commission or City Council) determines to 
infringe upon the historic nature of the building or structure. However, no exemption may be allowed unless the buildings or structures are judged by the Code Enforcement Officer or City Building Official to be safe and in the public 
interest of health, safety and welfare. ( Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 1. 1) 
5.04.02 Code Enforcement Officers 
A. 	General This Code shall be enforced by all Code Enforcement Officers of the city 
of Clarksville. For the purposes of this Code, a Code Enforcement Officer shall be defined as any city employee who has been duly sworn and authorized to uphold the ordinances of the city and laws of the state of Arkansas related to 
property maintenance, nuisance properties, abandoned vehicles, within the boundaries of the city. This Code may also be enforced by any and all duly sworn law enforcement officers of the Clarksville Police Department. 
B. 	Identification All Code Enforcement Officers shall carry proper identification 
and present the same upon request when performing duties under this Code. Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 1. 2) 
5.04.03 Inspections 
A. 	Right of entry Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to enter structures or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional restrictions on 
unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the officers may pursue such search authorization as may be provided by law. 
B. 	Inspections Code Enforcement Officers shall make all of the inspections required 
by this Code. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified 
by the responsible officer. Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to rely upon a responsible expert opinion as the officer deems necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise. ( Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 1. 3) 
5.04.04 Violations 
A. 	Misdemeanors It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. Any person 
who is convicted of a violation of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. 
B. 	Fines Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of violating any 
provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars($ 500.00), ordouble suchsumforeachrepetitionthereof. Iftheviolation 
is continuous in nature, the penalty for allowing the continuance thereof is a fine 
not to exceed Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for each day that the violation 
is unlawfully continued. The judge will determine the actual fine. 
C. 	Citations Code Enforcement Officers are hereby authorized to issue citations to any person, firm or corporation in conflict with or in violation of any of the 
provisions of this Code. Issuances of citations must comply with Arkansas Rules of Criminal Procedures. District Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction over citations issued pursuant to this Code. 
D. 	Appeals Any person after being found guilty of a violation or after entering a 
plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a violation shall have those appellant rights granted under the laws of the state of Arkansas, United States Constitution and Arkansas Rules of Criminal Procedure. Appeals of convictions of a violation will be with Johnson County Circuit Court. ( Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 1. 4) 
5. 04.05 Administrative procedures 
A. 	Notice of violations " Notice of violations" shall be written on standardized or 
letter from approved by the city administration and shall include the following 
information: 
1. 	
The name of the owner, ifknown; 

2. 	
An address or description ofthe real estate sufficient for identification; 

3. 	
A description of the violation(s); 

4. 	
A statement that citations may be issued and fines assessed in addition to any administrative remedy imposed by the city; 

5. 	
Include a statement that the city has a right to cause repairs, work or 


demolition to be made and that the costs may be assessed against the owner and the property of the owner; and 
6. 	TheinformationrequiredbyA.C.A. 14-504-903, ifapplicable. 
B. 	Method of service Administration notices ( such as a Notice of Violation) may be issuedbyanypersonauthorizedunderA.C.A. 14-504-903 bypostingonthe 
j 	subject property and: 
1. 	
By personal service; or 

2. 	
By regular mail or certified mail, return receipt requested; or 

3. 	
When the identity or whereabouts of a person is unknown, by weekly publication in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the city for 


two (2) consecutive weeks. 
Notice by mail shall be sent to the owner' s address of record with the 
applicable County Treasurer or Collector. When sent to the proper 
address with proper postage, notice by mail shall be deemed properly 
served without regard as to whether the owner or occupant accepted the 
mail or the mail was otherwise returned. 
C. 	Transfer of ownership After receiving a notice of violation, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any property or structure to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or 
otherwise alienate or dispose of the same until: 
1. 	
The property or structure has been caused to conform with this Code; or 

2. 	
The owner shall provide the other party a true copy of any notice of 


violation issued by a Code Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the same a signed and notarized statement from the other party accepting responsibility for the property or structure. 
D. 	Exceptions The Notice of violation requirements of this section shall not apply to 
the issuance of citations. Issuance of citations must comply with the procedures describedin5.04.04 (C). (Ord.No. 2015-737, Sec. 1.5) 
5.04.06 Condemnation 
A. 	Authority In addition to other penalties provided herein but not in lieu thereof, 
the City Council for the city of Clarksville may condemn structures through the passage of a resolution, after a public hearing that shall include: 
73 
1. 	
A description of the structure; 

2. 	
The owner or owners of the structures: 

3. 	
Findings that the structures are unfit for human occupancy or otherwise detrimental to the life, property or safety of the public. 


B. 	Notices The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for publication, mailing or delivery of all notices required to condemn structures. 
1. Priornoticeofproposedcondemnation Theownerofthestructureshall 
be provided notice of any proposed condemnation action no less than ten 10) calendar days prior to consideration by City Council. 
2. 	Notice of condemnation After a structure has been condemned by resolution as provided in this Code, a certified copy of such resolution 
shall be mailed to the owners thereof, by the method described in 5.04.05 B) and if appropriate, may be recorded in the property records of the 
Johnson County Circuit Clerk. 
3. Notice of certification of costs After a condemned structure has been 
removed at city expense, the owner shall be provided no less than ten( 10)calendar days' prior notice of any action to certify costs by the City Council. If appropriate, any and all lien holders will also be provided no 
less than ten( 10) calendar days' prior notice of any action to certify costs 
by the City Council. Notice will be provided by the method described in 
5.04.05 (B). 
C. 	Destruction and removal Condemned structures shall be destroyed and removed from the premises. 
1. Destruction and removal by owner The owner of any structure that has 
been condemned by resolution of the City Council is permitted to cause, at his or her own expense, to have the same destroyed and removed within 
No 
thirty( 30) days after the city has provided notice under 5. 04.06 (C). 
person is allowed to repair or refurbish a condemned structure without an 
agreement approved by the City Council that guarantees repairs will be done in a proper and timely fashion. 
2. 	Destruction and removal by city_Ifthe condemned structure has not been torn down and removed or otherwise abated, within thirty( 30) days after 
thenoticerequirementsof5.04.06 (B) (2) havebeenmet, thentheCode 
Enforcement Officer shall supervise the removal of any such structure in 
such a manner as deemed appropriate under existing circumstances. Ifthe structure has a substantial value, it or any saleable materials thereof may be sold at public sale to the highest bidder for cash using procedures provided by law. The costs of removal shall be presented to City Council 
for certification and collection from the owner. 
D. 	Disposition of proceeds of sale All the proceeds of the sale or salvage of any 
structure, and all fines collected from the provisions of this article shall be paid by the persons collecting the same to the City Treasurer. Ifany such structure or the 
saleable materials thereof be sold for any amount which exceeds all costs 
incidental to the abatement of the nuisance, including the cleaning up ofthe premises by the city, plus any fines imposed, the balance thereof shall be returned by the City Treasurer to the former owners of such house, building and/ or 
structure constituting the nuisance. 
E. 	Lien on property for net costs If the city has any net costs in the removal of any condemned house, building or structure, the city shall have a lien on the property as provided by A.C.A. 14-54-903 and 14-54-904. An inventory of all costs shall be kept by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
F. 	Penalty for violation of article A penalty as provided by this Code is hereby
imposed against the owners of any structure, condemned by resolution of the City Council thirty( 30) days after such structure has been condemned, and each day
thereafter such nuisance be not abated constitutes a separate and distinct offense, 
providedthenotice asprovidedin 5.04.06 (C) (2) hasbeengivenwithinten( 10) 
calendar days after such structure has been condemned. 
G. 	Transfer of ownership After receiving a notice of condemnation, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any structure to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or 
otherwise alienate or dispose of the same until: 
1. 	
The property or structure has been caused to conform with this Code; or 

2. 	
The owner shall provide the other party a true and exact copy of any 


notice of violation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the same a signed and notarized statement from the other party accepting responsibility for the property or structure. 
H. 	Restrictions on utility services Restrictions on utility services to structures 
declared condemned: 
1. 	The city shall not provide or permit another to provide public or private utility services, such as water, gas or electricity, to any building or house that has been condemned by the City Council pursuant to A.C.A. 14-56­
203. 
2. 	Subsection( 1) of this section shall not preclude the temporary use of such 
utility services as may be deemed necessary during construction, repair or alteration. The Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official shall be responsible for making the determination as to when such temporary 
services may be necessary. 
I. 	Court action authorized If City Council determines that a particular structure be 
judicially condemned, the City Council shall direct the City Attorney to bring such action in the name of the city, and the only notice to be given to the owners and lien holders will be that as provided by law. When any such structure has been declared judicially to be a nuisance by a court of law, a penalty as provided by this Code is hereby imposed against the owner thereof from the date such finding is made by the court, and each day thereafter such nuisance is not abated 
constitutes a separate and distinct offense. ( Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 1. 6) 
5. 04. 07 Emergency procedures 
A. 	Temporary safeguards Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, whenever, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Code Official shall, upon approval of his supervisor, 
order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of opening, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted, and shall cause such other action to be taken as the 
Code Official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
B. 	Emergency repairs For the purposes of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer, with approval of his supervisor, shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. Costs 
incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the city. The City Attorney shall institute appropriate action against the owner ofthe premises
of such costs. ( Ord. 
where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery 
No. 2015-737, Sec. 1. 7) 
s-so 
CHAPTER 5.08 
DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
5. 08. 01 Purpose 
5.08.02 Definitions 
5.08.01 Purpose Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall for the purpose of this Code, have the meanings shown in this chapter. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted 
meanings such as the context implies. Whenever the words " dwelling unit,"" dwelling," 
premises,"" 
building," or" structure" are stated in this Code, they shall be construed as though 
they were followed by the words" or any part thereof." ( Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 2. 1) 
5. 08. 02 Definitions 
Any motor vehicle which is left on public or private property"+
Abandoned motor vehicle
j as definedinthis sectionforaperiodofmore thanseventy-two (72) hours, regardlessofwhether 
wrecked or inoperable. 
Approved Consented or agreed to in writing by the Code Enforcement Officer or his 
proper designee. 
Boat Any vessel initially designed for the carrying of passengers or cargo upon the water, whether currently seaworthy or not, and regardless of size or design, including, without limitations, barges, motorboats whether inboard or outboard, canoes, rowboats, rafts and 
sailboats. 
Carport A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than two (2) sides. 
Code Enforcement Officer Any city employee who has been duly sworn and 
authorized to uphold the ordinances of the city and laws of the state of Arkansas related to property uses, maintenance, nuisances, and inspections within the municipal boundaries of the city. All duly sworn law enforcement officers of the Clarksville Police Department are authorized to exercise authority as Code Enforcement Officers. 
Condemn To adjudge unfit for human occupancy. 
Exterior property The open space on the premises and adjoining property under the 
control of owners or operators of such premises. 
77 

Extermination The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating 
their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by 
poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination method. 
Garbage The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Graffiti Any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, 
painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to or on any structural component of any building, structure or other permanent facility regardless ofthe nature of the material of that structural component or the nature of the inscription to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the 
owner or otherwise deemed to be a public nuisance. 
Historic Any existing buildings or structures designated by the city of Clarksville, the state of Arkansas, or the United States government to be historic or located within a historic 
district. 
Imminent danger A condition which could cause serious or life threatening injury or death at any time. 
Infestation The presence within or contiguous to a structure or premises of insects, rats, 
vermin or other pests. 
Inoperable motor vehicle A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including but not limited to being unlicensed, uninsured, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair or incapable of being moved under its own power. 
Motor vehicle A machine of conveyance which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and includes but is not limited to automobiles, buses, electric scooters, mopeds, 
bicycles, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, motor homes and trailers. 
Nuisance This term is defined in Section 5 of this Code. 
Operator Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is 
let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding
title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if 
ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
S-50 
Premises A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures 
thereon. 
Private property Any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not defined as public property in this section. 
Public property Any real property in the city which is owned by a governmental body and includes buildings, parking lots, parks, streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements and other 
similar property. 
Removal The act of clearing all material and debris whenever it becomes necessary to demolish any building that has been condemned and found to be a nuisance by resolution of the 
City Council. 
Residence A structure serving as a dwelling or home. 
I 
Rubbish Combustible and non-combustible waste material, except garbage. The term 
shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,,wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
I 
Uncut weeds and grass See 5. 12. 02 for definition. 
Structure That which is built or constructed or portion thereof. 
Trailer Means any freewheeling object designed or intended to be pulled or towed behind a motor vehicle, regardless of whether wrecked or inoperable, and regardless of whether 
currently inspected and/ or registered, including without limitations the following: boat trailers, 
camper trailers, cargo trailers, special trailers for items such as golf carts or motorcycles, utility 
trailer and farm implements. 
Wrecked motor vehicle Any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, incapable of operation by its own power on a public street, or from which the wheels, engine, transmission or any substantial part thereof has been removed. 
Yard An open space on the same lot with a structure. Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 2. 2) 
CHAPTER 5. 12 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sections: 
5. 12. 01  General  
5. 12. 02  Exterior property areas  
5. 12. 03  Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs  
5. 12. 04  Exterior structure  
5. 12. 05  Interior structure  
5. 12. 06  Rubbish and garbage  
5. 12. 07  Extermination  

5. 12. 01 General 
A. 	Scope The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures and exterior property. 
B. 	Responsibility The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and 
exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this Code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a 
structure are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that 
part ofthe structure which they occupy and control. 
C. 	Vacant structures and land All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the 
public health or safety. ( Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 3. 1) 
5 12.02 Exterior property areas 

A. 	
Sanitation All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe 


and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
B. 	Grass or weeds Grass or weeds shall not exceed twelve ( 12) inches in height in all residential districts or exceed twelve ( 12) inches in height on lots in all commercial zone districts and industrial zone districts on which a structure is located, or exceed twenty-four( 24) inches in height on lots in all commercial 
zone districts and industrial zone districts on which a structure is not located; except that the restrictions noted above will not apply to areas specifically 
designated or recognized by the city, the state or the United States as agricultural, 
wetlands, open spaces, natural or wild flower area or other designated 
preservation areas. Fields used for haying may be exempt from these 
requirements provided the first ten( 10) feet ofproperty when located next to a 
commercial, industrial or residential structure, conform to this Code. 
1 C. 	Rodent harborage All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be
j promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to 
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation. 
D. 	Accessory structures All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
E. 	Motor vehicles Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no 
motor vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in 
the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of motor vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. For specific requirements related to the removal of wrecked or inoperable vehicles, refer to 
5. 16. 04. Exception: a motor vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major 
overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similar enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. 
F. 	Defacement of property No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the 
responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of 
maintenanceandrepair. (Ord.No. 2015-737, Sec. 3.2) 
5 12 03 Swimming pools spas and hot tubs Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair so as to not be a harborage for mosquitoes and 
must be located in the rear yard. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, whether in ground, 
must be placed in the rear yard. (Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 3. 3) above ground or a" kiddie pool" 
5. 12. 04 Exterior structure The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary to as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
OW 
80. 1 
A. 	Premise identification Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers 
shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four 
4) inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0. 5 inches on residential 
structures and shall be a minimum of six( 6) inches high with a minimum stroke 
of 0. 5 inch for commercial structures. 
B. 	Exterior walls All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials and maintained to prevent deterioration. 
C. 	Window, skylight and door and frames Every window, skylight, door and frame 
shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. ( Ord. No. 2015­
737, Sec. 3. 4) 
5. 12.05 Interior structure The interior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or 
control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every handrail and guard rail shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 3. 5) 
5. 12. 06 Rubbish andarg bate 
A. 	Accumulation of rubbish orart bate All exterior property and premises and the interior of every structure shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or 
garbage. 
B. 	Disposal of rubbish Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers. 
1. 	
The occupant of every premises shall keep and maintain approved covered containers for rubbish and be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 

2. 	
Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be 


discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors, securing the doors with locks, chain, wire or rope or using other 
reasonable methods to prevent opening. 
C. 	Disposal ofarg bane Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved leak-proof garbage container and remove such 
containers from the premises. 
OW 
80.2 
f 
i 
i 
5-50 
D. 	Unlawful dumping or burning of trash
j 
1. 	Unlawful dumping Dumping or throwing of trash, refuse, cans, bottles, garbage, rage or any other forms oftrash or garbage upon the streets of the city of Clarksville by any person, firm or corporation is a violation of 
Code. 
2. 	Fire in public places and vacant lots Burning of any trash, lumber, leaves, paper, straw, brush, grass or any other combustible material of any kind or to kindle a fire, or furnish material for a fire or in any way authorize or allow any fire to be make or in any manner to aid or assist in making any fire in any street, alley or other public place or on any sidewalk or vacant lot in the city of Clarksville, without first having obtained permission to 
do so from the Clarksville Fire Department is not permitted. 
No permission shall be given to kindle, build, maintain or use a fire within 
fifteen( 	15) feet of a fire hydrant or within ten( 10) feet of any concrete 
curb or the surface of any permanent pavement, except for the purpose of 
repairing, removing or constructing the same. A fire kindled, built and 
maintained under permission as herein provided shall be continuously 
extinguished. Such burning shall be done under such other proper 
safeguards as the Chiefofthe Fire Department may prescribe. 
3. 	Fire on private property Burning or causing to burn any hay, straw, 
shavings, paper, leaves or yard waste on any occupied lot within the limits ofthe city of Clarksville, except in wire baskets or other fireproof
receptacles with proper cover and/or spark arrestor screens is not permitted. Household garbage or any flammable material shall not be burned within the corporate limits of the city of Clarksville. Owners of 
land being cleared or maintained may burn the products of the clearing or maintenance so long as they comply with the provisions of Act 1157 of 
the state of Arkansas. 
4. 	
Fire during burn bans Burning of any material whatsoever is not permitted when a burn ban has been issued by the Clarksville Fire Department or the Johnson County Judge. 

5. 	
Penally In addition to fines established in 5.04.01, Sec. 1. 4 ofthis Code, 


anyone who shall burn in violation of a burn ban shall be assessed a fine equal to the amount of costs incurred by the city in responding to any fire call growing out of any unlawful burning during a burn ban. 
80. 3 
E. 	Transportation and collection of trash 
1. 	Regulation of transportation Any person who shall collect or haul trash or who shall have an employee collect or haul trash in the city of Clarksville shall transport in such a manner so as to insure that no trash shall escape 
from the transporting vehicle. 
2. 	
Regulation of collection The parking of any truck, trailer or other vehicle containing trash for any overnight period or unloading, sifting or sorting through any trash or garbage is not permitted in any residential zone. 

3. 	
Penalt Anypersonfoundguiltyofviolating5.12.06 (E) ofthisCode 


shall besubjectto afineofnotless OneHundredDollars ($100.00) nor 
morethanFiveHundredDollars ($500.00). (Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 3.6) 
5. 12.07 Extermination 
A. 	Infestation All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. 
After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation. 
B. 	Owner The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
C. 	Occupant The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued 
rodent andpest-freeconditionofthestructure. 
D. 	Multiple occupancy The owner of a structure containing two (2) or more 
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, rooming house or a non-residential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is cause by failure of an occupant to prevent 
such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for the extermination. Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the 
structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. (Ord. No. 2015-737, 
Sec. 3. 7 
ork 
80.4 
00,.. 
Sections: 
5. 16. 01 
5. 16.02 
5. 16. 03 
5. 16. 01 
A. 
r` 
B. 
C. 
tow 
S-50 
CHAPTER 5. 16 
NUISANCES 
General 
General remedies 
Remedies for specific nuisances 
General 
Intent It is the intent of this Code to prevent and abate nuisances within the municipal boundaries of the city of Clarksville. For the purpose of this Code, the word" nuisance" is defined as any act, omission or property condition that is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public in that it: 
1. 	
Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 

2. 	
Offends decency; 

3. 	
Is offensive to the senses; 

4. 	
Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, 


stream, ditch or drainage; 
5. 	
In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 

6. 	
Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, 


or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
Prohibited It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance within the city of Clarksville. 
Illustrative enumeration of a nuisance The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions is hereby declared to be and 
constitute a nuisance, provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
80.5 
1. 	
Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation; 

2. 	
Accumulations or storage of rubbish, garbage, materials, metals, lumber 


and other materials; 
3. 	Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other 
vermin; 
4. 	Dilapidated structures; 
5. 	All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches; 
6. 	
The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death; 

7. 	
Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or 


maintained; 
8. 	Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or 
piece of ground; 
9. 	Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable 
quantities; 
10. 	
Graffiti; 

11. 	
Inoperable, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicles or any parts thereof; 

12. 	
The use of tarpaulins, canvas, plastic, oil cloth, sheeting and other similar 


materials as fencing or to shield or enclose any structure (including, without limitation, openings for windows, doors, walls, roofs, garage doors, porches or carports) except when temporarily necessary to perform 
repairs; 
13. 	
Structure that has been destroyed either in total or partial by a disaster; 

14. 	
Signs on utility poles, light poles or other physical property of the city of Clarksville. (Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 4. 1) 


80.6 
5. 16.02 General remedies 
A. 	Other remedies unaffected The remedies found in this article are not intended to 
displace any other remedies of law or equity found in the common or statutory law of Arkansas that may be available to the city of Clarksville, a citizen of the city of Clarksville or any public or private entity to abate or prevent a nuisance. 
B. 	Citations Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to issue citations or notices of violation of 5. 16. 01 ( B). 
C. 	Abatement In addition to the authority found in this section, Code Enforcement 
Officers are authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to abate nuisances within the city of Clarksville. For the specific nuisances that are defined in 5. 16. 03, Code Enforcement Officers may use the associated method of abatement which is deemed to be both a reasonable and necessary response by the 
city to abate a nuisance. (Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 4.2) 
5 16 03 Remedies for specific nuisances 
A. 	Uncut weeds grass and unsani articles All property owners and occupants 
within the municipal boundaries of the city of Clarksville are required to cut 
weeds and grass, remove garbage, rubbish and other sanitary articles and things from their property and to eliminate, fill up, or remove stagnant pools of water or any other unsanitary thing, place or condition which might become a breeding 
place for mosquitoes, flies and germs harmful to the health ofthe community. For specific requirements related to the required maintenance of grass and weeds, refer to 5. 12. 02 ( B). 
1. 	Authorized abatement Ifthe owner of any lot or other real property within the city shall neglect or refuse to remove, abate or eliminate any condition asmaybeprovidedforunder 5.16.03 (A) afterhaving beengivenaNotice 
of Violation with ten( 10) days' notice in writing to do so by a Code 
Enforcement Officer, the city is hereby authorized to take such action as is 
necessary to correct the condition, including but not limited to entering 
upon the property and having such weeds, rank grass or other vegetation 
cut and removed or eliminating any unsanitary and unsightly conditions or causing necessary repairs to be made and charging the cost thereof to the owner of such premises, which shall constitute a lien thereon. 
The above mentioned ten( 10) days' notice shall be calculated by counting the first day ofthe seven( 7) day period as the day after written notice is given to the owner by counting every calendar day, including weekends 
op" 
80.7 
and holidays, and by establishing the deadline to take the above required 
101h) 
actions as 11: 59 p.m. on the tenth( day. The city reserves the right 
to secure a lien for its costs, including a priority clean-up lien pursuant to 
A.C.A. 14-54-903. 
2. 	Special notice rules for weed lots For purposes of this section a" weed 
lot" is a previously platted and subdivided lot that is vacant or upon which an unsafe and vacant structure is located and that contains debris, rubbish, or grass contrary to this Code. Due to the continual growth cycle of 
vegetation on weed lots, continuous abatement is often necessary. Thus, 
theten(10) dayNoticeofViolationdescribedin5.16.03 (A) (1) shallbe 
issued with the following additional statement. " Work to abate this 
nuisance will not be complete until the end of the growing season." No 
additional Notice of Violation need be given unless and until the growing season concludes and further abatement is necessary. 
B. 	Inoperable or wrecked motor vehicles The accumulation of inoperable or wrecked motor vehicles in the city is degrading to the environment, property values, and the aesthetic beauty of the city. Thus, the only location where an 
inoperable or wrecked motor vehicle, or any parts thereof, may be parked, kept or 
r 
stored within the city is in an approved storage area on property that is properly
R 	zoned and permitted for that purpose. The parking, keeping or storing of inoperable or wrecked motor vehicles or any parts thereof at any other location or unauthorized area thereon in the city is declared to be a nuisance and may be cited forviolation of 5.12.02 (E)and, ifnecessary, abatedasprovidedin5.16.03 (1) 
below. 
1. 	Presumption of inoperability A vehicle shall be deemed inoperable when 
one or more ofthe conditions exist: 
a. 	One or more tires are flat and appear to have been flat for a week 
or more. 
b. 	
One of more wheels are missing. 

C. 	
The engine is missing. 

d. 	
The vehicle has no current vehicle tags or registration. 


2. 	Removal of inoperable motor vehicles near public streets Ifan owner or 
occupant of property within the city shall neglect or refuse to remove an inoperable motor vehicle that is parked, kept or stored near a public street 
80. 8 
without proper authority, a Code Enforcement Officer may cause the 
removal ofthe inoperable motor vehicle, provided that a Notice of 
Violation is affixed to the vehicle for a period of no less than three( 3) 
days which shall state that the vehicle is a nuisance and order the property 
owner, occupant or whoever has an interest in the vehicle to remove it from the property. If the vehicle is found on private property with one ( 1) or more occupiable structures, a copy of the notice shall additionally be 
placed on one ( 1) of the structures. 
C. 	Impediments to city streets easements or rights-of-way The city owns property rights throughout the jurisdiction of this Code which are necessary to the efficient 
flow oftraffic, storm water, utility service and the like. Impediments to these 
property rights are declared to be a public nuisance as they reduce the public 
benefit ofpublic property and can endanger the health and welfare of the citizens 
who use and depend upon these property rights. Code Enforcement Officers shall 
have the authority to order the immediate removal of any impediment to the use ofpublic streets, sidewalks, drains, ditches, utilities, easements or other right-of­ways. Iftheapparentowneroftheimpedimentisnotknown, availableorwilling to remove the impediment, a Code Enforcement Officer may cause the same to be 
removed. 
D. 	Nuisance structures Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unsafe or unfit for human habitation or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health or safety ofpeople residing 
in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located shall constitute a nuisance. 
1. 	For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows: 
Unsafe structures An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect 
or warn occupants in the event of fire or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is to damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or 
complete collapse is possible. 
Unfit structure for human occupancy A structure is unfit for human 
occupancy whenever the Code Official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and 
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating 
80. 9 
S-50 
facilities or other essential equipment required by this Code or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants ofthe 
structure or to the public. 
2. 	Vacating of unfit or unsafe structures and utility services Any premises declared as unsafe or unfit for human habitation by a Code Enforcement Officer and so designated by placard, shall be vacated with thirty( 30) 
days after notice of such action has been given to both the owner and occupant ofthe building allowing the owner or resident to make necessary 
repairs. 
On the thirty-first( 31 St) day after said notice, the Code 

Enforcement Officer shall notify all utilities to discontinue services to the 
structure. After utility services are cutoff no further services shall be 
made available until a permit has been obtained from the Building Official or until the Code Enforcement Officer notifies utilities that services may be provided to the dwelling unit. 
a. 	Placarding Upon failure ofthe owner or person responsible to 
comply with the Notice of Violation for a nuisance structure or equipment within the time given, the Code Official shall then post on the premises a placard bearing the word" Nuisance" and a 
statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises or 
removing the placard. 
b. 	Placard removal The Code Official shall remove the placard referred to in this subsection whenever the defect or defects upon which the placarding actions were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard 
without the approval ofthe Code Official shall be subject to the penalties approved by this Code. 
3. 	
Prohibited occupancy Any person who shall occupy placarded premises and any owner or responsible person ofplacarded premises who allows another person to occupy such premises shall be subject to the penalties provided by this Code. 

4. 	
Abatement When warranted, Code Enforcement Officers upon approval oftheir supervisor may perform work to secure, abate and otherwise cause 


a nuisance structure to conform with this ordinance and seek reimbursement of the cost thereof in the manner provided by law. 
5. 	Condemnation When warranted, Code Enforcement Officers may initiate condemnation proceedings under Section 7, Article 1 in lieu of or in 
additiontotheproceduresinthissection. (Ord. No. 2015-737, Sec. 4.3) 
OW 
80. 10 
S-44 
TITLE 6 
ANIMALS AND FOWL 
Chapters: 
6.04 	Dogs 
6.08 	Dangerous Dogs 
6. 12 	Other Animals and Fowl 
6. 16 	Selling of Animals 
CHAPTER 6. 04 
DOGS 
Sections: 
6. 04. 01 Rabies vaccination 
6.04.02 Owner identification 
6.04.03 Confinementofdogs 
6.04.04 Impoundment 
6.04.05 Reclaiming impounded dogs 
6.04.06 Adoption 
6.04.07 Enforcement responsibility 
6.04.09 Records 
6.04.01 Rabiesvaccination Alldogsoverthere (3) monthsofagewhichareowned, kept or harbored within the city limits of Clarksville shall be vaccinated against rabies once each yearaccording to A.C.A. 20-19-202. A durable metal tag signifying a current vaccination must be 
attached to the dog' s collar and worn at all times, and is not transferable from one dog to another. 
Ord. No. 148, Art. 1.) 
6.04.02 Owner identification 
A. 	In addition to the rabies vaccination tag, all dogs must be identified as to name and address of the owner by means of a durable and permanent tag or plate securely attached to the collar or harness of the dog. 
B. 	It shall be the responsibility of the owner to see that the rabies vaccination and owner identification tags are kept current and are worn by their dog(s) at all times. 
Ord. No. 148, Art. II.) 
S-44 
6. 04. 03 Confinement of dofzs An owner of a dog, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, identified or unidentified, shall confine such dog within an adequate fence or enclosure or within a house, garage, or other building, or shall confine such dog by a chain or leash affixed tot h dog' s collar and attached to a stationary object adequate to prevent the dog from running at large. It shall be the duty of any owner or keeper of any dog to keep such dog under such control as to: 
A. 	Prevent such dog from becoming a danger to persons or property, or trespassing upon another person' s property without that person' s permission, and 
B. 	Prevent such dog from running at large upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks 
or other public places of the city. (Ord. No. 148, Art. III.) 
6.04.04 Impoundment 
A. 	Any dog at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this code may be impounded in the city animal shelter in a humane manner for a period of not less than seven( 7) days. If within such time an animal so impounded has not been 
reclaimed by its owner in accordance with the provisions of this code, such 
animal shall become the absolute property of the Animal Control Authority, which may convey ownership of such animal to any responsible person as provided herein, or the Animal Control Authority may humanely destroy such 
animal. 
B. 	The Aminal Control Authority shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of any dog impounded in the animal shelter that the dog has been impounded, the manner by which it may be reclaimed, and that the dog may be destroyed or 
become the property of the Animal Control Authority as provided herein. 
C. 	Notwithstanding any provisions ofthis code to the contrary, the Animal Control Authority may refuse to release any animal impounded in the shelter for rabies or 
contagious disease quarantine, or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution, for such time period as the Animal Control Authority may determine. 
D. Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, the Animal Control 
Authority may humanely destroy any dog impounded in the animal shelter uponthe written opinion of a licensed veterinarian that destruction of the animal is necessary to prevent disease or injury to other animals or humans, or due to the fact that the dog has sustained an injury or disease which will likely result in 
(Ord. No. 148, Art. IV.)
maiming prolonged or severe suffering, or death. 
S-34 
6.04.05 Reclaiming impounded dogs. 
A. 	The owner of a dog impounded in the animal shelter may reclaim the animal upon 
presenting evidence satisfactory to the Animal Control Authority of compliance with all provisions ofthis code, and upon payment of fees and charges. 
B. 	Fees for reclaiming impounded dogs shall be set by the City Council, and may be reviewed and changed from time to time. 
C. 	The owner of an animal impounded in the animal shelter shall be liable for all assessed fees and charges, notwithstanding the destruction or adoption of the 
animal. ( Ord. No. 371, Sec. 1.) 
6.04.06 Adoption. The Animal Control Authority may convey ownership (permit adoption) of any dog which has become the property of the Authority as above provided, to any responsible person subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Animal Control Authority, including the following: 
A. 	Payment of all assessed fees and charges, and 
B. 	Evidence satisfactory to the Animal Control Authority that the animal will 
be vaccinated and identified as herein provided. (Ord. No. 148, Art. VI) 
Ord. No. 371, Sec. 2.) 
6.04.07 Enforcement responsibility. 
A. 	The provisions of this code shall be enforced by the appropriate city employee or contractor, as designated by the Mayor and City Council. 
B. 	No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest the Animal Control Authority in the performance of its duty, or seek to release any animal in custody ofthe Authority, except as herein provided. 
C. 	The Animal Control Authority and officers ofthe Clarksville Police Department are hereby authorized to issue a citation to any person for violation of any 
provision ofthis code. The citation shall be in a form approved by the Clarksville Municipal Court, shall designate the offenses charged, and shall require the person so charged to appear before the Clarksville Municipal Court on a date 
certain to answer the charges therein contained. 
D. 	Any person violating any provision ofthis code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than 
Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than One Hundred Dollars' ($100.00); 
and if such violation be continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
Ord. No. 148, Art. VII) 
5-49 
CHAPTER 6.08 
DANGEROUS DOGS 
Sections: 
6. 08.01  Identification and definition  
6. 08. 02  Procedure for declaring a dog dangerous  
6. 08. 03  Keeping of dangerous dogs  
6. 08. 04  Violation of conditions by dangerous dog  
6.08. 05  Notification of declaration or order of destruction  
6. 08. 06  Destruction  
6. 08. 07  Appeal  
6. 08. 08  Continuation of dangerous dog declaration  
6.08. 01  Identification and definition To respond to the increasing threat of potentially  

dangerous dogs, and to the failure of owners to properly control such dogs, the city hereby establishes a procedure to define, identify, and protect against dangerous dogs. 
Definition 
A. 	Dangerous dogs means any dog which attacks or otherwise initiates aggressive physical contact upon any person or domestic animal, when such person or domestic animal is peaceably conducting himself in any place where he may lawfully be at the time of such contact. A dog is not necessarily dangerous when displaying normal aggression towards another animal such as a cat. 
A dog may be declared dangerous as a result of attack upon meter readers, postal or delivery personnel, or trespassing children. It is the responsibility of owner or custodian of such potentially dangerous dog to protect such persons from harm by securely confining or otherwise controlling the dog. 
A dog' s breed shall not be considered in determining whether or not it is declared dangerous"— further, no dog shall be declared dangerous if: 
1. 	
The dog was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity from an attack or assault. 

2. 
The person attacked was teasing, tormenting, or abusing the dog or its 


S-49 
offspring. 
3. 	The domestic animal attacked was on the property ofthe owner or custodian of the dog. ( Ord. No. 2013-705, Sec. 5.) 
6.08.02 Procedure for declaring a dog dangerous 
A. 	Any adult person, or guardian in the case of a minor, may request that a dog be classified as dangerous as defined 6.08.01, by submitting a sworn, written complaint on a form approved by the city. Any city official receiving a report of an alleged dangerous dog shall immediately inform the complainant of his right to 
submit such an affidavit of complaint. All records of complaints are property of 
the city of Clarksville and will be kept on file in the city' s Administration Office. 
B. 	There is hereby created by this ordinance a" Hearing Panel," subject to judicial review, to receive and act upon affidavits described above. The Panel shall consist of the Mayor or his designate, the Chief of Police or his designate, and the Animal Control Authority Director or his designate. 
C. 	The Hearing Panel shall convene immediately upon receiving affidavit as described above. Two members may convene if the third member is not available. The Panel shall take the following steps: 
1. 	
Determine from the facts available ifthe dog should be immediately impounded by the Animal Control Authority, as an imminent danger. In that instance the Panel will notify the owner to surrender the dog or request warrant to seize the dog if necessary to ensure safety. 

2. 	
Schedule a hearing to be held within three ( 3) business days, to determine 


the declaration of" Dangerous." The owner of the dog and the complainant shall be notified on forms approved and shall sign for 
acknowledgment of service. 
3. 	At a hearing, all interested persons shall be given the opportunity to present evidence on the issue ofthe dog' s dangerousness. Criteria to be considered include, but are not limited to the following: 
a. 	
Provocation 

b. 	
Severity of attack or injury to person or domestic animal 

C. 	
Previous aggressive history of the dog 

d. 	
Observable behavior ofthe dog 

e. 	
Site and circumstances ofthe incident, and 

f. 	
Statements from interested parties. 


85 
S-49 
D. 	At the conclusion ofthe hearing, the Panel may: 
1. Determine that the dog is not dangerous, and, ifthe dog is impounded, 
upon payment of fees incurred and proof of vaccination by a licensed veterinarian, release the dog to its owner. Ifthe dog is required to be quarantined, the owner will be responsible for paying all costs associated 
with the quarantine prior to the dog begin released. 
2. 	Determine that the dog is dangerous and ifthe dog is not impounded, impound the dog immediately. Upon impoundment the following 
procedure shall be followed: 
a. 
The owner may immediately relinquish all claims to the dog and will then be responsible for only the fees incurred for care and confinement ofthe animal during the time prior to the hearing. 
b. 	The owner may reclaim the dog upon satisfactory proof of compliance with the requirements for keeping a dog declared dangerous, assetoutin6.08.03. Thedogwillbereleasedas follows: 
1) 	When the owner notifies the Police Department and it is determined that the requirements for the keeping of a dangerous dog have been met; 
2) 	When the dog has been altered and has received all 
required vaccinations; 
3) 	When the owner has paid all fees associated with the 
altering proce3dure, vaccinations and care of his/her dog. 
C. 	The owner must be in full compliance with the codes regarding the keeping of a dangerous dog within ten( 10) days from the date of 
declaration or the Panel may cause the dog to be humanely destroyed. Ifthe owner does not plan to reclaim the dog they should notify the Hearing Panel immediately so as to not incur 
further costs. The fees associated with impoundment, whether the 
dog is reclaimed or unclaimed, shall remain the responsibility of 
the owner. 
86 
S-49 
3. 	Determine that the dog is dangerous and cannot be safely released and 
order its humane destruction according to procedures set out herein. (Ord. 
No. 2013-705, Sec. 6.) 
6.08.03 Keepingoffdangerousdog The keepingofadogwhichhasbeendeclared dangerous according to procedure described herein, shall be subject to the following 
requirements: 
A. 	Leash No person having charge, custody, control or possession of a dangerous dog shall allow the dog to exist its kennel, pen or other proper enclosure unless such dog is securely attached to a leash not more than four( 4) feet in length. No such person shall permit a dangerous dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person capable of controlling the dog is 
in physical control of the leash. 
B. 	Muzzle It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous dog to allow the dog to be outside of its proper enclosure unless it is necessary for the dog to receive veterinary care or exercise. In such cases, the dog shall wear a properly fitted muzzle to prevent it from biting humans or other animals. Such muzzle shall not interfere with the dog' s breathing or vision. 
C. 	Confinement Except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this section, a 
dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or confined in a locked pen or other secure enclosure that is suitable to prevent the entry of children and is designed to prevent the dog from escaping. The enclosure shall include shelter 
and protection from the elements and shall provide adequate exercise room, light 
and ventilation. The enclosed structure shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall meet the following requirements: 
1. 	
The structure must have secure sides and a secure top, or all sides must be at least eight( 8) feet high. 

2. 	
The structure must have a bottom permanently attached to the sides, or the sides must be embedded not less than one ( 1) foot into the ground; and 

3. 	
The structure must be of such material and closed in such a manner that 


the dog cannot exit the enclosure on its own or children or other persons cannot enter the enclosure without knowledge of dog' s owner. 
4. 	The structure shall meet city building codes as to setback and position on the lot as required for" accessory building" set out in Ord. No. 2000-402. 
S-49 
D. 	Indoor confinement No dangerous dog shall be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such a building on its own volition. In addition, no such dog shall be kept in a house or structure when the windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting 
the structure. 
E. 	Signs All owner, keepers or harborers of dangerous dogs shall display in a 
prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words " Beware of Dog." 
F. 	Conditions of release A dog declared dangerous shall not be released to the owner until its identification is ensured by means of a microchip implanted by a licensed veterinarian and proof of activation and until the dog is altered. Costs of this procedure shall be added to the impoundment fees and paid by the owner 
before release. 
This microchip identification shall be in addition to a specific description and photograph provided by the Animal Control Authority, all of which shall be kept in the official records by the Hearing Panel. 
G. 	Notification of escape The owner of a dog declared dangerous shall immediately 
notify the Animal Control Authority, City Police, or City Hall ifthe dog escapes from its enclosure and is at large. Such immediate notification is also required if the dog bites or attacks a person or domestic animal. 
H. 	Change of ownership Any owner of a dangerous dog who sells or otherwise transfers ownership or location ofthe dog shall, within ten( 10) business days 
after such change, provide written notification of the name, address, and 
telephone number of the new owner to the Hearing Panel, through City Hall.  If 
shall also be the responsibility ofthe person transferring ownership or custody to 
provide written notification ofthe dog' s classification as dangerous and 
conditions for its confinement to the person receiving the dog. 
I. 	Failure to comply It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any owner of a dog declared dangerous by the procedure set out in this ordinance to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions ordered by the Hearing Panel. Said misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not less than One Hundred 
Dollars ($100.00), andnotmorethanOneThousandDollars ($ 1,000.00) and if 
such violation shall continue, each day' s violation shall be a separate offense. Any dog found to be in violation of such conditions shall be subject to immediate 
seizure and impoundment, and a second hearing will be held. (Ord. No. 2013­
705, Sec. 7.) 
5-49 
6.08.04 
Violation of conditions by dangerous dog 
A. 	A dangerous dog which is found to be in violation of the conditions of its initial 
release, or which is the subject ofa complaint of further attack or injury, shall be immediately seized and impounded. 
B. 	The Hearing Panel shall convene, following the procedure as set out in 6.08.03 
3), 
and conduct a Violation Hearing. At its conclusion the Panel may: 
1. 
Determine that the circumstances warrant a conditional release to the 
owner, after provision of: 
a. 
Evidence satisfactory to the Panel that no further violations will 
occur; and 
b. 	Payment of all fees and costs incurred by the impoundment. 
2. Order the destruction of the dog, as provided by the terms of this 
ordinance. ( Ord. No. 2001-435, Sec. 4.) 
6. 08. 05 Notification of declaration or order of destruction 
A. 	The Hearing Panel, within 48 hours after its determination, shall notify the owner of the dog of its findings, conditions, or order of destruction. Notification shall be by personal service or certified letter, mailed within two (2) business days. 
B. 	Ifthe Hearing Panel determines that the owner of a dog that has been seized pursuant to this ordinance, cannot be located after due diligence the Panel may order the dog impounded for at least five( 5) business days. After that time ifthe 
owner fails to claim the dog, the Panel may order its humane destruction. ( Ord. 
No. 2001-435, Sec. 5.) 
6. 08. 06 Destruction 
A. 	The Hearing Panel may order the destruction of a dog that it determines to be extremely dangerous to public health or safety, based upon its vicious behavior, or a dog declared dangerous whose owner is unable or unwilling to adequately 
restrain it. 
B. 	The Hearing Panel shall give written notice as set out in Section V ofthe order of destruction. The dog will be held for ten( 10) business days after receipt of notice byowner, toallowtimeforappeal asprovidedin6.08.07. Ifnoticeofappealis not received within ten( 10) days, the dog shall be humanely destroyed. 
S-49 
C. 	The dog owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other 
fees as may be required for the city to humanely and safely keep the dog during any legal proceeding. 
6. 08. 07 Appeal 
A. 	The decision of the Hearing Panel as to declaration of dangerousness, or order of humane destruction, shall be final unless the dog owner applies to court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available within ten( 10) days 
after receiving notice of the order. 
B. 	If an appeal is timely filed, the Panel shall suspend its declaration of dangerousness, or its order of destruction, pending the final determination of the court. The appeal hearing must be a trial de novo, and shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the order of the Hearing Panel. ( Ord. No. 2013-705, Sec. 8.) 
6.08.08 Continuation of dangerous dog declaration 
A. 	Any dog that has been declared dangerous by any agency of department of this city, another municipality, county, or state shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance for the remainder of its life. The person owning or having custody of any dog designated as a dangerous dog by any municipality, county, or state government shall notify the Hearing Panel of the dog' s address and conditions of maintenance within ten( 10) days of moving the animal into the city of Clarksville. The restriction and conditions ofmaintenance of any dog declared dangerous by this city, another municipality, county, or state shall remain in force while the dog remains in the city. 
B. 	Failure to notify the Hearing Panel as required herein shall constitute a 
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, a person shall be punishable by a fine ofnot less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars 
1, 000.00). If such violation shall continue, each day' s violation shall be a 
separate offense. Also any such dog shall be subject to immediate seizure until 
such time that the provisions of this code have been complied with. 
op 
i 
CHAPTER 6. 12 
OTHER ANIMALS AND FOWL 

Sections: 
6. 12. 01 
Horses, cows, mules, goats and hoofed livestock 
6. 12. 02 
Hogs and sheep 
6. 12. 03 
Diseased animals 
6. 12. 04 
Releasing animals 
6. 12. 05 Fowl 
6. 12. 06 
Cruelty to animals 
6. 12. 07 
Nuisance animals 
6. 12. 08 
Wild or exotic animals 
6. 12. 01 Horses, cows mules goats and hoofed livestock 
A. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit to run at large within the corporate limits ofthe city, any cows and/or horses except as provided in this chapter. The violation of this section is hereby declared to be a Class " C" misdemeanor. It shall be the duty of the proper law enforcement official to 
enforce the provisions hereof. 
B. 	The keeping within the corporate limits of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, of 
cows, horses, mules, goats, or other large hoofed domestic animals shall be allowed subject to the following provisions: 
1. 	Theownerorkeepershallprovideone ( 1) acreofopenpasturepertwo (2) 
such animals or combination thereof, with a minimum of one ( 1) acre for first such animal. 
2. 	
The owner of keeper shall maintain a fence which is adequately constructed to safely contain such animals. 

3. 	
No such animals may be kept within one hundred ( 100) feet of any residence or business, excluding the residence or business of the person owning or keeping the animal. 

4. 	
The provisions of this section shall be applied prospectively only and shall not affect the status of fencing or housing that are in place as of the date of the passage of this ordinance, the same being October 10, 2011. 


90. 1 
S-48 
C. 	The keeping of horses and cows in enclosures as herein provided within the limits of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the proper law 
enforcement official. 
Should any of the enclosures become harbors for breeding flies, mosquitoes and rats, or should they become unsanitary, obnoxious, unhealthful and/ or discomforting to any of the citizens of the city because of conditions created by keeping of said animals, the proper law enforcement official, upon investigating and finding any such conditions to exist, shall serve written notice on the owners or keepers of the premises as to the conditions 
thereofbydelivering acopyofthenoticeto theownerorkeeper, orbyposting sameinaconspicuousplaceonthepremises, andifwithinfive (5) daysafter 
service of notice said owner or keeper has not corrected the conditions, the City Attorney is authorized to institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to 
abate same as a nuisance. ( Ord. No. 2011-630, Sec. 1.) 
6. 12.02 Hogs and sheep Notwithstanding any other provisions relating to animals contained herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hogs or sheep within the city 
limits of Clarksville, Arkansas. Violation of this section shall be a Class" C" misdemeanor. Ord. No. 2011-631, Sec. l.) 
6. 12. 03 Diseased animals No person shall be allowed to transport into this city any animal infected with a contagious disease. 
6. 12. 04 Releasing animals It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly release any animal in any public place within the corporate limits of the city. 
6.12.05 Fowl ThekeepingwithinthecorporatelimitsofthecityofClarksville, 
Arkansas, of any fowl, which includes but is not limited to chickens, ducks, guineas, geese or other fowl, shall be allowed, subject to the following provisions and restrictions: 
A. 	Any chickens, ducks, guineas, pheasant, quail or other small fowl shall be kept in an area containing a minimum of two (2) acres. No such fowl may be kept within one hundred( 100) feet of any residence or business, excluding the residence or business of the person owning or keeping the fowl. The fowl shall be kept in an appropriate pen with a top, bottom, and sides to prevent the fowl from running at 
large. 
B. 	A single family residence that does not meet the minimum acreage requirements set out in subsection( A), shall be permitted to keep a maximum of three ( 3) small 
fowl provided they are kept in an appropriate pen. All pens must possess a top, bottom and sides to prevent running at large. 
C. 	No roosters may be kept under any circumstances except as provided for in the exclusions set out herein. 
90.2 
S-48 
D. It shall be unlawful to keep large fowl of any kind including, but not limited to 
ostrich, emu, peacock or turkey within the corporate limits of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas. 
E. 	None of the provisions or restrictions set forth in A-D above shall apply to the following, which are excluded from said provisions and restrictions: 
1. 
Any tract of land containing ten( 10) or more contiguous acres. 

2. 
Any commercial operation for the processing ofpoultry, including 


chickens and turkeys. 
F. 
Violation of this section shall be a Class " C" misdemeanor. Ord. No. 2012-675, Sec. 1.) 
6. 12. 06 Cruelty to animals If any person shall drive, overload, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance or cruelly beta or needlessly mutilate or kill any animal, he shall be 
guilty of a misdemeanor. 
6. 12. 07 Nuisance animals 
A. 
Nuisance animals are defined as animals which: 
1. 	
Molest passersby or passing vehicles; or 

2. 	
Attack other animals; or 

3. 	
Trespass on any private or public property; or 

4. 	
Are repeatedly found running loose; or 

5. 	
Damage private or public property; or 

6. 	
Bark, whine or howl in excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion disturbing the peace and quiet of any person who may reside in reasonable proximity ofthe place where such animal is kept. 


B. Upon a complaint from a resident concerning a nuisance animal being received 
and verified by the Police Department, the owner or keeper of such animal shall 
be given written notice by the department to take appropriate measures to ensure 
the behavior of the animal is modified or controlled. Ifthe owner or keeper fails 
to take such measures, then said owner or keeper shall be issued a citation for 
failure to control a nuisance animal. Failure to control a nuisance animal shall be 
a Class " C" misdemeanor. ( Ord. No. 2011-633, Sec. 1.) 
6. 12.08 Wild or exotic animals 
A. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, sell, or have in their 
possession or under their control, within the corporate limits of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, any wild or exotic animal, whether the animal is pure bred, hybrid or a mixed breed, including but not limited to the following: 
90.3 
S-47 
1. 	
Any poisonous animals; 

2. 	
Ape, chimpanzee, gibbon, gorilla, orangutan, and siamang; 

3. 	
Baboon; 

4. 	
Bear; 

5. 	
Cheetah, tiger; 

6. 	
Alligator, crocodile; 

7. 	
Coyote, wolf,hyena; 

8. 	
Elephant; 

9. 	
Jaguar, leopard, lion, lynx; 

10. 	
Monkey; 

11. 	
Piranha fish; 

12. 	
Puma, cougar, mountain lion, panther; 

13. 	
Rhinoceros; 

14. 	
Deer 


B. 	The animals listed in subsection( A) are specific animals or reptiles, but the prohibitions of this section are not limited to those animals or reptiles listed. Any wild or exotic animal or reptile, although not listed specifically in this subsection, 
is also prohibited. A violation of this section shall be a Class " C" misdemeanor. Ord. No. 2011-634, Sec. 1.) 
CHAPTER 6. 16 
SELLING OF ANIMALS 
Sections: 
6. 16.01 Prohibited 
6. 16.02 
Penalty 
6. 16. 01 Prohibited Except for established animal business enterprises with permanent structures, and the Johnson County Humane Society, the sale, distribution and giving away of 
animals from public property and from commercially and industrially zoned land is prohibited. Ord. No. 2008-573, Sec. 1.) 
6.16. 02 Penaltv Anypersonfoundtohaveviolatedthisordinanceshall beguiltyofa 
misdemeanorwhichshallbepunishablebyafineofOneHundredDollars ($100.00); Two 
Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the second offense; and Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for the 
third offense and each offense thereafter. Each day a person violates this ordinance shall be 
considered a separate offense. ( Ord. No. 2008-573, Sec. 2.) 
90.4 
S-46 
TITLE 7 
PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS 
Chapters: 
7.04 
State Criminal Statutes and Penalties 
7. 08 Curfew 
7. 12 
Loitering 
7. 16 Prohibited Weapons 
7.20 Fireworks 
7.24 Claims against City 
7.28 Storageand HandlingofVolatileCombustibles 
7.32 Outside Fire Service 
7.36 Fire Equipment Operation 
7.40 Soliciting on Streets 
7.44 Soliciting on Private Property 
7.48 Hawkers, Peddlers and solicitors 
7.52 False Fire and Burglar Alarms 
7. 56 Sales Tax on Hotels and Motels 
7.60 Advertising and Promotion Commission 
7.64 Signs 
7.68 SaleofAlcoholic Beverages 
7.72 Sexually Oriented Businesses 
7.76 Prohibited Substances 
CHAPTER 7.04 
STATE CRIMINAL STATUTES AND PENALTIES 
Sections: 
7. 04. 01 State criminal statutes adopted 
7. 04. 02 State penalties adopted 
7.04.01 State criminal statutes adopted Each and every act, matter or thing which the laws of the state of Arkansas make misdemeanors or violations is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the city and made unlawful under this ordinance. The criminal laws ofthe state of Arkansas, as now existing and as hereafter may be provided, insofar as same may make any act, matter or thing a misdemeanor or violation, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the Criminal Code of the ordinances of the city. 
STATE LAW REFERENCE -See A.C.A. 14-55-501 
S-36 
7.04.02 State penalties adopted. Each and every person who shall, within the corporate
limitsofthecity, violate anyoftheprovisionsofthe lawsintothisordinanceincorporatedand adopted shall on conviction thereof be punished by fine or imprisonment or both, as the case may
be, together with the costs of the proceeding of not less than the minimum nor more than the maximum penalty as prescribed by the corresponding State Law in such cases make and provide; which penalty shall be enforced in the manner now prescribed by the law for the enforcement 
and collection of fines, forfeitures and penalties. 
10.. 
91. 1­
CHAPTER 7.08 
CURFEW 
Sections: 
7.08. 01 
Civil emergencies 
7.08. 02 
Congregating during state of emergency
7. 08.03 
Penalty 
7. 08. 01 Civil emergencies The Mayor, any time a condition has arisen or is imminent which in his judgment constitutes a civil disturbance, riot, insurrection or time of local disaster, may declare a state of emergency and impose a curfew for such time and for such areas as he deems necessary to meet such emergency. Provided, however, such curfew shall not extend for overaperiodofforty-eight (48) hoursunlessextended byamajorityvoteofthemembersofthe 
governing body. 
7. 08. 02 Congregating during state of emergency No person shall congregate, operate any
business or be upon the streets or other public ways, unless on official business for the city or state, in any area or areas designated by the Mayor as curfew areas in the city during the time 
of any declared emergency. 
7. 08. 03 Penalty Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon 
conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed FiveHundred ($500.00) Dollarsor confinementinjailfornotmore thanone ( 1) year, orboth. 
CHAPTER 7. 12 
LOITERING 
Sections: 
7. 12. 01 Illegal 
7. 12. 02 Definitions 
7. 12. 03 
Penalty 
7. 12. 01 Illegal It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter upon the sidewalks, streets, highways, alleys or other public places within the city. 
7. 12. 02 Definitions 
A. A person commits the offense of loitering ifhe: 
1. lingers, remains or prowls in a public place or on the premises of another 
without apparent reason and under circumstances that warrant alarm or 
Vol• 
92 
concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity; and upon inquiry by a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself and give 
a reasonably credible account of his presence and purpose; or 
2. 	lingers, remains, or prowls in or near a school building, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a student, and not having written permission from anyone authorized to grant the 
same; or 
3. 	
lingers or remains in a public place or on the premises of another for the purpose of begging; or 

4. 	
lingers or remains in a public place for the purpose of unlawfully 


gambling; or 
5. 	
lingers or remains in a public place for the purpose of engaging or soliciting another person to engage in prostitution or deviate sexual activity; or 

6. 	
lingers or remains in a public place for the purpose of unlawfully buying, distributing, or using a controlled substance; or 

7. 	
lingers or remains on or about the premises of another for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of another. 


B. 	Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether a person is loitering are that the person: 
1. 	
takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; or 

2. 	
refuses to identify himself, or 

3. 	
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. 


C. 	Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to an arrest for an offense under subsection A (1) 
of this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm that would otherwise be warranted by requesting him to identify himself and explain his 
presence and conduct. 
D. 	It shall be a defense to a prosecution under subsection 1( a) that the law 
enforcement officer did not afford the defendant an opportunity to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct, or if 
93 
S-40 
it appears at trial that an explanation given by the defendant to the officer was true, and ifbelieved by the officer at that time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
STATE LAW REFERENCE-see A.C.A. 5-71-213 
7.12.03 Penalty. AssetoutinA.C.A. 5-71-213, loiteringisaClassCmisdemeanor 
punishableby amaximumfineofOneHundred ($100.00)Dollars. 
CHAPTER 7. 16 
PROHIBITED WEAPONS 
Sections: 
7. 16.01 
Unlawful to carry, exchange 
7. 16. 02 Unlawful activities 
7. 16. 03 
Penalty 
7. 16. 04 Rights of defense 
All, 7. 16. 05 Unlawful possession 
7. 16. 06 Definition 
7. 16. 07 
Penalty 
7. 16.08 
Bows, crossbows and archery devises 
7. 16. 01 Unlawful to carry, exchange. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any knife, the blade of which is over three inches in length, or to carry any instrument commonly called a crabapple switch, dirk, dagger, pick or any other dangerous or deadly weapon within the city, and it shall further be unlawful for any firm or corporation to sell, barter, exchange or otherwise dispose of such knives, crabapple switches, dirks, daggers or picks, or instruments to be used for a weapon within the corporate limits of the city. 
7. 16. 02 Unlawful activities. It shall be unlawful for any person, adult or minor to shoot, discharge or permit the shooting of any shotgun, rifle, pistol or firearm firing a powder charge 
from percussion cap or rim fire, using a loaded shell in any part of the city of Clarksville. (Ord. 
No-. 447, Sec. 1) 
7. 16. 03 Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of Section 
7.16.01 or7.16. 02hereof, shalluponconvictionbesubjectto afineofOneHundredDollars 
100.00) for the first offense, Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the second offense, and Four 
HundredDollars ($400.00) foreachoffensethereafter. (Ord. No. 06-533, Sec.12) 
S-45 
7. 16. 04 Right of defense Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prohibit any
right of defense of person or property as defined in Article 2, paragraph 5 of the Constitution of 
the state of Arkansas of 1874. ( Ord. No. 447, Sec. 3.) 
7. 16. 05 Unlawful possession It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a firearm while upon the Nature Trail located along the eastern and western banks of Spadra Creek within 
the city limits of Clarksville, Arkansas. ( Ord. No. 140, Sec. 1.) 
7. 16. 06 Definition The term " firearm" as used herein means an instrument used for the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets or any other projectile by the action of gun powder exploded 
within it. (Ord. No. 140, Sec. 2.) 
7. 16. 07 Penalty Any person violating this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a 
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall 
pay a fine ofnot less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than One Hundred Dollars ($ 100. 00) for each offense. ( Ord. No. 140, Sec. 3.) 
7. 16.08 Bows, crossbows and archery devices 
A. 	From and after the passage of this ordinance it shall be unlawful for any person to hunt with a bow, crossbow, or other similar device within three hundred feet of 
the Clarksville Nature Trail or any recreational area within the city of Clarksville. 
401. 
B. 	Any person convicted of violating this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of One 
HundredDollars ($100.00) for the firstoffense, Two HundredDollars ($200.00) 
for the second offense, and Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) for each offense 
thereafter. ( Ord. No. 2006-530, Secs. 1-2.) 
CHAPTER 7.20 
FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
7.20.01 Sale offireworks 
7.20.02 Use ofexplosion offireworks 
7.20.03 Permitted use 
7.20.04 
Penalty 
7. 20. 01 Sale of fireworks It shall be permissible for any person to store, offer for sale, expose for sale, or sell any fireworks, no matter by what name known, within the corporate limits of the city of Clarksville provided that they do so in compliance with all state and federal 
legislation, regulations, statutes, and codes. ( Ord. No. 2009-598, Sec. 1.) 
94. 1 
7.20.02 Use or explosion offireworks It shall be unlawful for any person to use or explode any fireworks, no matter by what name known, within the corporate limits of the city of Clarksville, except for a public display conducted by parties approved by the Clarksville City 
Council at times and dates approved by the Clarksville City Council. (Ord. No. 2009-598, Sec. 2.) 
7.20.03 Permitteduse Notwithstandingtheprovisionsof7.20.02, itshallbelawfulfor any person to use or explode any fireworks, no matter by what name known, within the corporate limits of the city of Clarksville on the following dated during specified hours: 
A. 	July 4 
from 10:00 a.m. to 11: 00 p.m. 
B. 	December 31 
from 10: 00 p.m. to January 1 at 1: 00 a.m. Ord. No. 2009-598, Sec. 3.) 
7.20.04 Penalty Anypersonfoundguiltyofviolatingtheprovisionsoftheordinance 
shall upon conviction be fined in a sum not less than Five Dollars ($ 5. 00) nor more than One 
Hundred Dollars ($ 100. 00). ( Ord. No. 2009-598, Sec. 4.) 
7.20.03 Novelty lighters 
A. 	Prohibitions; inapplicability The retail sale, offer of retail sale, gift of or 
distribution of any novelty lighter within the territorial jurisdiction of the city of Clarksville is prohibited. The prohibition is inapplicable to: 
1. 	Novelty lighters which are only being actively transported through the 
city; 
2. 	Novelty lighters located in a warehouse closed to the public for purposes 
of retail sales. 
B. 	Definition Novelty lighter means a lighter that has entertaining audio or visual effects, or that depicts through the use of logos, decals, art work, or other means, 
or resembles in physical form or function articles commonly recognized as 
appealing to or intended for use by children ten years of age or younger.  This 
includes, but not limited to, lighters that depict or resemble cartoon characters, 
toys, guns, watches, musical instruments, vehicles, toy animals, food or beverages, or that play musical notes or have flashing lights or other entertaining features. A novelty lighter may operate on any fuel, including butane or liquid 
fuel. 
C. 	Exceptions The term " novelty lighter" excludes 
e" 	94.2 
1. 	
Any lighter manufactured prior to 1980, and 

2. 	
Any lighter which lacks, fuel; or 

3. 	
Any lighter which lacks a device necessary to produce combustion or a 


flame. 
D. 	Enforcement The provisions of this section shall be enforced by any police officer, any Code Enforcement Officer, and any other city official authorized to 
enforce any of the provisions of the Clarksville Municipal Code. 
E. 	Penalties Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this ordinance is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction therefore, shall be subject to a fine or penaltyofnot lessthanTwenty-FiveDollars ($25.00) nor more thanFive 
Hundred Dollars ($500.00). ( Ord. No. 2007-554, Sec. 1.) 
CHAPTER 7.24 
CLAIMS AGAINST CITY 
Sections: 
7.24.01 
Liability coverage 
7.24.02 Settlement ofclaims 
7. 24. 01 Liability coverage The city shall carry liability coverage on all its motor vehicles in the minimum amounts prescribed in the Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act. 
A.C.A. 27-19-203, Et seq.) 
STATE LAW REFERENCE A.C.A. 21-9-303; HDBK. 8-5-3 
7.24.02 Settlement ofclaims all persons having claims against the city may file them 
with the Clerk/Treasurer. The Clerk/Treasurer shall present them to the Council. The Council 
may grant a hearing for the claimant and may authorize a settlement. 
STATELAWREFERENCE A.C.A. 21-9-302 
i 
I 
CHAPTER 7.28 
STORAGE AND HANDLING 
OF VOLATILE COMBUSTIBLES 
Sections: 
7.28. 01 
Restriction on keeping 
7.28. 02 
Volatiles never to be allowed to pass into drainage system 
7.28. 03 
Penalty 
7.28. 01 Restriction on keeping Gasoline, naphtha, benzine, and other like volatile combustiblesortheircompoundsinexcessofatotaloffive (5) gallons, exclusive of that in tanks of automobiles, in combustion engines, or in approved portable wheeled tanks in 
public garages each not exceeding sixty( 60) gallons capacity, shall not be kept within any building. Such total offive (5) gallons or less shall be kept only in cans approved by the Chiefof the Fire Department. Any quantity in excess of five( 5) gallons shall be kept only in a tank or 
tanks placed not less than two (2) feet beneath the surface ofthe ground or in an outside tank or tanks above ground and approved by the Chief of the Fire Department located not less than fifty 50) feet from the line of any adjoining property which may be built upon. The tank or tanks shall be adequately and properly diked with a dike having capacity not less than equal in volume to that ofthe tank or tanks surrounded. No underground tanks shall be placed, constructed or maintained under a street, public sidewalk or in a sidewalk area. 
7.28.02 Volatiles never to be allowed to pass into drainage system In no instance shall gasoline, naphtha, benzine and other like volatile combustibles or their compounds be allowed to 
run upon the floor or fall or pass into the drainage system of the premises. Self-closing metal 
cans shall be used for all oily waste or waste oils. 
7.28.03Penalty Anypersonwhoshallviolateorfailtocomplywithanyofthe provisions of this chapter, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or regulation, 
shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). The 
imposition of one( 1) penalty for violation of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or permit 
it to continue; and all 
96 
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable 
time; and each day that any prohibited condition is maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
The application of said penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of any 
prohibited condition as provided by this chapter. 
CHAPTER 7.32 
OUTSIDE FIRE SERVICE 
Sections: 
7.32. 01 
Authority to dispatch 
7.32.02 Restrictions 
7.32.03 Costofairwithoutmutualaidagreement 
7. 32. 04 Mutual aid agreement 
7.32. 05 
Payment of money collected 
7.32.01 Authority to dispatch No Fire Department apparatus shall be taken beyond the 
corporate limits of the city to assist at any fire or for any other purpose, except by order of the Mayor or Fire Chief or such other person as they may designate, and subject to the restrictions 
and conditions hereinafter set forth. (Ord. No. 398, Sec. 1.) 
7. 32. 02 Restrictions The Mayor or Fire Chief or such other person as they may designate are authorized, in their discretion, to aid in the extinguishing of fires in another city or 
town, public institutions, corporation, or other properties within a reasonable distance from the city or on property immediately adjacent to the city in which there is a possibility of fire spreading within the corporate limits, under the following conditions: 
A. 	A request from a city or incorporated town for assistance must come only from the Mayor, Fire Chief or such other person as may be designated by mutual 
agreement. 
B. 	Calls may be responded to only by such apparatus and men which in the judgment of the Mayor or Fire Chief or such other person as they may designate can be safely sent without unduly impairing the fire protection within the city, and when 
highways and weather conditions are favorable. 
C. 	The city, incorporated town, public institution, corporation, or individual requesting assistance must pay the charge for apparatus and service hereinafter 
provided unless there exists a mutual aid agreement. 
D. 	The city, incorporated town, public institution, corporation or individual must 
compensate the city for any loss or damage to such apparatus while answering such call, and be responsible to the members 
40, 
I I I 
of the Fire Department of the city for any injuries suffered or incurred by them
E 
while responding to such calls and while working at such fire, unless otherwise covered by insurance. 
STATE LAW REFERENCE A.C.A.14-53-102 
7.32.03 Costofaidwithoutmutualaidagreement Unless thereexistsamutualaid 
agreement, every municipality, institution, corporation or individual requesting and receiving such services of the Clarksville Fire Department, beyond the corporate limits, shall pay for such 
servicesandtheuseofthefirefightingapparatusinthetotalsumofFiftyDollars ($50.00). This charge shall be appointed as follows: 
Twenty Dollars ($20.00) to thecityofClarksville, Arkansas, and the remaining Thirty Dollars ($30.00) to be divided equallyamong the firemen 
who provide such services. ( Ord. No. 82, Sec. 1.) 
7.32.04 Mutual aid agreement The Mayor and Chiefofthe Fire Department are herebyauthorized to enter into mutual aid agreements with other municipalities, firms, corporations, or 
individuals, for the rendering of fire service, subject to the following conditions: 
A. 	That the parties with whom such mutual aid agreements are entered into shall agree to indemnify the city against any or all loss, cost and damage which it may suffer or sustain by reason of damage to any apparatus arising from any cause whatsoever while such apparatus is going to or from the scene ofthe fire or while 
at the scene of the fire. The duty to indemnify shall be performed within fifteen 15) days after demand. 
B. 	As to each fire driver injured while driving to or from the fire, or while at the scene of the fire, and as to each fireman helping at the fire, injured between the time he reports to the foreman of this company and the time his service ends, the person entering into such mutual aid agreements shall pay within fifteen( 15) days after demand to the city a sum sufficient to cover the medical and hospital 
expenses by such injured driver or fireman. ( Ord. No. 398, Sec. 5.) 
7.32.05 Pavmentofmoneycollected Moneycollectedunderthetermsof7.32.03ofthis chapter shall be paid to the respective fire drivers and firemen as to whom such collections were 
made, and in proportion to the amount of time applicable to them respectively. 
CHAPTER 7.36 
FIRE EQUIPMENT OPERATION 
Sections: 
7.36. 01 
Yield to fire vehicles 
7.36.02 
Restrictions around fire equipment 
7.36.03 
Penalty 
7.36.01 YieldtofirevehiclesAlloperatorsofmotorvehicleswithinthecityarerequiredto exercise caution upon sounding of the Clarksville siren fire alarm or fire truck siren or siren of 
any member ofthe city Volunteer Fire Department and to move said vehicle out ofthe traffic line so as to permit the unobstructed passage of all fire fighting trucks and equipment and vehicles in the use by members ofthe Fire Department. Said operators shall cause their vehicles 
to remain still until all fire equipment and personnel shall have passed through the street or 
streets being used. (Ord. No. 369, Sec. 1.) 
7.36.02 Restrictions around fire equipment It shall be unlawful for any operator of a 
motor vehicle to park or leave the same within two (2) blocks ofany fire truck or fire fighting equipment or personnel while on duty at any fire. Or to park a vehicle within one ( 1) block of any fire hydrant which is in use for fire. No driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall follow any fire trucks or firemen' s car traveling in response to an alarm closer than five hundred( 500) feet. No operator of any vehicle shall drive over or upon any fire hose when laid down upon any street driveway or any place when being used for fire use without the 
consent offire officials. ( Ord. No. 369, Sec. 2.) 
7.36.03 Penalty Anypersonfoundguilty.ofviolatinganyoftheprovisionsofthis ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in any 
sumnotlessthanTenDollars($ 10.00) normorethanOneHundredDollars ($100.00) foreach offense. ( Ord. No. 369, Sec. 3.) 
CHAPTER 7.40 
SOLICITING ON STREETS Sections: 
7.40.01 Permit required 
7.40.02 Information required 
7.40.03 
Permit issued by Mayor 
7.40.04 
Penalty 
7.40.01 Permit required No person, organization, firm or other party shall solicit donations on the streets of Clarksville, Arkansas, for any public charity or religious purpose whatsoever without having first secured a permit from the Mayor before doing any such 
soliciting. (Ord. No. 113, Sec. 1.) 
7.40.02 Informationrequired Beforeanyperson, organization, firmorgroupofpersons shall be permitted to solicit as provided in the preceding section, they shall submit in writing to the Mayor an application stating the name and headquarters address of the group or organization they represent and solicit for and the names and addresses of any and all solicitors so engaged or to become engaged in soliciting in and upon the streets of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas. 
Ord. No. 113, Sec. 2.) 
7.40.03 Permit issued by Mayor The Mayor is hereby empowered to permit any such 
organization, firm or other group or party to solicit religious or charitable contributions upon the streets. Such permit so to do shall be issued in writing by the Mayor, shall be attested by the City Clerk and shall bear and show an impression of the city seal in addition to the signatures of 
the city Mayor and City Clerk. No charge or fee shall be made for any such permit. (Ord. No. 
113, Sec. 3.) 

7.40.04 Penalty any person, organization, firm, group or party failing to comply with this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than 
TenDollars ($10.00) normorethanOneHundredDollars ($100.00), togetherwiththe costsof 
the proceeding. (Ord. No. 113, Sec. 4.) 
CHAPTER 7.44 
SOLICITING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sections: 
7.44.01 Nuisance 
7.44.02 
Penalty 
7.44.03 Exceptions 
7.44.01 Nuisance Thepracticeofgoinginanduponprivateresidencesinthecityof 
Clarksville, Arkansas, by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors ofmerchandise not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/ordisposingofand/orpeddling orhawkingthe same is declaredto 
be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
7.44.02 PenaltvAnypersonconvictedofperpetratinganuisanceasdescribedand prohibited in the first section of this ordinance, shall be fined in a sum of not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00), normorethanTwenty-FiveDollars ($25.00)togetherwiththecostsofthe 
proceeding. 
7.44.03 Exceptions That theprovisionsofthisordinanceshallnotapplyto thesale, or 
solicitingoforderforthe saleof,fruits, vegetablesorotherproducts ofthefarm, includingmeat from domestic animals or livestock, so far as the sale ofthe commodities named herein is now authorized by law. 
CHAPTER 7.48 
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
Sections: 
7. 48. 01 License required 
7.48. 02 
Application for license; fees; posting 
j 7.48.03 Exceptions 
7.48.01 Licenserequired Itshallbeunlawfulforanyperson, nothavinganestablished business in the city to haul or bring into the city either directly or indirectly, any goods, wares, merchandise, provisions, fruits or other food products with the intention of selling or disposing of same from any truck or vehicle, railroad car, rooms, store, warehouse, building, lot or in any other manner, whatsoever, either at wholesale or retail; by soliciting order therefore from house to house, or from store to store, or taking orders for the future delivery thereof, or selling directly or otherwise, at wholesale or retail, without a bona fide intention of selling or disposing of such goods, ware, merchandise, fish, meats, provisions, fruit, food products, or other such property through a regularly established place of business within the city, without first obtaining a license 
for such purpose, as is herein provided. 
It shall also be unlawful for any person not having an established business in the city to 
solicit orders for sale of any service to be performed, subscriptions of any publication, insurance, 
or securities, or an other type of service or offering, whether performed or sold immediately or at 
some future date, without first obtaining a license for such purpose, as is herein provided. 
7.48.02 Application for license; fees posting Any person who does or attempts to do any of the acts specified in 7.48. 01 shall first make application in writing to the City Clerk for a 
license as herein provided, in which application he shall state his age, place of residence, business, and any other information requested by the City Clerk, to show his good faith, and that his business is lawful and legitimate, which application shall be subscribed and sworn to by the applicant and filed in the office ofthe City Clerk. Upon the filing of such application, and payment of the fees as herein provided, the City Clerk shall thereupon issue a license to the applicant permitting him to engage in such business as is covered by the application, in accordancewiththeprovisionsof7.48.01 forwhichthefollowingfeesshallbecharged: 
101 
op*' 
S-39 
For each day, or part of a day, less than one ( 1) week, the sum of 
50.00 For each week, under one ( 1) month, the sum of 
100.00 For each month, less than one ( 1) year, the sum of 
150. 00 For one ( 1) year, the sum of 
200.00 
Eachlicense shallindicateonitsfacethedateofexpirationofthe same, andshallbe 
placed in a conspicuous place on the truck, vehicle or premises, covering the place of business of 
the license. Each truck, vehicle, room or structure or building shall be a separate unit, treated 
and licensed as such under the terms ofthis section. 
7.48.03 Exceptions. TheprovisionsofSections7.48.01and7.48.02shallnotapplyto any person having a regularly established place of business within the city and whose stock of goods, wares or merchandise has been assessed for taxation and the tax shall have been paid 
thereon during the current year; nor to any person selling wood, fuel or farm products produced by the person offering the same for sale, either on his own premises or on the premises of another, providing, however, such producer must have in his possession his grower's permit; nor to any person engaged in interstate commerce. 
CHAPTER 7.52 
FALSE FIRE AND BURGLAR ALARMS 
Sections: 
7.52.01 Fire alarms 
7.52.02 Burglar alarms 
7.52.01 Fire alarms. Any entity, whether an individual or business, which has a fire alarm system shall be allowed to report three (3) false alarms per year without incurring any 
penalty. For every false alarm over three (3) per year permitted, said entity shall be fined Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00), said sum being calculated to cover the cost incurred by the city in 
responding to said alarm. (Ord. No. 248, Sec. 1) 
7.52.02 Burglar alarms. Each entity, whether an individual or a business, which has a burglar alarm system shall be allowed to report two (2) false burglar alarms per month without incurring any penalty. For every false burglar alarm reported over the two (2) per month 
permitted, saidentityshallbefinedthesumofFiftyDollars ($50.00). (Ord. No. 248, Sec. 2 as 
amended by Ord. No. 99-398, Sec. 1.) 
r•-102 
S-32 CHAPTER 7.56 
SALES TAX ON HOTELS AND MOTELS 
Sections: 
7.56.01 Tax is levied 
7. 56.02 
Collected by Commission 
7.56.01 Tax is levied 
A. 	A tax ofone percent( I%) is hereby levied on the portion of the gross receipts or gross proceeds received from the renting, leasing or otherwise furnishing ofhotel, motel or short term condominium rental accommodations for sleeping, meeting or party room facilities for profit in the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, but such 
accommodations shall not include the rental or lease of such accommodations for periods of thirty (30) days or more; and 
B. 	A tax of one percent ( 1%) 
is hereby levied on the portion of the gross receipts or gross proceeds received by restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, delis, drive-in restaurants, carryout restaurants, concession stands, convenience stores, grocery 
store delis, and similar businesses from the sale of prepared food and beverages for on or off-premises consumption, except that such tax shall not apply to such gross receipts or gross proceeds of fraternal organizations qualified under Section 501c(3) InternalRevenueCode. [A.C.A. 16-75-602 (a) (1) (A) (d) (1) ( B)]. (Ord. No. 364, Sec. 1.) 
7.56.02 Collected by Commission 
A. 	The one percent( 1%) 
tax described in this ordinance hereof shall be paid by the 
persons, firms and corporations liable therefor and shall be collected by the 
Advertising and Promotion Commission of the city( hereinafter the 
Commission"), or by a designated agent of the Commission, in the same manner and at the same time as the tax levied by the Arkansas Gross Receipts Act, A.C.A. 
26-52-101, et. seq. [ A.C.A. 26-75603 ( a) ( 1)]. 
B. 	The person paying the tax shall report and remit said tax on forms provided by the Commission and as directed by the Commission. The rules, regulations, forms of 
notice, assessment procedures, and the enforcement and collection ofthe tax under the Arkansas Gross Receipts Act shall, so far as is practicable, be applicable with respect to the enforcement and all actions shall be by, and through 
the proper Commission officials or agents. [ A.C.A. 26-75-603 ( b)] 
S-32 
APO. 
C. 	The tax levied by this article shall be collected from the purchaser or user of the food or accommodation by the person selling such food or furnishing such accommodation. Such person shall pay to the city by the twentieth( 20th) day of each month all collections ofthe tax for the preceding month, accompanied by 
reports on forms to be prescribed the Commission. (Ord. No. 364, Sec. 2.) 
CHAPTER 7.60 
ADVERTISING AND PROMOTION COMMISSION 
Sections: 
7.60.01 Commission created 
7.60.02 Use for local taxes 
7.60.01 	Commission created 
A. 	There is hereby created the city of Clarksville Advertising and Promotion Commission, which shall be composed of seven ( 7) members as follows: 
1. 	four( 4) members shall be hotel, motel, or restaurant owners or managers 
who shall be appointed by the City Council ofthe city for staggered terms of four( 4) years; and 
2. 	
two (2) membersoftheCommissionshallbemembersoftheCityCouncil and selected by the City Council; and 

3. 	
one ( 1) member shall be from the public at large and shall be nominated by the Mayor of the city and approved by the City Council of the city for a 


termoffour(4) years. [A.C.A. 26-75-602 (f) (1) ( 2) (3) ]. 
B. 	The four( 4) hotel, motel, or restaurant members at the first meeting of the Commission, shall draw lots for terms so that: 
1. 	
one ( 1) member shall serve for a term of one ( 1) year; 

2. 	
one ( 1) member shall serve for a term oftwo (2) years; 

3. 	
one ( 1) member shall serve for a term of three ( 3) years; and 


4 	one ( 1) member shall serve for a term of four( 4) years. 
O"" 	104­
S-36 
All successors to these members shall be appointed for terms offour( 4) years. [A.C.A. 
26-75-605 (b) (1) ( 2) (3) (4)] (Ord. No. 364, Sec. 3.) 
7.60.02 UseforlocaltaxesAlllocaltaxes collectedpursuant to this ordinance shall be 
usedforthefollowingpurposes. Theuseorpledgeofall, or anypartof,therevenuesderived from the tax for the purposes prescribed in this ordinance for the construction, reconstruction, repair maintenance, improvement, equipping, and operation ofpublic recreation facilities. This revenue shall be used or pledged for the purposes authorized in this ordinance only upon the 
recommendationofthe CommissionandtheapprovaloftheMayor andCityCouncil. [A.C.A. 
26-75-606 (a) (1) ( 2) (3) (b)] (Ord.No. 364, Sec. 4.) 
CHAPTER 7.64 
SIGNS 
Sections: 
7.64.01 Ordinance 01425 repealed 
7.64.02 Restrictions 
7.64.01 Ordinance01-425repealed Ord.No. 01-425whichdeclaredatemporary 
moratorium on the placement of signs exceeding ten( 10) feet in height and on the placement of all billboards within the city limits of the city of Clarksville is hereby amended as follows: 
A. 	The provisions of Ord. No. 01-425 are hereby repealed with the exception that there shall be no commercial billboards in the city limits of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, other than those to be located in the Interstate 40 corridor, controlled by 
the state of Arkansas. Commercial billboards shall be permitted in that corridor 
only. 
B. 	Definitions: 
Billboards: Any outdoor device or apparatus which is for lease or rent and is to be used for displaying, painting, messaging, or placing ofplacards, posters, or any other thing, with the purpose of displaying, advertising, or informing the public of 
an establishment, contents of an establishment, its goods, or its services. Ord. No. 01-433, Sec. 1.) 
r•. 	105­
S-38 
S-41 
7. 64. 02 Restrictions. No sign shall be erected within the city limits of Clarksville which 
places a mobile home, shed, automobile, truck, vehicle of any kind, or any other like items on a 
pedestal pole of similar display that elevates the item more than three (3) feet above ground
level. 
This ordinance is designed to control only the placement of the above listed and like items on poles, pedestals, etc., and is not designed to regulate actual signs, their size, lettering, coloring
or other aspects of actual signage. ( Ord. No. 325, Sec. 1) 
CHAPTER 7.68 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Sections: 
7.68. 01 
Times 
7. 68. 02 
Fine 
7. 68. 01 Times It shall be unlawful for any facility that serves alcoholic beverages to 
sell, offer for sale, or give away any alcoholic beverages, beer or wine before the hour of 10: 00 
a.m. and after the hour of 2: 00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 04-495, Sec. 1.) 
7.68.02 Fine Any facility that violates this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) nor more than OneThousand Dollars ($ 1, 000.00). ( Ord. No. 04-495, Sec. 2.) 
CHAPTER 7.72 SEXUALLYORIENTED BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
7.72.01 
Rationale and findings 
7.72.02 
Definitions 
7.72.03 
Classifications 
7. 72.04 
License required 
7. 72. 05 
Issuance of license 
7. 72.06 
AW Fees 
7.72.07 
Inspection 106 
S-49 
7.72.08 Expirationoflicense 
7. 72. 09 Suspension 


7.72. 10 Revocation 
7.72. 11 
Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal 
7.72.12 Transferoflicense 
7.72.13 Hours ofoperation 
7.72. 14 
Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films on premises 
7.72. 15 
Loitering and exterior lighting and monitoring requirements 


7.72. 16 Penalties and enforcement 
7.72. 17 
Applicability of ordinance to existing businesses 

7.72. 18 Prohibited activities 
7.72. 19 
Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability 
7.72.20 
Failure of city of Clarksville, Arkansas to meet time frame not to risk applicant/licensee rights 
7.72.21 
Location of sexually oriented businesses 
7.72.01 	Rationale and findings 
A. 	Purpose It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesseswithinthecityofClarksville, Arkansas. Theprovisionsofthis ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is 
it the intent nor effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution 
of obscene material. 
B. 	Findings and rationale Based on evidence ofthe adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Clarksville 
City Council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporatedinthecasesofCityofLittletonv. Z.J. GiftsD-4, L.L.C. 124 S.Ct. 2219 (June 7, 2004); CityofLosAngeles v. AlamedaBooks, Inc., 535U.S. 425 
2002); 	Pap'sA.M. v. CityofErie, 529U.S. 277 (2000); CityofRentonv. 
Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 ( 1986) Young v. American Mini Theatres, 
426 U.S. 50 ( 1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 ( 1991); California 
v. LaRue, 409U.S. 109 (1972); andWorldWideVideoofWashington, Inc. v. 
h 
City of Spokane, 368 F. 3d 1186 ( 9`Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. c. Village of 
h
Somerset, 316 F. 3d 702 ( 7`Cir. 2003); H and A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, TX, 480 F.3d 336)5' Cir. 2000) 
106. 1 
S-49 
And based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around 
sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to Austin, Texas— 1986; 
Indianapolis, Indiana— 1984; Garden Grove, California— 1991; Houston, Texas— 
1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona— 1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga Tennessee— 1999­2003; Minneapolis, Minnesota— 1980; Los Angeles, California— 1997; Whittier, 
California— 1978; Spokane, Washington— 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota— 1994; 
Littleton, Colorado 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma— 1986; Dallas, Texas— 
1997; Greensboro, North Carolina—2003; Amarillo, Texas— 1997; New York 
New York Times Square— 1994; and Report ofthe Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses ( June 6, 1989, state of Minnesota), the Association of Adult Businesses with Secondary Effects; Legal 
Doctrine, Social Theory and Empirical Evidence, (Alan C. Weinstein and Richard 
McCleary, 2011); Rural Hotspots— The case of Adult Businesses, ( Richard 
McCleary, 2008); Do " Offsite" Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effect: Legal Doctrine, Social Theory and Empirical Evidence, (Richard McCleary and Alan C. Weinstein, 2009); Stigma management of male and female customers to a non-
urban adult novelty store ( Kristen Hefley 2006); Survey of Florida Appraisers, 
Effects of Land uses on market values Palm Beach County, Florida, (Duncan and 
Associates, 2008); Survey of Texas Appraisers, Secondary Effects of Sexually 
Oriented Businesses on market value, (Connie B. Coger FAICP and Eric Damian 
Kelly, Ph.D., FAICP, 2008); Survey of Appraisers, Fort Worth and Dallas— 
Effects of Land Uses on Surrounding Property Values, City of Fort Worth, Texas Duncan and Associates, 2004). ( Ord. No. 2013-694, Sec. 1.) 
The Clarksville City Council finds: 
A. 	Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
B. 	Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented business, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
106. 2 
S-49 
C. 	Each ofthe foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city of Clarksville, Arkansas' s rationale for this ordinance, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city of Clarksville, Arkansas's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may 
locate in the city of Clarksville, Arkansas finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this ordinance are reasonably believed to be relevant to said 
secondary effects. ( Ord. No. 2013-694, Sec. 1.) 
7.72.02Definitions Forthepurposesofthisordinance, thewordsandphrasesdefinedin 
the sections hereunder shall have the meanings herein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
106.2. 1 
TITLE 8 
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters 
8. 04 Adoption of State laws 
8. 08 Truck Routes 
8. 12 
Emergency Vehicles 
8. 16 
Non-operating Vehicles 
8. 20 Restricted Vehicles 
8. 24 
Parking Meters 
8. 28 
Handicapped Parking 
CHAPTER 8.04 
ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS 
Sections: 

8.04.01 Adoptionofstatelaws 
8.04.01 Adoption of state laws The " Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways of 
Arkansas," 
as continued in Title 75 of the Arkansas Statutes, three ( 3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Clerk/ Treasurer, are hereby adopted as traffic rules and regulations within and for the city. Any person convicted of a violation of said statutes shall be deemed guilty of the 
violation of the ordinances ofthe city, and shall be fined or imprisoned or both in the manner set out under the state statutes. 
CHAPTER 8. 08 
TRUCK ROUTES Sections: 
8. 08. 01 
Designated by Mayor 
8. 08. 02 Use required 
8. 08. 03 
Penalty 
8.08.01 Designatedbyayor TheMayorforthecityofClarksvilleisherebyauthorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes as truck routes, and to close 
street, parts of streets or specific lanes to truck and commercial vehicle traffic of more than one 1) 
ton capacity. ( Ord. No. 146, Sec. 1.) 
8.08.02 Use required All trucks and commercial vehicles ofmore than one( 1) ton capacity shall follow designated truck routes within the city limits of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, and unless a specific street or highway is designated by appropriate signs placed on said streets or highways for trucks or commercial vehicles, then such streets or 
highways shall be closed to trucks or commercial vehicles of more than one ( 1) ton capacity, 
except that trucks or commercial vehicles making deliveries that cannot be made without 
travelingoverclosedstreetsshallbeexemptedfromtheprovisionsofthisordinance. (Ord.No. 146, Sec. 2.) 
8. 08. 03 Penalty Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a 
misdemeanorandshall bepunishedby afineofnotmorethan OneHundredDollars ($100.00), 
or by imprisonment for not more than thirty( 30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Ord. No. 146, Sec. 3.) 
CHAPTER 8. 12 
EMERGENCY VEHICLES 
Sections: 
8. 12. 01 
Right-of-way 
8. 12. 02 
following prohibited 
8. 12.03 
Restriction of vehicular traffic 
8. 12. 04 Strict enforcement 
8. 12. 05 Exempt personnel 
8. 12.06 
Penalty 
8. 12.01 Right-of-way When any emergency vehicle is on an emergency run, a siren and/or flashing light shall be operated at all times while said vehicle is in motion. Any such moving emergency vehicle shall be entitled to and shall receive the right-of-way over all pedestrianandvehicletraffic. Whentheoperatorofanynon-emergencyvehicleisapproached from any direction by such emergency vehicle, he shall immediately move his vehicle to the extreme right side of the street, and shall come to a full stop, remaining at such full stop until all 
such emergency vehicle movements have passed. 
8. 12. 02 Following_prohibited No person except as herein authorized shall follow any emergency vehicle which is operating its emergency signals. 
8. 12. 03 Restriction of vehicular traffic No vehicular traffic (other than that of authorized personnel specified herein) shall be permitted within a three ( 3) block radius of any emergency, unless such vehicular movement is permitted by order ofthe fire, police or medical personnel in 
charge at the scene of such emergency. Fire, police or other authorized personnel shall have the specific authority to order all pedestrians and spectators outside said emergency area at any time. 
8. 12.04 Strict enforcement The provisions hereof shall be strictly enforced; members of the Police Department, the auxiliary Police Department, the Fire Department, the Volunteer Fire Department and all other duly qualified and acting law enforcement officials 
shall have full and complete authority to make arrests and/or issue summons to violators, and such arrests and/or summons for any such violation shall be valid and enforceable by court order 
as in other cases. 
8. 12. 05 Exempt personnel The following personnel when acting in the line of duty are specifically exempt from the provisions ofthis chapter: 
A. 	All regular and Volunteer Fire Department personnel. 
B. 	All regular and auxiliary police personnel. 
C. 	News reporting and photography personnel for public communications media 
D. 	Medical, nursing and ambulance personnel. 
E. 	Law enforcement officers, and other persons specifically authorized by the Mayor, Police Chief or Fire Chief. 
F. 	Public utility personnel. 
8. 12. 06 Penalty Any person violating any of the provisions hereinabove shall be guilty ofamisdemeanor, anduponconvictionshallbefinedinanysumnot lessthanTwenty-Five 
Dollars ($25.00) normorethanOneHundredDollars ($100.00). 
CHAPTER 8. 16 
NON-OPERATING VEHICLES 
Sections: 
8. 16. 01 Definitions 
8. 16. 02 
Prohibiting non-operating vehicles 
8. 16. 03 Exceptions 
8. 16. 04 
Penalty for violation 
8. 16. 05 Violators 
8. 16.01 Definitions 
A. 	Non-operating motor vehicles as used in this chapter means a motor vehicle with one or more of the following characteristics: 
1. 	
The engine or motor is inoperative 

2. 	
The wheels all of any one ofthem are removed 

3. 	
The motor vehicle has flats on two or more tires 

4. 	
Major operating components are missing such as: windshield glass, door glass, fenders, gauges, steering wheel, tie rods, springs, drive train, gear box, rear end, or any parts connected with the steering geometry ofthe 


motor vehicle, the seats are removed. 
5. 	Any of the major operating components such as those listed in item( A)(4) above are in such damaged condition so as to make the motor vehicle 
useless 
6. 	
The motor vehicle does not have a current Arkansas registration 

7. 


The motor vehicle does not have a current Arkansas motor vehicle 
inspection sticker demonstrating the vehicle has passed a safety inspection as by law required 
B. 	Prima facie case: it shall be a prima facie case that a motor vehicle is a non-operating motor vehicle ifit does not have a current Arkansas motor vehicle inspection sticker demonstrating the motor vehicle has passed a safety inspection 
as by law required. 
C. 	Motor vehicle means a car, automobile, truck, bus, omnibus, tractor truck, or 
other vehicle licensed to travel upon the roads of Arkansas, or subject to licensing for travel or intended as a carried for goods and persons from point to point which uses motive power derived from a motor or engine especially an internal 
combustion engine, or rotary engine and a wankle. 
8. 16. 02 Prohibiting non-operating vehicles It is unlawful to have a non-operating motor 
vehicle. 
8. 16. 03 Exceptions Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to apply to: 
A. 	Any motor vehicle that can be started and moved under its own power on demand. 
B. 	Motorcycles and motor bikes. 
C. 	Antique automobiles, provided the vehicle has an antique license as by law 
required. 
D. 	Temporarily disabled motor vehicles provided they are restored to running condition within thirty( 30) days from date or disablement. 
8. 16.04 Penaltv for violation A violation ofthis chapter is hereby declared to be a 
misdemeanor and punishable by a fine ofnot less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than One 
HundredDollars ($100.00) orby ajailsentenceofone( 1) 
to ten( 10) days. Each day a non-operating motor vehicle is upon the premises of a person shall constitute a separate offense. 
8. 16. 05 Violators A person shall be deemed in violation of this chapter if: 
A. 	Such person owns or has registered to him a non-operating motor vehicle that is in 
a prohibited area within the terms ofthis chapter. 
B. 	Such person owns property that non-operating motor vehicles are placed, parked or found resting on in a prohibited area within the terms ofthis chapter. 
C. 	It shall be a prima facie case that the record owner is the owner of property in 
question. 
D. 	It shall be a prima facie case that the registered owner of a motor vehicle is the owner of the motor vehicle. 
CHAPTER 8.20 
RESTRICTED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
8.20.01 Nature Trail 
8.20.02 Definition 
8. 20.03 
Penalty 
8.20.04 Flood levee 
8.20.05 Definition 
8.20.06 
Penalty 
8.20.01 Nature Trail It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle, bicycle or any other vehicle, whether motorized or not, on the Nature Trail which is 
situated along and eastern and western banks of Spadra Creek within the city limits ofthe city of Clarksville, Arkansas. (Ord. No. 139, Sec. 1.) 
8.20.02 Definition The term" motor vehicle" for the purpose ofthis ordinance shall mean any vehicle which is self-propelled, included, but not limited to, automobiles, jeeps, vans, motorcycles, mo-peds, three-wheeledcycles oranyothermeansoftransportationwhichis 
motorized. (Ord. No. 139, Sec. 2.) 
8.20.03 Penalty Anypersonviolatingthisordinanceshallbedeemedguiltyofa 
misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall pay a fine ofnot less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) 
andnottoexceedOneHundredDollars ($100.00) foreachoffense. (Ord. No. 139, Sec. 3.) 
8.20.04 Floodlevee Itshallbeunlawfulforanyperson tooperateamotorvehicleupon or across the flood levee that runs along the western band of Spadra Creek within the city limits 
ofClarksville, Arkansas. (Ord.No. 81, Sec. 1.) 
8.20.05 Definition Theterm"motor vehicle"forpurposesofthisordinanceshallmean any vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, jeeps, vans and 
motorcycles. (Ord. No. 81, Sec. 2.) 
8.20.06 Penalty Anypersonviolatingthisordinanceshallbedeemedguiltyofa 
misdemeanoranduponconvictionshallpayafineofnotlessthanTwenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) 
and not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord. No. 81, Sec. 3.) 
CHAPTER 8.24 
PARKING METERS 

Sections: 
8. 24. 01 Operation 
8. 24. 02 Fines 
8.24.01 Operation ThecityofClarksvilleandthe CityCouncilthereofbyordinanceor resolution shall have the power to purchase, install, maintain, operate and control parking meters 
in the public streets, avenues, roads, alleys, public ways, public parks, public parking lots and 
places within the city of Clarksville at such designated places as the City Council may deem necessary and proper and as it may establish by resolution or ordinance; to set and collect reasonable rates, fees or charges for the use ofparking places so designated and equipped with parking meters by vehicles; to regulate the period oftime in which such parking places with parking meters may be used by the public for parking vehicles at such rates; to provide by
ordinancepenaltiesfortheviolationofparking meterregulationspursuant tothelawsofthe state ofArkansas,particularlyAct309oftheActsofthe GeneralAssemblyofthe stateofArkansas, for the year 1939, and the Constitution of the state of Arkansas for the year 1874 as amended. 
Ord. No. 400, Sec. 1.) 
8.24.02 Fines From and after the passage and approval ofthis ordinance, the fines for parking meter violations within the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, shall be as follows: 
A. 
The fine for a parking meter violation shall be Fifty Cents ($. 50) ifpaid within 
twenty-four( 24) hours from the date the parking ticket was issued. 
B. 	If said fine or penalty is not paid within twenty-four( 24) hours, the fine or penalty 
shall be increased to One Dollars($ 1. 00) 
C. If said fine or penalty is not paid within seventy-two (72) hours from the date the 
parking ticket was issued, the fine or penalty shall be Ten Dollars ($ 10.00) and 
the Clarksville Police Department shall notify the owner of the vehicle, in writing,
by United States mail of the fine and the possible consequences of non-payment. 
D. 	Ifsaid fine or penalty, as set out above, is not paid within one ( 1) week from the date ofthe mailing of the above described notification, a warrant shall be issued by the District Court, and the owner ofthe vehicle arrested, and upon conviction 
shall be fined in any amount, not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00), nor more than 
Twenty-Five Dollars ($25. 00). ( Ord. No. 182, Sec. 1.) 
CHAPTER 8. 28 
HANDICAPPED PARKING 
Sections: 
8. 28. 01 
Eligible persons 
8. 28. 02 Violations 
8.28.01 Eligible persons All person who may wish to avail themselves ofthe provisions of A.C.A. 27-15-702 in regard to public parking areas or to avail themselves of the provisions of this ordinance, shall apply for and obtain from the state of Arkansas the identifying decal known 
as the International Symbol of Access. Such shall be displayed on the lower left corner of the license plate of the vehicle registered to the handicapped person.  Only those persons who are disabled within the definition ofA.C.A. 27-15-702 and have properly obtained an identifyingdecal which is properly displayed on the vehicle, or an individual who is found to be disabled by
the Veterans Administration and who legally displays the " Disabled Veterans" license plate, shall be permitted to park in parking spaces which shall be designated for handicapped persons 
on either public or private parking areas. ( Ord. No. 131, Sec. 1.) 
8.28.02 Violations Any person who shall park a vehicle in a parking space which has been set aside and designated for handicapped persons only, who is not a disabled person within thedefinitionofA.C.A. 27-15-702, who doesnothaveeithertheproperidentifying decal displayed on his or her license plate, or who does not display a" Disabled Veterans" license plate shall beguiltyofamisdemeanor anduponconvictionshall be fined asumofnotlessthan Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each offense, plus applicable towing, impounding and related fees. ( Ord. No. 131, Sec. 2.) 
00"' 
Chapters: 
9. 04 
9. 08 
9. 12 
Sections: 
9.04.01 
9. 04.02 
9. 04.03 
9. 04.04 
9. 04.05 
9. 04. 06 
9. 04.07 
9. 04. 08 
S-43 TITLE 9 
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
Streets, Alleys, Gutters or Ditches Excavations and Alterations Visibility at Intersections 
CHAPTER 9.04 
STREETS, ALLEYS, GUTTERS OR DITCHES 
Streets and alleys 
Gutters or ditches 
Driveways 

Penalty 
Use of certain vehicles restricted 
Definitions 
Responsibility of parent or guardian 
Penalty 

9.04.01 StreetsandalleysItshallbethedutyofeveryowneror occupantofanylotor 
premises in this city along which any street or alley runs, to keep said street or alley from the middle line thereof to the side next to him, free from all manner and kind of filth, garbage, trash, 
debris or decaying animal and vegetable substance of every kind. 
9.04.02 Gutters or ditches No person shall allow any dirt, filth or obstruction of any kind to accumulate in the gutter or ditch in front of his premises, and all owners or occupants of 
property are required to keep the gutter or ditch in front of their premises clean, open and free from trash and weeds, and all obstructions to the easy and rapid flow of water. 
9.04.03 Driveways That every person, firm or corporation constructing a driveway 
over any public ditch within the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, shall provide some adequate means for the continual flow of water through said ditch; such opening shall be made by tile or other materials to be approved by the Street Superintendent of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas. 
Ord. No. 109, Sec. 1) 
o,.. 
S-43 
9. 04. 04 Penalty Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished upon conviction in any 
sumnotlessthanTwenty-FiveDollars ($25.00) normorethan OneHundredDollars ($100.00) 
and each day that said condition shall exist shall be considered a separate offense. ( Ord. No. 
109, Sec. 2) 
9.04.05 Useofcertainvehiclesrestricted Nobicycles, skates, skateboards, rollerblades, scooters, segways, or other similar devices shall be used upon any sidewalk in the downtown business district of Clarksville in the areas on Main Street from Legion Street( just west of the Spadra Bridge) to Johnson Street and all streets and alleys running north and south between Sevier and Cherry Streets, including but not limited to Cravens, Fulton, College, and Ladd, but excluding Sevier and Cherry Streets proper. This restriction shall only apply between the hours 
of 8: 00 a.m. to 5: 00 p.m. Mondays— Saturdays. 
Additionally, none of such devices shall be used on the walkways stairs, rails, parkinglots or other areas of any business, residence, church or other property without the consent of the 
property owner. ( Ord. No. 2007-557, Sec. 1.) 
9.04.06 Definitions 
Skateboard—a short, narrow board having wheels mounted to it. 
Skate— a shoe or boot with wheels affixed to its sole, enabling it to roll across surfaces, 
with the exception of wheeled sneakers. 
Sidewalk—that area adjacent to a roadway and commonly used by pedestrians as a 
walkway. (Ord. No. 2007-557, Sec. 2.) 
9 04 07 Responsibility of parent or guardian Where a person under the age of fourteen 14) years of age is in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, the responsibility for the non-
parent or guardian. ( Ord. No. 2007-557, Sec. 3.)
compliance shall be placed on that person' s 
9.04.08 Penalty Anyindividual fourteen( 14) yearsofageorolder, ortheparent orlegal 
guardian of any child under the age of fourteen( 14), who knowingly permits a child to violate 
any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall be fined not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) 
normorethanFiftyDollars ($50.00). (Ord.No. 2007-557, Sec. 4.) 
S-43 
CHAPTER 9. 08 EXCAVATIONS AND ALTERATIONS Sections: 
9. 08.01  Excavations -permit  
9. 08.02  Application for permit-deposit  
9. 08.03  Municipal exemption  
9. 08. 04  Emergencies  
9. 08. 05  Permit required  
9. 08. 06  Penalty  
9. 08. 01  Excavations -permit From and after the passage of this ordinance any person,  

firm or corporation or anyone wishing to bore or excavate under or cut or excavate into the surface of or otherwise upon any street, alley or public roadway in the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, shall furnish to the City Clerk ofthe city of Clarksville, Arkansas, the locution where the opening is to be made, the nature, extent and purpose of said opening and shall pay to the 
City Clerk a fee in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50. 00) for a permit allowing such opening for excavation, which permit shall be issued by the City Clerk with the approval of the Street Superintendent of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, upon the posting of a bond as hereinafter 
provided. (Ord. No. 94, Sec. 1) 
9. 08. 02 Application for permit-deposit Anyone desiring to make an opening or 
excavation in the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, shall deposit with the City Clerk at the time of 
application for a permit a bond in the amount of Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) to be used as 
necessary by the city in repairing and restoring the roadway to its former condition.  In the event it is necessary to cut the curb as well, said bond will be increased to Five Hundred Dollars 
500.00). Afterrepairofstreetand/or curb has beencompleted andinspected, any excessof such bond remaining shall be refunded. Costs of such repairs will be calculated according to 
schedule approved by the City Council. (Ord. No. 94, Sec. 2) 
9.08.03 Municipal exception The Clarksville Light and Water Company and other municipal departments shall secure a permit before opening any street, alley or public roadway but shall not be required to pay the permit fee or post a bond in those instances where such opening is necessary for repairs or improvements to the public utility system. Clarksville Light and Water Company may open a street or roadway to perform utility work on behalf of a customer or property owner only after such responsible individual has obtained permit and bond 
as herein required. Under no circumstances will a permit be issued in the name of Clarksville Light and Water Company for a street cut performed for the benefit of a private contractor, 
customer or property owner. (Ord. No. 256, Sec. 2) 
S-43 
9. 08. 04 Emergencies An emergency is hereby defined as a utility repair that is necessary and that occurs after the office hours ofthe City Clerk. A permit is required for an emergency opening or excavation, and a permit shall be obtained from the City Clerk within four( 4) hours after the City Clerk's office becomes open to the public, following such emergency excavation or opening. A signed statement shall be submitted to the Street Superintendent at the time of application for a permit, describing in detail the nature of the emergency and the reasons for the 
opening of excavation. (Ord. No. 256, Sec. 3) 
9.08.05 Permitrequired Noperson, firmorcorporationshallbore, excavateunder, cut or excavate into the surface of or otherwise upon any street, alley or public roadway within the city limits of Clarksville, Arkansas, for any purpose whatsoever without first obtaining an 
official permit therefor from the City Clerk as herein provided. (Ord. No. 94, Sec. 5) 
9.08. 06 Penalty Violation ofthis ordinance is declared to be a misdemeanor and any person, firm or corporation who is found guilty of a violation hereof shall be fined not more than One Hundred Dollars ($ 100.00) and each day during which a violation continues shall constitute 
a separate offense. ( Ord. No. 94, Sec. 6) 
CHAPTER 9. 12 
VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS 
Sections: 
9. 12. 01 Regulated 
9. 12. 01 Required On a corner lot on which a front yard is required, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision betweenaheightoftwoandone-half(2 1/21) feetandten(10') feetabove thecenterlinegrade 
oftheintersecting streetinthe areabounded by the streetright-of-way lines (not curb lines but the right-of-way lines which are also the property lines) of such corner lot and line joining pointsalongsaidstreetsright-of-waylinestwenty-five (25) feetfromthepointofintersection. Graphic 
illustration of these requirements is provided by the following: 
122 
S-39 
A user determined to be discharging waste in violation of Ord. No. 22, Article 1 through 6, other than excessive BOD or suspended solids, shall compensate the utility for the cost of sampling and laboratory service expense required for monitoring the discharges until such time 
as the discharged waste is in compliance. 
The manager may suspend the wastewater treatment services and/or a Wastewater Contribution Permit when such suspension is necessary in the opinion ofthe manager in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial 
endangerment to the health or welfare ofpersons, to the environment, causes interference to the 
POTW or causes the manager to violate any condition of its NPDES Permit. 
Any user who violates the following conditions ofthis ordinance, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of 
10.04.16 ofthis ordinance: 
A. 	Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics ofhis discharge; 
B. 	Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater 
constituents and characteristics; 
C. 	Refusal of reasonable access to the user' s premises for the purpose of inspection 
or monitoring; or 
D. 	Violation of conditions ofthe permit. ( Ord. No. 121, Art. VII.) 
10.04.17 Violationofordinance WhenevertheCommissionfindsthatanyuserhas violated or is violating this ordinance, Wastewater Contribution Permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the Commission may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty( 30) days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Commission by the user. 
The Commission may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the Commission who the proposed enforcement action 
should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Commission regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before Commission why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten( 10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
The Commission may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designated any of its members or any officer or employee of the ( assigned department) to: 
A. 	Issue in the name of the Commission notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
B. 	Take the evidence; 
C. 	Transmit a report ofthe evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Commission for action thereon. 
At any hearing held pursuant to this ordinance, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any 
party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
After the Commission has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are 
properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city' s wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, federal or state Pretreatment Requirements, or any order ofthe city, the City Attorney may commence an action 
for appropriate legal and/ or equitable relief in the District City Court of Clarksville. ( Ord. No. 
121, Art. VIII.) 
10.04.18 Civilpenalties Anyuserwhoisfoundto haveviolatedanorderofthe 
Commission or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision ofthis 
ordinance and the order, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined not less 

thanTenDollars ($10.00) normorethanOne HundredDollars ($100.00) for eachoffense each 
day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law 
against the person found to have violated this ordinance or the orders, rules, regulations and 
permits issued hereunder. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in 
any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained 
pursuant to this ordinance, or Wastewater Contribution Permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or 
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance, 
shall,uponconviction,bepunishedby afineofnotlessthanFive HundredDollars ($500.00) or 
by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by both. ( Ord. No. 121, Art. IX.) 
S-49 
CHAPTER 10.08 
SEWER AND WATER RATES 
Sections: 
10.08.01 Monthly sewer rates 
10.08.02 Bond payments 
10. 08. 03 Meters, fees 
10. 08. 04 Base 
10. 08. 05 Non-payment 
10. 08. 06 Monthly water rates 
10. 08. 01 Monthly sewer rates That the following monthly rates be and they are hereby fixed as rates to be charged for sewer services furnished by the system which rates the City Council finds and declares to be reasonable and necessary rates to be charged: 
Inside the City 
Effective with consumption beginning with March meter readings: 
2002  2003  2004  
Monthly base rate:  Domestic  3. 13  3. 91  4. 89  
Commercial  $ 12. 50  15. 63  19. 54  
Industrial  $  18. 75  23. 44  29.30  
Per 1, 000 gallons plus monthly base rate  2. 88  3. 60  4. 50  

Outside the City 
Effective on the date of passage of this ordinance: 
Monthly base rate: 	Domestic $ 13. 38 Commercial $ 34.86 Industrial $ 58. 11 
Rate: $ 7. 41 per 1, 000 gallons plus monthly base rate. Ord. No. 2002-446, Sec. 1.) 
0` 
S-49 
Wastewater rates 
Base/ customer charge monthly A fixed fee shall be charged on a monthly basis regardless of consumption quantity based upon the customer class: 
Residential ( inside &  outside):  7. 50  
Commercial:  10. 00  
Large commercial/industrial:  100. 00  

Per 1, 000 gallons, plus monthly rate of$4. 50. 
The schedule of charges as described in above sections shall be adjusted on meter readings starting on October 1, beginning 2015, and each subsequent year by the amount of increase in the South Urban Unadjusted Consumer Price Index( CPN) as published by the BureauofLabor Statistics. 0=:// data.bls.goy//pdg/SurveyOgVutServlet?series id=CUUR0300SAO,CUUS0300SA0) by amount reported, but not to exceed three percent( 3%) whichever is less) for the preceding calendar year. Ifthe CPIU`declines during the previous 
calendar year, the rate adjustment will be zero percent( 0%).* This adjustment only effects the 
consumption water rates for retail inside and outside customers, commercial, large commercial/industrial, and wholesale customers. 
Example: IfCPIUfor2014equals2.0% forthecalendar year(JanuarytoDecember), the rates will increase 2. 0% in October of 2015. If CPIU equals 3. 25% for the 2014 calendar 
year, the rates will increase a maximum of 3%. If CPIU for the calendar year of 2014 drops by 
1%, the rates will remain unchanged. 
A copy of the revised consumption for rates shall be posted on the Clarksville Light& 
Water website (www.clarksvillelightwater.com) . The Clarksville Light& Water Commission 
shall be authorized to regulate the percentage(%) adjustment on the annual basis at a percentage 
below the published CPIU increase if the retained earnings of the utility remains at a 
reasonable and sustainable amount based upon its annual budgetary projections. ( Ord. No. 
2014-715, Sec. 1.) 
10.08.02 Bond payments That the rates shall never be reduced below an amount sufficient to provide for the operation and maintenance of the system and for the prompt payment ofthe principal and interest on the Utility Refunding and Construction Revenue Bonds Series 1986 and shall, when necessary, be increased to provide for the operation and 
maintenance of the system and for the payment of the principal and interest on the bonds. 
150. 1 
S-39 
10.08.03 Meters, fees That the facilities or services afforded by the system shall be furnished to the customer through a meter of all buildings, both public and private. In the case of 
apartment houses, multi-family dwelling, motels or trailer courts that are master metered, the sewer charge shall not be less than the minimum charge per unit multiplied by the number of units served by such master meter. 
The Clarksville Light and Water Commission is empowered to establish a service 
connection charge for residential customers. The service charge shall not be less than Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00) nor more than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) per connection within 
the city limits of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, and shall not be less than One Hundred Fifty 
Dollars ($150.00) normorethanThree HundredDollars ($300.00) perconnection outsidethe 
city limits of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, as established by a majority vote of the Clarksville Light and Water Commission. 
The service connection charge for each industrial and commercial consumer shall equal 
installation costs of connection, but in no case shall the service connection be less than One 
HundredFiftyDollars($ 150.00)perconnectioninside thecitylimitsofthecityofClarksville, Arkansas, andThreeHundredDollars ($300.00)perconnectionoutsidethecitylimitsofthecity of Clarksville, Arkansas. ( Ord. No. 307, Sec. 1.) 
10.08.04 Base That all monthly sewer charges shall be based upon water consumption. All customers shall be classified as either domestic, commercial or industrial. 
A. 	In the case of domestic customers the sewer bill will be calculated for actual water consumption for the four( 4) months beginning November 15th and ending with 
15th .
March The average ofthese four( 4) months will be used to calculate the 
sewer bill for the remaining eight( 8) months. (Ord. No. 438.) 
B. In the case of commercial customers, the monthly sewer charge shall be 
determined by applying the above schedule to each monthly water bill throughout the year. However, in those cases which, in the opinion of the Clarksville Light And Water Commission, an appreciable portion of a commercial or industrial customer' s water usage does not reach the sewer system, the Commission shall determine the percentage of that customer' s water usage which does reach the 
sanitary sewer, and the above schedule of rates shall apply to that percentage 
only. 
C. 	In the case of industrial customers, the monthly sewer charge shall be determined by the greater of the rate established by the above schedule or a charge computed 
by the following formula: ci=(co)(ci) plus (bo) (bi) plus (so) ( si) where" ci" is 
equal to the charge to industrial customers, where " vo" is equal to the unit cost of 
transportation and treatment of industrial waste chargeable to volume, as shown in 
dollars per thousand gallons; where " vi" is equal to the volume of wastewater 
from industrial customers, expressed in thousand gallons per month, where " vo" 
S-49 
is equal to the unit cost of treatment chargeable to Biochemical Oxygen Demand BOD)expressedindollarsperpound; where " vi" isequaltotheamountofBOD from industrial customers expressed in pounds per month; where" so" is equal to 
the unit cost of treatment( including sludge treatment) chargeable to suspended solids, expressed in dollars per pound; and where" si" is equal to the amount of suspended solids from industrial customers expressed in pound per month. In the 
utilization of such formula, the costs associated with the transportation and 
treatment of industrial waste shall include the unamortized capital costs of 
existing facilities( as represented by the outstanding debt), new facility 
construction costs ( exclusive of funds that do not have to be repair, ( operation 
and maintenance costs( including repair and replacement costs) and any other costs borne by the city, including but not limited to site acquisition, easement 
costs and administrative costs. 
D. In the case of municipal customers, all water used by the city of Clarksville, 
Arkansas, shall be paid for at the rate of Thirty-Three Cents ($. 33) per one 
thousand( 1, 000) gallons of water actually calculated to enter the sewer system 
and there shall be no meter minimum. ( Ord. No. 104, Sec. 4.) 
10. 08. 05 Non-payment That all rates or charges, if not paid when due, shall constitute a 
lien upon the premises served by the sewer system and the charges will constitute a line upon the fee title to the land and permanent improvements. Ifany service charge so established is not paid within thirty( 30) days after it is due, the water service to the delinquent premises shall be 
discontinued and the amount of such payment in arrears, together with a penalty of ten percent 10%) and a reasonable attorney' s fee may be recovered by the Clarksville Light and Water Commission in a suit filed in the Chancery Court ofJohnson County in the name of the city in 
which suit the lien may be foreclosed against such lot, parcel of land or building. (Ord. No. 104, 
Sec. 5.) 
10.08.06 Monthly water rates That the following rates be, and they are hereby found as rates to be charged for water to be furnished by the Clarksville Water System which rates the Council hereby finds and declares to be reasonable and necessary minimum rates to be charged: 
Water Rates 
A. Base/customer charge monthly ill A fixed fee shall be charged on a monthly basis regardless of consumption quantity based upon the customer class: 
Residential: 7. 50 
Commercial: 10. 00 
Large commercial/industrial: 100.00 
Contract wholesale: 100. 00 
5-49 
Inside City Water Rate Schedule per thousand gallons) 
First  2, 000 gallons  2. 14  
Next  5, 500 gallons  3. 58  
Next  17, 500 gallons  3. 71  
Next  75, 000 gallons  2.97  
Next  400,000 gallons  2.77  
Next  500,000 gallons  2. 53  
All over  1, 000,000 gallons  2. 21  

Outside City Water Rate Schedule 
per thousand gallons) 
First 2, 000 gallons 3. 05 Next 23,000 gallons 5.32 Next 75, 000 gallons 4.42 Next 400,000 gallons 4. 16 Next 500,000 gallons 3. 86 All over 1, 000,000 gallons 3. 46 
Contract/Wholesale Water Rate Schedule per thousand gallons) 
First 2,000 gallons 2.37 Next 23, 000 gallons 2. 62 Next 75,000 gallons 2.62 Next 400,000 gallons 2.62 Next 500,000 gallons 2.62 All over 1, 000,000 gallons 2.31 
The schedule of charges as described in above sections shall be adjusted on meter 
readings starting on October 1, beginning 2015, and each subsequent year by the amount of increase in the South Urban Unadjusted Consumer Price Index( CPIU) as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. (http:Hdata.bls.gov/pdq/SurveyOutputServlet?series id=CUUR0300SAO, CUUS0300SA0) by amount reported, but not to exceed three percent( 3%) 
whichever is less) for the preceding calendar year. Ifthe CPIU declines during the previous calendar year, the rate adjustment will be zero percent( 0%).* This adjustment only effects the 
consumption water rates for retail inside and outside customers, commercial, large commercial/industrial, and wholesale customers. Example: IfCPIU for 2014 equals 2.0% for the calendar year( January to December), the rates will increase 2. 0% in October of 2015. If CPIU equals 3. 25% for the 2014 calendar 
year, the rates will increase a maximum of 3%. If CPIU for the calendar year of 2014 drops by 1%, the rates will remain unchanged. 
S-49 
A copy of the revised consumption for rates shall be posted on the Clarksville Light& 
Water website (www.clarksvillelightwater.com) . The Clarksville Light& Water Commission shall be authorized to regulate the percentage (%) adjustment on the annual basis at a percentage 
below the published CPIU increase ifthe retained earnings of the utility remains at a 
reasonable and sustainable amount based upon its annual budgetary projections. ( Ord. No. 2014-714, Sec. 1.) 
B. 	The minimum monthly bill shall be determined by the size ofthe meter and shall be as follows: 
Within the city Outside the city Meter size Limits of Clarksville Limits & bulk water rate 5/ 8" meter 3. 70 4.63 3/4" meter 6. 15 7.70 l' meter 8.60 10.75 1 % 2 " meter 12.30 15.35 2" meter 24.60 30.75 
3" meter 36.90 46. 10 4" meter 49.20 61. 50 6" meter 123. 00 153. 75 8" meter 147.60 184.50 
An amount of water at rates in effect will be allowed monthly for the monthly minimum bill. 
The size of the meter shall be commensurate with the use of water and shall be determined by the Light and Water Company. 
C. 	Private fire connections for private premises shall pay the following fire service 
charges per year: 
Within the  Outside the  
city limits of Clarksville  city limits of Clarksville  
1.  Automatic sprinkler system  
connections, one thousand( 1, 000) heads  50. 00  62. 50  

For system containing more than one 
thousand( 1, 000) heads, the charge 
shall be for each head in excess of 
one thousand( 1, 000) 	05 06 
153. 1 
S-10 
Within the Outside the 
city limits city limits of Clarksville of Clarksville 
2. 	The minimum annual fire 
connection shall be 	50.00 62.50 
62.50
3. 	
Private fire hydrants, each 50.00 

4. 	
The service connection charge 


for fire hose stand pipes shall be 
1 '/ a" diameter openings, or smaller 
12. 50
each -	10.00 
1 '/ 2" diameter openings, each 15. 00 	18. 75 
2" diameter openings, each 25.00 	31. 25 
2 %2" diameter openings, each 50.00 	62.50 
5. 	Billsshallberenderedon asemi-annual basisonthefirstdaysofJanuary andJulyofeachyearforthe succeeding six (6) month's service. 
D. 	All water used by the city of Clarksville shall be paid for at the rate of Sixteen Cents ($. 16) per 1, 000 gallons ofwater actually used except for fire protection, street cleaning and a reasonable amount for firefighter training and there shall be 
no meter minimum. 
E. 	Meters shall be installed at each water connection at all buildings, both public and 
private. In the case of apartment houses or buildings, a separate meter shall be 
installed for each apartment or family unit, provided, however, that multi-family 
dwellings under one roof or motels and trailer courts having a minimum of six (6) 
units may have a master meter. The following size meters for multi-family 
dwellings shall be installed unless the Clarksville Light and Water Commission shall decide otherwise: 
Buildings with less than six( 6) units shall be metered separately: 
6— 11 	units required 1" minimum meter size 
12— 25 units required 	1 % 2 " minimum meter size 
26— 50 units required 	2" minimum meter size 
51 — 75 	units required 3" minimum meter size 
76— 150 units required 	4" minimum meter size 
151 and up units 	Battery settings to be determined by Clarksville Light and Water Company 
S-49 
Bills for water service, with the exception of the private fire service connections referred to above, shall be rendered monthly and ifnot paid on or before the 
15th)
fifteenth( 
day following the original date of billing, a ten percent( 10%) penalty shall be added to the bill. Ifthe bill is not paid on or before the thirtieth 
30th) 
day, service may be discontinued and the premises shall be disconnected. 
A service charge of Five Dollars($ 5. 00) in addition to all other charges that may 
be payable shall be paid for reconnection to the system. And in this regard, if any 
such charges are paid at the time the meter person goes out to disconnect the 
premises, achargeofThreeDollars ($3.00) (insteadoftheFive Dollars ($5.00) 
above specified in the event of a reconnection) shall be paid in addition to all 
other charges than payable. 
F. The Clarksville Light and Water Commission is empowered to establish a service connection charge for residential consumers. The service charge shall not be less than One Hundred Dollars($ 100.00) nor more than Two Hundred Dollars 200.00)per connection for a3/4" 
meter as established by a majority vote of the 
Light and Water Commission. 
The service connection charge for larger meters whether for residential, commercial or industrial shall be as follows: 
One( 1") inch 205.00 
One and one-half( 1 '/ inch 500.00

2 ") 
Two (2?) inch 	525. 00 
The service connection charge for each industrial and commercial consumer shall equal the actual installation cost of connection but in no case shall the service connection be less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a3/4 " meter. 
G. 	The residential, commercial and industrial service connection charge for non­residents shall be as above plus twenty-five percent( 35%) surcharge. (Ord. No. 
211, Sec. 1.) 
H. 	Electric rates for Clarksville Light and Water Company The following electric energy rates and terms and conditions of electric service are hereby fixed as rates to be charged for electric energy by the Clarksville Light and Water Company, which rates the City Council hereby finds and declares to be reasonable and necessary minimum rates to be charged beginning April 1, 2014. 
154. 1 
S-49 
Rate Schedule R-1 ( Residential) 
Availability At any point on the Company' s distributing system. 
Application For residential service to single residence for individual family apartments supplied through one ( 1) meter, including incidental family use on the appurtenant premises. 
The rate schedule is not applicable to commercial type use on the appurtenant premises 
such as chicken brooding. Where a portion ofthe residence premises, not separately metered, is usedfornon-residentialpurposes, thepredominantuseoftheservice, asdeterminedbythe 
Company, shall determine the rate schedule applicable to all service. Service is for the use ofthe 
customer and may not be shared and may not be resold to others. Not applicable to standby or 
supplementary service. 
Character of service Service will normally be single-phase sixty( 60) cycle, at approximately 120/240volts. However,three-phaseservicemaybefurnishedifapprovedbythe Clarksville Light and Water Company. 
Net monthly e For consumption beginning with April billing cycle meter readings 
each year: 
04/ 01/ 2014 
Base/customer charge 7.50 
First 265Kwh 0. 0608 
All additional Kwh 0. 0442 
Base/customer charge monthly A base charge of Seven Dollars and Fifty Cents 
7. 50) will be charged on a monthly basis regardless of consumption quantity. 
Fuel adjustment The above energy charges will be increased or decreased to reflect the charge in the cost of fuel and purchased power incurred by the Company for the supply of service hereunder, as prescribed in Fuel Adjustment Clause. 
Taxes The net monthly bill is subject to the addition of all taxes levied on power bills. 
Payment Payment shall be due fifteen( 15) days from the billing date and ifnot paid on 
15th) 
or before the fifteenth( day following the billing date, a late charge of ten percent( 10%) may be added to the bill. 
Contract period Month to month except as otherwise required by a line extension 
agreement. ( Ord. No. 2014-718, Sec. 1.) 
154. 2 
S-49 
Rate Schedule R-2 ( Residential) 
Availability At any point on the Company' s distributing system. 
Application For residential service to single residences or individual family apartments supplied through one ( 1) meter, including incidental family use on the appurtenant premises where such electric service is in the primary source for heating the entire residence or apartment 
dwelling unit( including the water heater). The rate schedule is not applicable to commercial 
type use on the appurtenant premises, such as chicken brooding. Where a portion ofthe residence premises, not separately metered, is used for non-residential purposes, the predominant use of the service, as determined by the Company, shall determine the rate schedule applicable to all service. Service is for the use of the customer and may not be shared and may not be resold to others. Not applicable to standby or supplementary service. 
Character of service Service will normally be single-phase sixty( 60) cycle, at approximately120/240volts. However,three-phaseservicemaybefurnishedifapprovedbythe Clarksville Light and Water Company. 
Net monthly rate 
1. 	For meter readings in the months of June, July, August, September and October: 
04/ 01/ 2014 
Base/ customer charge 	7. 50 
First 265Kwh 	0.0608 
All additional Kwh 	0.0442 
2. 	For meter readings in the months ofNovember, December, January, February, March, April, and May: 
04/ 01/ 2014 
Base/customer charge 	7. 50 
First 265Kwh 	0. 0608 
All additional Kwh 	0. 0342 
Base/ customer charge monthly bill A base charge of Seven Dollars and Fifty Cents 
7. 50) will be charged on a monthly basis regardless of consumption quantity. 
154.3 
S-49 
Fuel adjustment The above energy charges will be increased or decreased to reflect the charge in the cost of fuel and purchased power incurred by the Company for the supply of 
service hereunder, as prescribed in Fuel Adjustment Clause. 
Taxes The net monthly bill is subject to the addition of all taxes levied on power bills. Pam Payment shall be due fifteen( 15) days from the billing date and ifnot paid on 
15th) 
or before the fifteenth( day following the billing date, a late charge of ten percent( 10%) may be added to the bill. 
Contract period Month to month except as otherwise required by a line extension 
agreement. ( Ord. No. 2014-718, Sec. 1.) 
5-27 CHAPTER 10.12 
CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS 
Sections: 
10. 12. 01 Purpose 
10. 12. 02 Definitions 
10. 12. 03 
Approving authority 
10. 12. 04 Owner responsibilities 
10. 12. 05 Retrofit of backflow preventers on domestic and fire service lines 
10. 12.06 New construction 
10. 12. 07 Approved backflow prevention assembly 
10. 12.08 Periodic testing 
10. 12. 09 Temporary use backflow prevention assemblies 
10. 12. 10 Reporting requirements 
10. 12. 11 Records 
10. 12. 12 Protection of backflow prevention assemblies 
10. 12. 13 Powers and authorities of inspectors 
10. 12. 14 Variance 
10. 12. 15 Penalties 
10. 12. 01 Purpose The purpose of this chapter is as follows: 
A. 	To protect the public potable water supply ofthe city of Clarksville from the possibility of contamination or pollution from backflow into the public water 
system. 
B. 	To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the customer' s potable water system( s) and non-potable water 
systems, plumbing fixtures, and industrial piping systems. 
C. 	To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control that will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or 
pollution of all potable water systems. ( Ord. No. 330, Sec. 1.) 
10. 12. 02 Definitions When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the 
stated meanings: 
Approving authority—Clarksville Light and Water Commission or its designated 
representative. 
Auxiliary water supply -any water supply on or available to the property other than the city's water supply. 
Backflow -flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than ritsintended source. 156 
S-27 
Backflow prevention assembly -a mechanical backflow prevention assembly assembled with shutoff valves and provided as a complete assembly by a single manufacturer and used to preventtheflowofcontaminantsorpollutantsintothecity'swatersystem. Theassemblymust have the approval of the state of Arkansas Department of Health, and the city. 
Backflow prevention device-a mechanical backflow preventor without the shutoff 
valves. It does not have shutoff valves on either side ofthe backflow prevention mechanism. 
Any backflow prevention assembly without the shutoff valves is called a device. 
Bypass -any arrangement of pipes, plumbing or hoses designed to divert the flow around an installed device or assembly through which the flow normally passes. 
Certified assembly testing technician (tester) -a person certified by the Arkansas 
Department of Health as an assembly testing technician. 
Certified assembly repair technician -a person certified by the Arkansas Department 
of Health as an assembly repair technician. 
City—the city of Clarksville, Arkansas. 
Containment-a method of cross connection control requiring a backflow prevention assembly at point of service connection to the city's water system. 
Contaminant-a substance that will impair the quality ofthe water to a degree that it 
creates a health hazard. 
Cross connection -any actual or potential connection between the city's water system 
and a source of contamination or pollution. 
Cross connection control -use of backflow prevention assemblies, methods and 
procedures to prevent contamination or pollution of a potable water supply through cross 
connections. 
Degree of hazard -danger posed by a particular substance or set of circumstances. 
Domestic -plumbing as defined by the state of Arkansas Plumbing Code and is not associated with designated fire protection water service lines and systems. 
Double checkvalve assembly( DCVA) -a backflow prevention assembly consisting of 
two (2) independently operating checkvalves, four( 4) test cocks, and two (2) shutoffvalves. It is only appropriate for use against non-health hazards. DCVA can be subjected to backpressure. 
S-27 
Detector double checkvalve assembly (DDCVA) -a DCVA with an additional, smaller 
DCVA assembly with a flow detector meter in parallel used to detect system leaks and 
unauthorized use. 
Detector reduced pressure zone assembly (DRPZA) -an RPZA with an additional, 
smaller RPZA assembly with a flow detector meter in parallel used to detect system leaks and 
unauthorized use. 
Fire protection system -a system consisting ofpipes, sprinklers, valves, fixtures, fittings, ponds, tanks, water storage vessels and fire hydrants that are intended and used 
exclusively for fire protection. 
Inspector—person authorized by the Approving Authority to perform inspections of owner' s facilities for the purpose of determining compliance with the city of Clarksville Cross-
connection Program. 
Isolation -a method to confine a potential source of contamination to the non-potable 
system being served and to provide a backflow prevention mechanism at each actual or potential 
cross connection. 
Multipleservices -two (2) ormoreservices. Iftwo (2) ormorewateragenciesare 
involved, the multiple service connections constitute an auxiliary source of water on the 
property. 
New construction -construction of a new facility, alteration or addition to an existing 
facility, or modification or addition to existing plumbing and fire protection systems. 
Owner-a person who possesses any interest in the structure or property to which such 
ownership relates. 
Person -any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision of the state or federal governments, or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant-aforeignsubstancewhichwilldegradethequalityofthecity'swatersystem and constitute a hazard if allowed to enter into the system. 
Program -the city of Clarksville Cross Connection Program. 
Responsible Managing Employee (RME)—an individual or individuals who shall be 
designated by each company that plans, sells, installs, maintains, or services a fire protection sprinkler system on a full-time basis to assure that each fire protection sprinkler system as 
installed, maintained, or serviced meets the standards as provided by state law. 
S-27 
Reduced pressure zone assembly (RPZA) -a backflow prevention assembly consisting offour(4)testcocks,two (2) shutoffvalvesandtwo (2) independentlyoperatingspring-loaded checkvalves with a reduced pressure zone between the checks. The zone contains a relief port which will open at atmosphere ifthe pressure in the zone falls within two (2) psi of the supply pressure. The assembly provides protection against both backpressure and back-siphonage. 
Retrofit-replacement of an existing device or backflow prevention assembly when the specifications or condition of the device or assembly are not adequate for the degree of hazard found on the property as defined by this program. 
Shall—mandatory; May or Will is permissive. 
Service connection -a piping connection between the city's water main and a property 
owner's system. (Ord.No. 330, Sec. II.) 
10. 12. 03 Approving authority 
The public water system( PWS) regulations and the state Plumbing Code are complementary in protecting the consumer from contamination introduced through cross connections. The PWS regulations basically are designed to protect the public water distribution system from contamination, and the Plumbing Code is designed to protect private potable water plumbing from backflows. 
Installation of an approved, properly functioning backflow preventor on the owner's 
service line will be sufficient to protect the public water distribution system from backflow; however,thisarrangementwillnotprotectthe usersofthebuilding'spotable water plumbing where the cross connection occurs. Such a Cross Connection Control Program is called a 
containment system, since any potential damage from a cross connection is contained within the plumbing ofthe facility where it occurs. 
To protect the users within the building itself, each device or plumbing fixture which contains a cross connection must be individually protected by an approved cross connection control device. The state Plumbing Code so requires, and such a program is referred to as an isolation program, since any contamination from a cross connection is isolated to the plumbing 
device where the cross connection occurs. 
The approving authority shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants through the water service connection. The approving authority shall take action as necessary to 
meet the goals of the program. 
158. 1 
S-27 
A. 	If in the judgment of the approving authority an approved backflow prevention assembly isrequired attheowner'swater service connectionforthesafetyofthe public water system, the backflow compliance officer shall give notice in writing 
to the owner. 
B. On new installations, the backflow compliance officer shall provide inspection 
and review ofplans in order to determine ifa backflow prevention assembly shall be required. 
C. 	For property with backflow prevention assemblies existing prior to the adoption of this program, the Approving Authority will perform a review of plans or inspectionofpropertyandinform theownerinwritingofanyretrofitrequired,the method of achieving the retrofit and the time allowed for the retrofit to be made. 
D. 	The Approving Authority shall not allow any cross connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly for which a permit has been issued and which shall be regularly tested to ensure satisfactory operation. 
E. 	The Approving Authority shall inform the owner in writing of any failure to comply. Ifthe owner fails to comply with the necessary correction, the Approving Authority shall inform the owner in writing that the water service to theowner'spropertywill beterminated. Iftheownerinforms theApproving Authority of extenuating circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by the approving authority. 
F. 	Ifthe Approving Authority determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, any water service shall be terminated immediately. 
G. 	The Approving Authority shall allow only certified assembly testing technicians to test backflow prevention assemblies and only certified assembly repair technicians to maintain and to repair backflow prevention assemblies. Installation 
shall be accomplished by personnel licensed to do so by the State Department of 
Health. 
H. 	A program for routine inspections shall be administered by the Approving Authority for all water users. This program shall continually assess the hazards which water users may pose, and, when warranted, require that appropriate 
backflow prevention assemblies be installed. ( Ord. No. 330, Sec. III.) 
10.12.04 Ownerresponsibilities Theownershalladheretotherequirementsofthe 
Approving Authority in their efforts to execute the program. The owner shall: 
A. Eliminate all cross connections or install an approved backflow prevention 
assembly on the property. 
158.2 
S-27 
B. 	Retrofit unapproved existing backflow preventers should they be relocated, 
require more than minimal maintenance, or the operation or maintenance of the 
device/assembly constitutes a hazard to health. 
C. 	Correct any malfunction of the backflow prevention assembly. 
D. 	Inform the Approving Authority of proposed or modified cross connections and also existing cross connections which the owner is aware of but which the Approving Authority has not identified. 
E. 	Not install a bypass around any backflow prevention assembly unless there is a backflow prevention assembly ofthe same type in the bypass. 
F. 	The owner shall insure the type of backflow prevention assembly and the installation is approved by the Approving Authority. 
G. 	Obtain a permit from the Approving Authority for any private well or other private auxiliary water supply. The Approving Authority may require the owner to install a backflow prevention assembly installed ifa private water source is maintained, evenifit isnotcrossconnectedtothecity'swatersystem. 
H. 	Advise the Approving Authority of any plumbing installed to provide potable waterfordomesticpurposeswhich isonthecity's sideofthebackflowprevention 
assembly. 
I. 	Pay all fees for permits and testing. 
J. 	Where backflow prevention assemblies are installed, have certified inspections 
and operational tests made at least once ( 1) per year. In those instances where the Approving Authority deems the hazard to be great enough, certified inspections may be required at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the owner. Operational test shall be performed by a Certified Assembly Testing Technician. 
K. 	Installtwo (2) backflowpreventionassembliesinparallelifuninterruptedwater 
service is desired during testing or repairing. 
L. 	After having been notified by the Approving Authority of a requirement for a backflow prevention assembly, shall submit within the time specified by the Approving Authority, installation plans for approval and install an approved backflow prevention assembly at their expense; and, failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install, maintain, and have tested, any and all backflow prevention assemblies on their property shall constitute grounds for discontinuing owner' s water service until such requirements have been 
satisfactorily met. 
158. 3 
S-27 
M. Insure that only personnel licensed by the state as certified assembly repair 
technicians accomplish installations, repairs, and maintenance on domestic backflow prevention assemblies. Assemblies for fire protection lines tapped from 
domestic service lines shall meet the same criteria. 
N. Insure that only personnel licensed by the state to install backflow prevention 
assemblies, who are Certified Assembly Repairman Technicians accomplish repairs, maintenance and installation of designated fire protection service line 
backflow prevention assemblies. (Ord. No. 330, Sec. IV.) 
10. 12. 05 Retrofit of backflow preventers on domestic and fire service lines 
A. 	Existing cross-connection control devices are not required to be replaced if they 
are not equipped with the necessary test cocks. If any such device is relocated, or requires more than minimal maintenance, the final backflow preventer shall meet 
current requirements. However, the Approving Authority may require replacement of the device ifit determines that the operation or maintenance of 
existing device constitutes a hazard to health. Devices shall be removed when directed by the Approving Authority to facilitate the installation of a required backflow prevention assembly. 
B. All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the 
requirements of this program but were approved assemblies for the purposes 
described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly 
maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements, be 
excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the Approving Authority is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location or requires more than the minimum maintenance, or when the Approving Authority finds that the operation or maintenance of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the assembly shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
C. 	When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is required it shall be installed adjacent to the meter on the owner' s side. Any devices existing at this location shall be removed to facilitate installation of the required backflow 
prevention assembly. (Ord. No. 330, Sec. V.) 
10. 12. 06 New construction New construction plans shall be submitted to the Approving Authority prior to desired installation date. Plan submission shall include detailed information as 
required by the Approving Authority. No building permit shall be issued without Approving Authority' s approval of plans. No water service will be provided without final inspection of 
plumbing system. ( Ord. No. 330, Sec. VII.) 
158.4 
S-27 
10. 12. 07 Approved backflow prevention assembly Any backflow prevention assembly required shall be a model and size approved by the Arkansas State Department of Health and the Approving Authority. (Ord. No. 330, Sec. VIII.) 
10. 12. 08 Periodic testing 
A. 	RPZAs, DCVAs shall be tested and inspected at least once ( 1) annually. Periodic testing shall be performed by a Certified Assembly Testing Technician at the 
owner' s expense. 
B. 	Any backflow prevention assembly which fails a performance test shall be repaired or replaced. Upon completion of the necessary repairs, the owner shall cause the backflow prevention assembly to be retested to insure correct operation. Water service may be discontinued ifan RPZA fails a test and cannot be repaired immediately. Copies of all repair, maintenance, testing, and retesting reports shall be submitted to the Approving Authority. 
C. 	Backflow prevention assemblies will be tested more frequently than specified in Subsection( A) above, in cases where there a history of test failure and the Approving Authority determines that due to the degree of hazard involved, additional testing is warranted. Owner shall initiate testing and bear the cost of 
the additional tests. ( Ord. No. 330, Sec. IX.) 
10. 12. 09 Temporary use backflow prevention assemblies 
A. 	When using a public fire hydrant as a temporary water source, it shall be protected by a RPZA. The water user shall use a RPZA and a flow meter, which shall be obtained from the Approving Authority. The water user shall be charged a deposit for the RPZA and meter. In addition, water user shall pay for water usage. The Approving Authority shall install the RPZA and meter. The water user will notify the Approving Authority to disconnect the RPZA and meter and 
return it when no longer needed or at the end of one ( 1) year, whichever is sooner. IftheRPZA and/ormeter islostorstolenthe initialdepositshallbeforfeited. RPZAs and meters shall only be used at the site for which initially intended. 
B. Theconnectionofanewly-installedwater distributionsystemtoanexistingcity 

water main shall be through an approved backflow prevention assembly. The 
backflow prevention assembly shall be placed where it will have the least impact 
on traffic. The removal of the meter and assembly shall be allowed only after 
construction has been accepted by the Approving Authority. Any necessary taps 
may be made, however only one ( 1) tap shall be physically connected to the newly constructed water distribution system. All other new distribution water lines shall be terminated with a plug pending acceptance by the Approving 
be connected to the city mains. ( Ord. No. 330,
Authority, at which time they may 
Sec. X.) 

158. 5 
S-27 
10. 12. 10 Reporting requirements The owner shall be responsible for properly filing 
reports with the Approving Authority for each required backflow prevention assembly. DDCVAsandDRPZAsarecomposedoftwo (2) uniqueassemblies: eachrequiresthe 
submission of a report. In addition to administrative reports, any failure, removal, modification or replacement of an RPZA or suspected backflow shall be reported immediately by telephone to the Approving Authority. Repair, maintenance, replacement and performance test reports shall 
be filed within two (2) calendar days. ( Ord. No. 330, Sec. XI.) 
10. 12. 11 Records The owner shall maintain records for each assembly. Installation drawings, manufacturer, model, serial number, date installed, copy of current permit, schedule of 
preventive maintenance and technical data are the minimum record requirements. (Ord. No. 330, 
Sec. XII.) 
10. 12. 12 Protection of backflow prevention assemblies No unauthorized person shall 
maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any 
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the backflow prevention assembly. No person, without first obtaining written consent from the Approving Authority, shall cover a backflow prevention assembly vault with earth or pavement, or otherwise render it inaccessible. 
Ord. No. 330, Sec. XIII.) 
10. 12. 13 Power and authorities of inspectors The Approving Authority, representatives 
retained by the city and other duly authorized employees ofthe city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, 
observation and testing to verify adherence to the provisions of this chapter. The Approving Authority or their designated representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the determination ofthe degree of hazard. Authorized personnel shall have authority to inspect and copy records pertaining to the threat of a hazard to the city 
water system. 
An owner may request that specific information which must be submitted to the 
Approving Authority be kept confidential. A statement notifying the owner that the information 
submitted will be available to the public without restriction, shall be included on each 
questionnaire. The statement also notifies the owner that the Approving Authority will follow 
the requirements of 40 CFR 2, in its evaluation and approval or denial of each owner' s request 
for confidentiality. (Ord. No. 330, Sec. XIV.) 
158. 6 
S-27 
10. 12. 14 Variance 
A. 	Request for deviation or relief from any of the provisions of this program shall be submitted in writing to the Approving Authority. The Approving Authority shall not deviate from the provisions of this chapter, but may grant a variance in areas not addressed by ordinance ifnot in conflict with the spirit and intent of the 
Cross-ConnectionControlProgram. Requestforuseofotherthanapproved 
backflow prevention assemblies shall be accompanied by technical data. 
B. 	No action shall be taken on the part of the owner to proceed with any construction or installation of which a request for deviation has been submitted, without the 
written permission of the Approving Authority. (Ord. No. 330, Sec. XV.) 
10. 12. 15 Penalties 
A. 	Any owner determined to be guilty of a violation of any provision ofthis chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties and fines set forth in the city code. 
B. 	Anyownerfound inviolation ofanyoftheprovisionsofthischaptershallbe served by the Approving Authority with written notice stating the nature of the violation, describing the penalty applicable to the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The owner may deliver by certified mail to the Approving Authority, within five 
5) days of receipt of such notice, a written request for a hearing before the Approving Authority at which hearing the owner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice should be rescinded or modified. 
C. 	A notice issued pursuant to this subsection may provide one ( 1) or more of the following penalties: 
1. An administrative penalty of not more than One Thousand Dollars 
1,000.00) foreachviolationofthe chapter, andeachdayofacontinuing violation may be deemed a separate violation; and, 
2. 	A compliance directive with time schedule mandating procedures which would bring the owner into compliance with this chapter within the 
designated time schedule, or termination of water service upon non­
compliance with the compliance directive with schedule. 
158. 7 
S-27 
D. 	The Approving Authority shall utilize this chapter and the Cross-Connection Program, which is adopted by the Clarksville City Council on the effective date of this chapter, and confirmed hereby, in( 1) the initial issuance of penalties set forth 
in notices issued pursuant to this subsection, and( 2) in the administrative 
adjustment or amendment to any such penalty as a result of a hearing requested by the owner pursuant to the provisions ofthis subsection. No action shall be final 
until the Approving Authority has given notice of and conducted the show cause 
hearing provided for the Enforcement Response Plan, unless it has been 
determined that to continue to provide water service would endanger the public 
health, due to possible contamination of the city water system. This situation would constitute grounds for immediate termination of applicable water service to 
the property. 
E. 	Any person violating the provisions ofthis chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
F. 	The listing of penalties in this section shall not preclude other appropriate judicial remedies available with reference to any violation of this chapter. In particular, the city may petition any equitable relief by reason of a violation. No judicial action against an owner to collect a civil penalty for violation shall be commenced 
without a majority vote of the City Council of the city of Clarksville. (Ord. No. 
330, Sec. XVI.) 
158. 8 
S-36 
TITLE 11 
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 

Chapters: 
11. 04 Building Permit 
11. 08 Plumbing Code 
11. 12 Electrical Code 
11. 16 Fire Prevention Code 
11. 20 Housing Code 
11. 24 Condemned Structures 
11. 28 Building Code 
11. 32 Gas Code 
11. 36 Energy Code 
11. 40 Mining 
11. 44 Codes Adopted By Reference 
11. 48 Mechanical Code 
CHAPTER 11. 04 
BUILDING PERMITS 
Sections: 
11. 04.01  Requirement  
11. 04.02  Application  
11. 04.03  Fees  
11. 04.04  Fee schedule  
11. 04.05  Review and issuance  
11. 04.06  Expiration  
11. 04.07  Enforcement and penalty  
11. 04.01  Requirement The owner of any land situated within the incorporated limits of  

the city shall neither construct nor allow construction or placement, on such land, of any building or structure as set forth below, without having obtained a building permit from the city. Such permit will likewise be required before the remodeling or repair of such structures, but only if such remodeling or repair includes a change in dimension offoundation and/or roofline. The moving or demolition of any structure shall likewise require a permit. Structures included in this requirement are ofthe following types: 
159­
S-38 
A. 	Single-family residence. 
B. 	Multiple-family residence. 
C. 	Any building in which, or from which, any business, commercial enterprises, or manufacturing process is to be considered; or any structure used for storage or 
warehousingpurposes. (Ord.No. 00-408, Sec. 1.) 
11. 04.02 Application. The application for any building permit under this ordinance will 
be filed by the landowner or his agent in the office of the City Clerk. The application shall be on forms provided by the city, and shall contain the following information as a minimum: 
A. 	Name, mailing address, and telephone number ofthe applicant and his agent, if 
applicable. 
B. 	Type building to be constructed as listed herein. 
C. 	Location ofthe building site. 
D. 	Outside dimensions ofthe proposed building, or addition. 
E. 	Construction materials to be used for the foundation, floor and exterior walls. 
F. 	Manner in which the proposed building will be anchored to the foundation. 
G. 	Height of the first floor level above the ground level, as measured from the highest point of the ground level. 
1. 	Prior to any grading or leveling.
000b. 
2. 	After grading and leveling. 
H. 	Date on which construction is proposed to begin. 
I. 	Scale drawing showing building dimensions, its location on the lot, all lot lines and setbacks, driveway, sidewalk, parking and drainage plans, and any other information which may be required to allow the enforcement of all applicable 
ordinances and codes. (Ord. No. 00-408, Sec. 2.) 
11.04.03 Fees. Afeewillbechargedatthetimeofpurchasingeachapplicablepermit. 
Such fees will be in accordance with the fee schedule outlined 11. 04.04 as established by the City Council and revised as needed from time to time. 
On new building structures, and for additions to existing structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems requiring a permit, a fee covering the cost of all inspections is required in accordance with the following schedule. The Building Inspection Department is authorized to use most current average construction costs per square foot as published by the International Building Code and updated yearly for the determination of valuations for building 
permit fees. ( Ord. No. 05-507, Sec. 1.) 
160 
S-38 
11.04.04 Feeschedule ThefollowingfeesshallbeleviedbythecityofClarksville: 
A. 	Permit Fees 
Total Valuations 1, 000 and less 1, 000 to $50,000 
50,000 to $100,00 
100,000 to $500,000 
500,000 and up Fee 
No fee, unless inspection required. 
16.75 for the first$ 1, 000 plus $4.25 for each 
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $50, 000. 00 
225.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.00 for 
each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 
425.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 
1, 625 for the first $500,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof 
B. 	For constructing repair, remodeling, replacements to existing structures, the appropriate HVACR, plumbing, or electric permits must be obtained. Inspection fesswillbebased on$30.00/hourorfractionthereof. Theymaybeaccumulated 
and paid at the end of the project. 
C. 	Moving fee: For the moving of any building or structure, the fee shall be 
250.00. 
D. 	Demolition fee: For the demolition of any building or structure, the fee shall be: 
0 up to 100,000 cu. ft.  
100, 000 cu. ft. and over  
E.  Driveway permit:  
F.  Cell Tower permit fee:  
Fee to apply to construct a cell  
tower or to connect to an  
existing tower  
000- 

50.00 
0. 5111, 000 cu. ft. 
30.00 (notrequiredifbuildingpermit issued) 
500.00 
160. 1 
S-40 
G. 	Businessinspectionfee: 30.00perhourorfractionofhour. 
H. 	Engineer review fee for 
Commercial/ Industrial Multi-Family 
Residential Development: 

The feewill be basedonthe genuinetotal estimatedcostofall on-site improvements, except buildings, but including grading, drainage, landscaping, driveways, parking, sidewalks, and utilities. Said estimates will be submitted by a 
licensed architect or engineer associated with the project. 
I. 	Construction Review fees for commercial developments containing public streets and drainage improvements shall be paid to CL& W at the time of issuance of the 
notice to proceed and shall be calculated at .25% of the developers estimated cost of street and drainage improvements. 
The developer shall be responsible for paying for materials testing cost, performed by an independent certified geotechnical technician selected by the 
city. ( Ord. No. 06-531, Sec. 1.) 
Estimated Total Costs 	Review Fee 
0 25, 000 250. 00 25,0001 - $ 50,000 250.00 + 1. 0% ofamount over $ 25,000.00 50,001 - $ 100,000 500.00 + 0.8% ofamountover $50,000.00 100,001 - $ 200,000 900.00 + 0.75% ofamountover 
$ 100,000.00 200,001 - $ 500,000 1, 650.00 + 0.7% ofamount over $ 200,000.00 500,001 - $ 1, 000,000 3, 750.00 + 0.6% ofamount over $ 500,000.00 1, 000,000 - $ 2,000,000 6,750.00 + 0.5% ofamount over$ 1, 000,000.00 
Over $2,000,000 11,750.00 + 0.4% ofamountover $2,000,000.00 Ord. No. 05-507, Sec. 2.) 
11. 04.05 Review and issuance Applications for single-family residential buildings and duplex residences built on a single lot, shall be reviewed by the City Building Inspector for conformance to all applicable codes. Permit shall then be issued by Building Inspector. 
0111' 
160.2 
5-40 
00, 
Applications for all buildings other than single-family residential, or single-lot duplex, 
shall be reviewed as follows: Building Inspector shall compile all information as required on 
application, make initial review, and then deliver application and supporting information to 
licensed engineer designated by the city. Engineer shall review and inspect site and make 
written report regarding compliance of the project design with all applicable state and city 
standards. After Engineer' s approval is noted on application, and on any necessary revisions, Inspector shall issue building permit. 
Final review and approval of Engineer shall likewise be noted on Certificate of 
Occupancy and Compliance, for all projects requiring Engineering review as noted above. ( Art. 
X, Sec. 3, Zoning Ord. No. 00-402.) ( Ord. No. 00-408, Sec. 4.) 
11. 04.06 Expiration Each building permit issued hereunder shall expire by limitation at the end of six months from the date of issue, unless work is in progress. In any event, permit shall expire at the end of 12 months, unless an extended period is approved by Inspector and Engineer at time of issuance of permit. Permits for moving or demolition shall require that all 
work is completed to applicable codes and standards within 120 days. ( Art. X, Sec. 2, zoning 
Ord. No. 00-402) ( Ord. No. 00-408, Sec. 5.) 
11. 04.07 Enforcement and penally The provisions ofthis ordinance shall be subject to 
enforcement and penalties as set out in Art. X, Sec. 4, Zoning Ord. No. 00-402. ( Ord. No. 00­
op", 
408, Sec. 6.) 
S-36 
CHAPTER 11. 08 PLUMBING CODE Sections: 

11. 08.01  Definition  
11. 08. 02  State Code  
11. 08.03  Inspection and supervision  
11. 08.04  Applications, permits  
11. 08.05  Bond  
11. 08.06  Street openings  
11. 08. 07  Hazardous conditions  
11. 08. 08  Plastic pipes and fittings  

11.08.01 Definition. "Plumbing" forthepurposeofthischapterisherebydefinedasthe definitions of Act 200 of 1951 ( Ark. Stats. 71-1205, et sec) and the Arkansas State Plumbing Code. 
11. 08.02 State Code. The provisions and regulations ofthe Arkansas State Plumbing Code, 1991, and amendments thereto, adopted by the State Board of Health of Arkansas are madeapartofthischapterbyreference,three (3) certifiedcopiesofwhichshallbeonfileinthe 
officeoftheClerk/Treasurerand shallextendoverandgoverntheinstallationofallplumbing installed, altered or repaired within or without the City wherever water and/or sewage service 
originating from the municipal water and/or sewer system is furnished. (Ord. No. 320) 
11. 08.03 Inspection and supervision. 
A. 	The Mayor shall designate the official responsible for enforcing and administering this code subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the City Council. 
B. 	It shall be the duty ofthe Code Enforcement Officer to enforce all provisions of this chapter and such inspector or inspectors are hereby granted the authority to enter all buildings 
0001, 
161. 1­
within or without the corporate limits of the city when such buildings are 
Imo" 
connected, or to be connected to the municipal water and/ or sewage system. 
C. 	The Code Enforcement officer shall prepare or cause to be prepared suitable forms for applications, permits, inspection reports and other such materials. 
D. 	It shall be his duty to inspect and test all plumbing work for compliance with this chapter and its adopted plumbing code, and to enforce changing of such installations that do not meet the requirements. It further shall be his duty to see 
that all persons installing or altering plumbing shall be qualified by state law. 
11. 08.04 Applications, permits. 
A. 	Before beginning any work in the city, the person installing or altering same, shall apply to the City Building Inspector and obtain a permit to do such work. Only those persons legally authorized to do plumbing may be issued permits. A permit may be issued to a homeowner to install or alter plumbing in a single family residence, providing the homeowner does the work himself and that such work 
shall meet the code requirements. 
B. 	All applications for permits shall be made on suitable forms provided. The application shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the schedule in 
11. 04.03. 
Anadditionalfeeof$2.00shall bechargedfor eachadditionaltrip onthepartof 
the plumbing inspector, caused by the negligence ofthe plumber of not being 
ready for inspection or a return for inspection of a corrected installation. 
11. 08.05 Bond. 
A. 	Every master plumber doing business in the city shall execute and deliver to the city a bond with a surety bonding company in the sum of One Thousand 
1, 000.00) Dollars to indemnify the city or any citizen for any damage caused by the failure of such master plumber to comply strictly with the provisions of this chapter. No plumbing permit shall be issued to any master plumber unless this bond has been delivered to the city and is in full force and effect. 
11. 08.06 Street openings. 
A. 	All openings made in the public streets or alleys to install plumbing must be made 
as carefully as possible and all materials excavated from,the trenches shall be removed or placed where the least inconvenience to the public will be caused. 
00"-
S-3 
B. 	All openings must be replaced in precisely the same condition as before the excavation started and all rubbish and material must be removed at once, leaving the street or sidewalks ,clean and in perfect repair. 
C. 	All openings shall be marked with sufficient barriers. Flares or red lamps shall be 
maintained around the opening at night and all other precautions shall be taken by the plumber or excavator to protect the public from damage to person or property. 
11. 08.07 Hazardous conditions. 
A. 	The Water Department is hereby authorized to discontinue or cause to be discontinued all water service or services to any and all premises, lands, buildings or structures where it is found that an immediate hazard exists to the purity or 
potability of the city water supply, by reason of the requirements of the Arkansas State Plumbing code and the City Plumbing Code and the regulations of the Arkansas State Board of Health having not been complied with. 
B. 	The Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to take such steps as necessary to determine all potential hazards to the purity or potability of the city water supply which exist. Upon determining said potential hazards, it shall be the duty of said department to immediately cause notice to go to the owner or such 
other person responsible for said premises, specifying said hazards and notifying said person that in the event that said hazard is not corrected within thirty (30) days from the date of said notice, all water services shall be discontinued thereafteruntiltherequirementsoftheArkansas StateofPlumbing Code andthe regulations of the Arkansas State Board of Health have been complied with. 
11. 08.08 Plastic pipes and fittings. 
All plastic pipes and fittings for sanitary waste drains and vents outside the building shall 
be a minimum of Schedule 35. ( Ord. No. 169, Sec. 1) 
S-6 
CHAPTER 11. 12 
ELECTRICAL CODE 
Sections: 
11. 12.01 Adoption of electrical code 
11.12.02 AppointmentoftheCodeEnforcementOfficer 
11. 12.03 Duties 
11. 12.04 Permits 
11. 12. 05 Inspection 
11. 12.06 Standards 
11. 12. 07 Licensing of electricians 
11. 12.08 Bond required 
11. 12.09 Qualification 
11. 12. 10 Failure to comply 
11. 12. 11 License to individual 
11 12. 01 Adoption of electrical code. There is hereby adopted for the city for the 
purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal and 
maintenance of electric wiring and apparatus, including permits and penalties, that certain 
electric code known as the 1987 National Electrical Code ofthe National Fire Protection Association, of which not less than three ( 3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Clerk/ Treasurer ofthe city and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if 
set out at length herein, and from the date this chapter takes effect, the provisions shall be controlling in the construction, alteration, maintenance or removal of all electric wiring and 
apparatus within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. No. 190, Sec. 1) 
11 12.02 Appointment ofthe Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer, the officer responsible for administering this code shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by a majority of the Council. 
11. 12.03 Duties. He shall have the duty and is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate and determine the placing of electric wires and other appliances for electric lights, heat or power in the city and to cause all such wires, appliances, or apparatus to be placed, constructed, and guarded as not to cause fires or accidents, endangering life or property, and to be constructed so as to keep to a minimum the loss or waste of electric current. 
It shall be his duty to enforce all provisions of this chapter and he is hereby granted the authority to enter all buildings in the city in the performance ofhis duties at any reasonable hour. 
It shall be his duty to inspect and/ or test all electrical work and equipment or apparatus for compliance with the code whenever electric wires, appliances or apparatus shall be defective 
or hazardous 
Aft, 164­
wiring, appliance or apparatus. 
11.12.04 Permits. Noinstallation, alteration, orremovalshallbemadein/orofthe wiring of any building or structure for light, heat or power or to increase the load ofenergy carried by such wires or equipment, nor shall any building or structure be wired for electric lights, appliances, motors, apparatus, or heating devices nor alterations made thereto without a 
written permit therefor being first obtained from the city license issuing clerk by the person, firm, or corporation having direct charge of such installation, alteration or removal. 
11.12.05 Inspection. Uponthecompletionofthewiring, installationoralteration ofany 
building or structure for light, heat, power, appliance, or apparatus it shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation having direct charge of such to notify the Code Enforcement Officer who shall, as early as possible, inspect such wiring, installation, appliance, and apparatus and if 
installed, altered and constructed in compliance with the permit and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, he shall execute a certificate of satisfactory inspection, which shall contain the date of such inspection and the result of his examination, but no such certificate shall be issued unless such electric wiring, motors, heating devices, appliances, and apparatus be in strict accord with the rules and requirements and the spirit ofthis chapter, nor shall current be turned on to such installation, equipment, appliance, motors, heating devices, and apparatus until said certificate be issued. The amount of fee or charge to be made for such inspections and certificates is to be fixed and determined by the City Council. 
11. 12.06 Standards. All electrical construction, all materials, appliances, motors, heating devices, and apparatus used in connection with electrical work and the operation of all electrical apparatus within the City shall conform to the rules and requirements of the National Electrical 
Code current when work is performed or equipment and apparatus installed, however, the 
necessity, good service and said results often require larger sizes of wire, more branch circuits, 
and better types of equipment than the minimum which is specified in the National Electrical 
Code. Therefore, the Code Enforcement Officer supervising the enforcement of this code will 
have the responsibility and authority for making interpretations ofthe rules, for deciding upon 
the approval of equipment, materials, construction, and for granting the special permission 
contemplated in a number of the rules and he, where necessary, shall follow the code procedure 
for securing official interpretations of the code. 

165­
11 12.07Licensingofelectricians. Anyperson, firmorcorporationdesiringtoengagein 
the business of electrical construction or of the installation of wiring and apparatus for electric 
lights, appliances, heating or power in the city shall, before doing so, obtain a license therefor, 
the fee for which shall be $20.00 per year which shall be paid into the city treasury before such 
license shall become effective. 
11. 12.08 Bond required. Every person, firm or corporation doing electrical business in 
the city shall execute and deliver to the city a bond with a surety bonding company in the sum of One Thousand($ 1, 000.00) Dollars to indemnify the city or any citizen for any damage caused by the failure of such person, firm, or corporation doing the electrical work to comply strictly with 
the provisions ofthis chapter. 
11. 12. 09 Qualification. No license shall be issued until the parry applying for same has 
given satisfactory evidence to the Code Enforcement Officer ofhis or their ability to do said electrical work in a safe and satisfactory manner. No permit for installation or alteration of any wiring, heating devices, motors, appliances and apparatus shall be issued until the license and 
bond herein required have been obtained. 
11. 12. 10 Failure to comply. Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to correct 
any defect or defects in his or her work or to meet the required standards after having been given notice ofthe unfit condition by the Building Inspector within a reasonable time, shall be refused any other permit until such defect or defects have been corrected and shall be subject to 
e+r revocationoflicenseforcontinualdefectiveworkoreitherupon convictionforviolationofthe provisions of this chapter. Upon failure to comply with this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have authority, after due notice, to cut out electric current in the locality concerned. 
11. 12. 11 License to individual. Any individual desiring to perform his own electrical work personally shall not be required to make the required bond or to obtain the required license, 
but shall be required to obtain the regular permit for that particular job. Such work done by an 
individual must be done by him personally on his own particular job and not be a way or 
performing a service to the public generally. 
166­
S-25 
CHAPTER 11. 16 FIRE PREVENTION CODE Sections: 

11. 16. 01  Adoption of fire prevention code  
11. 16. 02  Enforcement  
11. 16. 03  Establishment of districts in which  
storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks, bulk storage  
of liquefied petroleum gases and storage of explosives and blasting agents  
is to be restricted  
11. 16. 04  Modifications  
11. 16. 05  Appeals  
11. 16. 06  Penalties  

11 16 01 Adoption of fire prevention code. There is hereby adopted by the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Standard Fire 
PreventionCode, 1992Edition, ofwhichcodenotlessthanthree (3) havebeenandnowarefiled in the office ofthe Clerk/Treasurer and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the 
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits ofthe municipality. (Ord. No. 
320) 
11. 16.02 Enforcement. The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the Chiefofthe fire department of the municipality. 
11. 16.03 Establishment ofdistricts in which storage offlammable liquids in outside above ground tanks, bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases and storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be restricted. The limits referred to in Section 73 of the code hereby adopted in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited, the limits referred to in Section 103 of the code hereby adopted, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, and the limits referred to in Section 53 ( b) of the code hereby adopted, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: 
A. 	The area designated on the " Official Zoning Map" of the municipality as the Central Business District. 
B. 	Within one thousand five hundred( 1, 500) feet of any dwelling structure in any built up area within the corporate limits of the municipality. 
167­
with the exception of outside above ground tanks for the storage of flammable liquids or for the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases having been located in such designated areas prior to the adopting date of this ordinance; provided, 
however, that the Fire Chief shall inspect such facilities and issue a letter of Modification" as hereinafter set forth in Section 5 of this ordinance. 
11. 16.04 Modifications. The Chiefofthe fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application, in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying 
out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public 
safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decisions of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records ofthe department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
11. 16. 05 Appeals. Whenever the Chief of the fire department shall disapprove an 
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted,the applicantmayappealfromthedecisionofthechiefofthefire department to the governing body of the municipality within thirty (30) days from the date of the 
decision appealed. 
11.16.06 Penalties. Anypersonwhoshallviolateanyoftheprovisionsofthecode Hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed ormodifiedbythegoverningbodyofthemunicipalityorby acourtofcompetentjurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, beguiltyofamisdemeanor,punishable by afineofnotlessthanTwenty-Five 
25.00) DollarsnormorethanFive Hundred ($500.00) Dollars orbyimprisonmentfornotless than three( 3) days nor more than thirty( 30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one ( 1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects 
within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten ( 10) days that prohibited 
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of 
prohibited conditions. 
168­
CHAPTER 11. 20 
A001-
HOUSING CODE 
Sections: 
11. 20.01 Adoption of 
11. 20.02 Housing official 
11.20.03 Boardofappeals 
11.20.04 DutiesofHousingOfficial 
11.20.05 Rightofentry 
11. 20.06 Fair Housing Code 
11. 20.07 Existing rights unaffected 
11. 20.01 Adoption of. There is hereby adopted by the City council that certain health and 
housing standards known as the Standard Housing Code of which not less than three ( 3) copies 
have been and are now filed in the office ofthe Clerk/Treasurer and the same are hereby adopted 
and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter 
shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling on all dwellings and premises within the city limits. 
11. 20.02 Housing official. 
A. The office of-housing official is hereby created. 
B. The housing official, appointed by the mayor, shall be responsible for the 
enforcement ofthis chapter. 
11.20.03 Boardofappeals. Thereisherebycreatedaboardofhousingappealswhich shall consist offive (5) members appointed by the Mayor and subject to confirmation ofthe City 
The board shall act by a majority vote ofthe members present. Said board shall have
Council. 
the power and be required to hold public hearings in deciding appeals where it is alleged there is an errorinlaworfact inanyorderordecisionofthehousingofficialintheenforcementofthis 
chapter. 
11. 20.04 Duties ofHousing official. It shall be the duty ofthe-housing official to enforce all laws and provisions specified in the herein adopted Standard Housing Code. 
11.20.05 Rightofentry. Thehousingofficial, inthedischargeofhisofficialduties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
11.20.06 FairHousingCode. The FairHousingCodeofthecityofClarksville, 
Arkansas, of which not less than three ( 3) copies have been and are now filed in the office of the City Clerk of the 
001-
169­
S-40 
city of Clarksville, Arkansas and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully set forth at length herein, and from the date on which this ordinance shall take effect, the provisions 
thereof shall be controlling with respect to discriminatory housing practice within the area of 
jurisdiction of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas. ( Ord. No. 74, Sec. 1) 
11. 20.07 Existing rights unaffected. Nothing in this ordinance or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued or existing, under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy or any character be lost, 
impaired or affected by this ordinance. (Ord. No. 74, Sec. 2) 
CHAPTER 11. 24 
CONDEMNED STRUCTURES 
Sections: 
11. 24.01 Unlawful 
11. 24.02 Condemnation required 
11. 24.03 Notification to owner 
11.24.04 Descriptionofproperty, reasonforcondemnation 
11. 24.05 Notice 
11. 24.06 Removal 
11. 24.07 Duties ofMayor 
11. 24.08 Proceeds of sale 
11.24.09 Enforcementoflien 
11. 24. 10 Penalty 
11. 24. 11 Judicial condemnation, penalty, previous sections applicable 
11. 24.01 Unlawful. That it shall be and it is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person or persons, partnership, corporation or association, to own, keep or maintain any house, building and/ or structure within the corporate limits of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, which constitutes a nuisance and which is found and declared to be a nuisance by resolution of the City 
Council. (Ord. No. 05-524, Sec. 1) 
11. 24.02 Condemnation required. That any such house, building and/or structure which is found and declared to be a nuisance by resolution of the City Council will be condemned to 
insure the removal thereof as herein provided. (Ord. No.05-524, Sec. 2) 
OOW 
S-40 
11. 24. 03 Notification to owner 
A. 	That prior to the consideration of a resolution by the City Council declaring any house, building and/or structure as a nuisance, the owner(s) and any mortgagee(s) or lien holder(s), of such house, building and/ or structure shall be mailed written notification of the date, time and place that the City Council will consider said resolution. In addition, said notice shall inform the owner( s) and any mortgagee(s) or lien holder(s), ofthe right to be heard at the City Council meeting on the proposed resolution declaring such house, building and/or structure to be a 
nuisance. 
B. 	Shouldtheowner(s) andmortagagee(s) and/orlienholder(s) ofanysuchhouse, building and/or structure beunknownor theirwhereabouts be unknownorifthey do not reside in Arkansas, then a copy of the written notice shall be posted upon said premises and the Mayor or his designee shall make an affidavit setting out 
the facts as to the unknown address, unknown whereabouts and/or non-resident 
status of said owner(s), mortgagee( s) and lien holder(s). Thereupon, service of 
publication as now provided for by law against unknown and/or non-resident defendant(s) may be had and an attorney ad litem shall be appointed to notify such persons by registered letter addressed to their last known place( s) of 
residence or business. ( Ord. No. 05-524, Sec. 3.) 
11.24.04 Descriptionofproperty, reasonforcondemnation Thattheresolutionofthe City Council condemning any house, building and/ or structure which constitutes a nuisance will include in said resolution an adequate description of the house, building and/ or structure, 
thenameornames, ifknown, oftheowner(s) andmortgagee(s) and/orlienholder(s)thereof, and 
shall set forth the reason or reasons said house, building and/or structure is or has been 
condemned as a nuisance. ( Ord. No. 05-524, Sec. 4) 
11. 24.05 Notice After a house, building and/or structure has been found and declared to 
be a nuisance and condemned by resolution as herein provided, a true or certified copy of said resolutionwillbemailedtotheowner(s) andmortgagee(s) and/orlienholder(s)thereof, ifthe whereabouts ofsaid owner(s) and mortgagee(s) and/or lien holder(s) thereofbe known oriftheir 
last known address be known, and a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on said house,buildingand/orstructure. Provided, thatiftheowner(s) andmorrgagee(s) and/orlien holder(s) ofsaidhouse, buildingand/orstructurebeunknownorifhisortheirwhereaboutsor last known address be unknown, the posting of the copy of said resolution as hereinabove 
provided will suffice as notice ofthe condemnation. (Ord. No. 05-524, Sec. 5) 
11. 24.06 Removal Ifthe house, building and/or structure constituting a nuisance has not been torn down and removed, or said nuisance otherwise abated, within thirty (30) days after postingthetruecopyoftheresolutionataconspicuousplaceon saidhouse, building and/or structure constituting the nuisance, it will be torn down and/ or removed by the Mayor or his duly 
designated representative. ( Ord. No. 05-524, Sec. 6) 
5-40 0"' 
11.24.07 DutiesofMayor TheMayororanyotherpersonorpersonsdesignatedbyhim 
to tear down and remove any such house, building and/or structure constituting a nuisance will insure the removal thereof and dispose of the same in such a manner as deemed appropriate in 
the circumstances and to that end may, ifthe same have a substantial value, sell said house, building and/ or structure, or any saleable material thereof, by public sale to the highest bidder for cash, ten ( 10) days' notice thereof being first given by one publication in some newspaper having 
a general circulation in the city, to insure its removal and the abatement of the nuisance. ( Ord. 
No. 05-524, Sec. 7) 
11.24.08 ProceedsofsaleAlltheproceedsofthesaleofanysuchhouse, buildingand/or structure, or the proceeds of the sale of saleable materials therefrom and all fines collected from 
the provisions ofthis ordinance shall be paid by the person or persons collecting the same to the 
City/Treasurer. If any such house, building and/or structure, or the saleable materials thereof, be 
sold for an amount which exceeds all costs incidental to the abatement of the nuisance ( including 
the cleaning up of the premises) by the city, plus any fine or fines imposed, the balance thereof 
will be returned by the City/Treasurer to the former owner or owners of such house, building 
and/or structure constituting the nuisance. (Ord. No. 05-524, Sec. 8) 
11.24.09 Enforcementoflien. Ifthecityhasanynet costsinremovalofanyhouse, building or structure, the city shall have a lien on the property as provided by a.C.A. 14-54-904. The lien may be enforced in either one of the following manners: 
oil, 
A. 	The lien may be enforced at any time within eighteen ( 18) months after work has been done, by an action in the Chancery Court, or 
B. 	The amount of the lien herein provided may be determined at a hearing before the governingbodyofthemunicipalityheldafterthirty (30) days'writtennoticeby 
certified mail to the owner or owners of the property, ifthe name and whereabouts ofthe owner or owners be known, and ifthe name of the owner or 
owners cannot be determined, then only after publication of notice of such 
hearing in a newspaper having a bona fide circulation in the county wherein the 
said property is located for one ( 1) insertion per week for four( 4) consecutive 
weeks, the determination of said governing body being subject to appeal by the 
property owner in the Circuit Court, and the amount so determined at said 
hearing, plus ten percentum ( 10%) penalty for collection, shall be by the governing body of the municipality certified to the tax collector of the county wherein said municipality is located, and by him placed on the tax books as delinquent taxes, and collected accordingly, and the amount, less three percentum 
3%) thereof, when so collected shall be paid to the municipality by the county 
tax collector. (Ord. No. 05-524, Sec. 9.) 
11.24.10Penalty AfineofnotlessthanTwoHundredFiftyDollars ($250.00)normore 
than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) is hereby imposed against the owner(s) ofany house, 
172 
S-40
0001, 
building and/or structure found and declared to be a nuisance and for each day thereafter said 
nuisance be not abated constitutes a separate and distinct offense punishable by a fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for each said separate and distinct offense, provided the notice 
as herein provided in Section 11. 28. 04 hereof has been given within ten ( 10) days after said 
house, building and/or structure has been by resolution found and declared to be a nuisance. Ord. No. 05-524, Sec. 10) 
11. 24. 11 Judicial condemnation, penalty,previous sections applicable. In the event it is deemed advisable by the City Council that a particular house, building and/or structure be judicially declared to be a nuisance by a court having jurisdiction of such matters, the City Council is hereby authorized to employ an attorney to bring such an action for said purpose in 
the name ofthe city, and the only notice to be given to the owner(s) and mortgagee(s) and/or lien holder(s) ofanysuchhouse, buildingand/orstructure sought tobejudiciallydeclaredtobea nuisance will be that as now provided for by law in such cases in a court of equity or Circuit Court. When any such house, building and/or structure has been declaredjudicially to be a 
nuisance by a court of competent jurisdiction, a fine of One Hundred Dollars ($ 100. 00) is hereby 
imposed against the owner(s) thereof from the date said finding is made by the court and for each separate and distinct offense. In the event the owner(s) ofany such house, building and/or structure judicially found to be a nuisance fails or refuses to abide by the orders of the court, the 
Mayor or persons referred to in Section 11. 28.07 ofthis ordinance will take such action as AW provided in Section 11. 28. 07 hereof, and Section 11. 28. 08 of this ordinance will be applicable to 
such owner(s). 
The provisions contained in the immediately preceding sentences apply independently of any action as may be taken by the court judicially declaring the nuisance. ( Ord. 
No. 05-524, Sec. 11) 
0" 
172. 1 
001, 	S-40 
CHAPTER 11. 28 
BUILDING AND MECHANICAL CODES 
Sections: 
11. 28. 01 
Adoption of building and mechanical codes 
11. 28.02 
Establishment of office of Building Official 
11. 28. 03 
Qualifications of Building Official 
11. 28.04 
Duties of the Building Official 
11. 28. 05 Liability 
11. 28.06 Right of entry 
11. 28.07 Definition 
11. 28.08 Fees 
11. 28.09 Call back fees 
11.28.01 Adoptionofbuildingandmechanicalcodes. Thereisherebyadoptedbythe City Council of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that 
certain building code known as the " Standard Building Code", 1991 Edition, and " Standard 
Mechanical Code", 1991 Edition, of which not less than three ( 3) copies each have been and now 
are filed in the office ofthe Clerk/Treasurer, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated 
as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this ordinance shall take effect, 
the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and structures 
therein contained within the corporate limits of the city. 
11.28.02 EstablishmentofofficeofBuildingOfficial. 
A. 	The office of the Building Official is hereby created. 
B. 	The Building Official shall be appointed by the Mayor. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given him to be heard 
on specific charges. 
C. 	During temporary absence or disability ofthe Building official, the Mayor shall designate an Acting Building Official. 
0,11, 
11.28.03 QualificationsofBuildingOfficial. Heshallbeingoodhealth,physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections. He shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in or connected with building construction, alterations, removal and 
demolition. 
11.28.04 DutiesofBuildingOfficial. 
A. 	He shall receive applications required by this code, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine the premises for which permits have 
been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce all provisions ofthe building code. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or 
when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with 
matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure 
the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be 
necessary. 
B. 	Inspections required under the provisions ofthe building code shall be made by 
the Building Official or his duly appointed assistant. The Building Official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation 
oftheir qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the building code shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of such service. 
C. 	The Building Official shall keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, 
and of notices or orders issued. 
D. 	All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons 
at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the Building Official without his written consent. 
E. 	The Building Official shall make written reports to his immediate superior once each month, or more often ifrequested, including statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated. 
11. 28. 05 Liability. Any officer or employee, or member ofthe Board of Adjustments and Appeals, charged with the enforcement ofthis code, acting for the City in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted on the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this code shall be defended by the City Attorney or Legal Representative of the City. 
s'" 
11.28.06 Rightofentry. TheBuildingOfficial, in thedischargeofhisofficialduties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premise at any reasonable hour. 
11.28.07 Definition. Whenevertheterm "CorporationCounsel" isusedinthebuilding code, it shall be held to mean the City Attorney or other attorney acting for the city. 
11. 28.08 Fees. 
A. For building permit schedule of fees for erecting or repairing a building or 
structure, see Section 11. 04.03( a). 
Fractions to $ 1, 000 are considered to be the next$ 1, 000 in costs. 
B. Building permit schedule of fees for moving of building or structure. 
For the moving of any building or structure, the fee shall be Ten($ 10.00) Dollars. 
C. Building permit schedule of fees for demolition of buildings or structures. 
Forthedemolitionofanybuildingorstructure,the feeshallbeFour($4.00) 
Dollars. 
11. 28. 09 Call back fees. Ifany building or structure fails for any reason, to pass the Building Official's inspection and the .Building Official has to reinspect said building or 
structure, there will be an additional charge of Five ($ 5. 00) Dollars for each inspection; and any 
and all fees shall be paid by the person to whom the permit is issued. 
CHAPTER 11. 32 
GAS CODE 
Sections: 
11. 32.01 Adopted 
11. 32.02 Filed 
11. 32. 01 Adopted. The Arkansas State Gas Code as printed and bound for 1975 is hereby adopted as the City of Clarksville Code. ( Ord. No. 117, Sec. 1) 
11.32.02 Filed. Thecopiesoftheprinted, boundcodeshallbefiledwiththeCityClerk 
and Recorder to be kept at all times for inspection by the public. (Ord. No. 117, Sec. 2) 
1.
00. S-39 
CHAPTER 11.36 
ENERGY CODE 
Sections: 
11. 36.01 Adoption ofEnergy Code 
11.36.01 AdoptionofEnergyCode. ThereisherebyadoptedbytheCityCouncilof Clarksville, Arkansas, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for energy efficient standards for new building construction, this code known as the 1994 Arkansas Energy Code, being particularly the 1994 edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions 
as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which not less than three (3) copies have 
been and now are filed in the office of the Clerk or Recorder ofthe city of Clarksville, Arkansas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the 
construction of all buildings and structures therein contained within the corporate limits of the cityofClarksville,Arkansas. (Ord. No. 342, Sec. 1) 
Sections: 
11. 40.01 
11. 40.02 
11. 40.03 
11. 40.04 
11. 40.05 
11. 40.06 
11. 40.07 
11. 40.08 
11. 40.09 
11. 40.01 
CHAPTER 11. 40 
MINING 
Unlawful 
Penalty 
Drilling for oil and gas 

Special use permit application 
Required information 
Limitations 
Conditions 
Additional requirements 

Starting time 
Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do any 
mining for any coal, mineral, stone or other commercial product within the corporate limits of the city. Mining shall mean by any method, strip, shaft, slope, hydraulic or any other, to recover 
any minerals, ores, stone or any commercial product. (Ord. No. 468, Sec. 1) 
11.40.02 Penalty. Anyperson, firmorcorporationwho shallviolateanyofthe provisions of Section 11. 40.01 hereof shall be upon conviction fined in any sum not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one ( 1) year, or, by fine and imprisonment. (Ord. No. 468, Sec. 2) 
176 
S-39 
11 40.03 Drilling for oil and gas. This ordinance is hereby adopted for the purpose of 
prescribing regulations governing conditions for the drilling of oil and gas wells within the cityof Clarksville, Arkansas. A special use permit is hereby established to set standards used in approving oil and gas well operations and to establish procedures for processing the permits.
Certain uses are defined as special uses because of the potential harmful effects the use can cause to nearby property and public streets, and because the requirements needed to eliminate those harmful effects vary from site to site. Thus, the City Council, in considering each special use 
request, will review the overall compatibility of the planned use with surrounding property as well as such specific items as street standards, traffic patterns, compliance with the adopted Fire Prevention Code of the city, amount of dust or spillage created by the operation, traffic control, 
etc., to make sure no harmful effects occur to nearby property or existing public property. While nothing herein shall be interpreted or applied so as to effectively prevent or eliminate oil or gasdrilling within the city limits of Clarksville, the City Council may refuse to grant any permit if the special use in question poses an unreasonable danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
Ord. No. 158, Sec. 1) 
11 40 04 Special use permit application The application for a special use permit shall be made to the office of the Mayor by the owner or agent of the oil and gas well operations. The application shall include four( 4) copies ofthe required site plan. The fee for processing a 
special use application is One Hundred Dollars ($ 100. 00). 
The required survey and site plan shall be submitted on paper no larger than twenty-four 
24)inchesbythirty-six (36) inchesandnosmallerthantwelve (12) inchesbytwenty-four(24)inches. The site plan shall be drawn to scale ofno less than one ( 1) inch equals twenty (20) feet unless the City Council approves a different scale. The survey and site plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
A. 	The land to be included in the proposed use along with a written legal description 
ofthe land. 
B. The location and dimensions ofall public rights-of-way on or abutting the 
planned area. 
C. Existing and proposed finished grade on the site, with particular attention to 
drainage. 
D. 	Location of all points of vehicular entrance and exit to the site.  The location and dimensions of all existing easements and public improvements within the site. 
177 
e0l5­
39 
E. 	The location of permanent or temporary structures or proposed structures to be located on the site. 
F. 	The location of any reserve pit. 
G. 	Location of closest available water to the site. 
H. 	Exact location ofthe proposed drilling rig. 
I. 	Location of an all weather roadway( shale, SB-2 etc.) capable of supporting fire apparatus on the site. 
J. 	Locationofallsecurityfencingaroundthesite (ifapplicable). (Ord. No. 158, Sec. 2) 
11. 40.05 Required information. The complete application, including all supportive information, 
must be received by the Mayor at least thirty (30) working days before the date that work is to commence. The special use application shall contain the following information: 
A. 	A survey and site plan of the property prepared by a certified land surveyor or 
registered civil engineer. 
owl"' 
B. 	The street address or addresses ofthe entire property. 
C. 	The present zoning classification ofthe property, using such words as 
residential", " industrial", and " commercial" along with the numeral and letters in lieuofletters suchas "R-2-MF" 
D. 	A description ofthe proposed special use, including the description of any construction of temporary structures to be erected on the property. 
E. 	The projected route of truck traffic to and from the operation site including the projected number of trips. The number of trips and route may be regulated by the City Council. 
F. 	The name of subcontractor responsible for site preparation( a separate special use permit is required). 
G. 	In addition to the above information, the applicant shall submit supportive 
information that shall be deemed necessary by the City Council. Ifadditional information is requested, an additional seven( 7) working days shall be required 
fortheprocessingoftheapplication. (Ord. No. 158, Sec. 3) 
178 
000, 
S-1 
11. 40.06 Limitations. 
The City Council may impose reasonable conditions and restrictions upon the application under consideration with the intent of minimizing the impact of the special use permit operation upon nearby property or public property. The limitations placed upon a special use permit may include but are not limited to: ( 1) method for cleaning materials used in the operations that are dropped, shifted, leaked, or otherwise escape onto a roadway from the vehicle transporting such materials, and such material shall be removed as necessary each day; ( 2) method of controlling traffic (flagman or traffic control devices may be required at the contractor's expense); ( 3) weight 
limits may be placed on all haulers to minimize damage to public facilities (reasonable weight limits to be determined by the Mayor or his designated agent); ( 4) the number of hours that site 
preparation work can be conducted on the premises may be regulated by the City Council to 
minimize harmful effects on nearby property owners. (Ord. No. 158, Sec. 4) 
11. 40.07 Conditions. 
The applicant must be in compliance with the Fire Prevention Code of the city and must also meet the following conditions: 
A. 	The reserve pit shall be located a minimum of one hundred( 100) feet from any 
structure. 
B. All standing brush or trees shall be cleared for a radius of fifty (50) feet from a 
reserve pit. 
C. Reserve pit shall be diked or otherwise constructed to protect public property and 
the environment. 
D. 	Water must be available at the site (within one thousand five hundred( 1, 500) feet by either fire hydrant or hoses which will fit fire department connections. 
E. 	Drilling platform shall be a minimum twenty-five (25) feet from any roadway. 
F 	An all weather roadway capable of supporting fire apparatus shall be available at 
the site. 
G. When surface blasting is required, the following precautions shall be taken: (a) 
blasting shall be conducted by federally licensed technicians; ( b) authorities having jurisdiction shall monitor blasting and blasting shall be limited to the day light hours, between the hours of 8: 00 a.m. to 5: 00 p.m. 
179­
S-1 
H. 	The drilling site shall have security fencing around the entire site or personnel on the site twenty-four( 24) hours during the operations to prohibit unauthorized 
access. 
I. 	A list of trained personnel to be called in case of a blow-out shall be furnished to the Clarksville Fire Department. 
J. 	Temporary repairs to the city streets may be required by the Mayor or his designated agent. (Ord. No. 158, Sec. 5) 
11. 40.08 Additional requirements. 
All reasonable conditions required for a special use must be met before any operations may begin. The owner or applicant filing for a special use permit shall sign a binding agreement with the city of Clarksville that all damages to public property related to this operation, for which the owner or applicant is legally responsible, shall be repaired at the expense ofthe applicant. The Mayor shall determine the condition ofpublic facilities (including photos and 
documentation) prior to the initiation of the operation. A bond, for a reasonable amount, shall be required for the amount determined by the City Council. Immediately after completion of the drilling of the well site, repairs will commence on the damage that has been done to the public property. Failure of the applicant to correctly repair all damaged public facilities, for which it has been determined responsible, may result in the revocation of all existing or future permits for said company and the City Attorney is authorized to take what means are necessary to insure that 
the public facilities are repaired. (Ord. No. 158, Sec. 6) 
11. 40.09 Starting time. 
Thedrillingoperationmustbeginwithinsix (6) monthsoftheauthorizationunless a special time limit( less than six (6) months has been imposed by the Mayor or his designated 
agent). ( Ord. No. 158, Sec. 7) 
180­
S-38 
CHAPTER 11. 44 
CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE 
Sections: 
11. 44.01 Codes adopted by reference 
11. 44.02 Designated official 
1144.01 Codesadopted byreferenceItisordainedbythecityofClarksvillethatthe following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
Arkansas Fire Prevention Code 2002 Volume I Volume II Volume III Appendix B Appendix C Appendix J Appendix C Appendix E Appendix H Appendix D Appendix I 
National Electrical Code 2005 
Arkansas Mechanical Code 2003 
Arkansas State Plumbing Code 2003 
Appendix F Appendix J Appendix K 

001b-
Current National Fire Protection Association( NFPA) National Fuel Gas Code 1999 Ord. No. 05-508, Sec. 1.) 
11. 44.02 Designated official It is further ordained that within said Codes, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official owned therein, that designated official of the city of Clarksville who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in this Code shall be 
deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are 
concerned. (Ord. No. 00-405, Sec. 2.) 
CHAPTER 11. 48 
MECHANICAL CODE 
Sections: 
11. 48. 01 Code adopted 
11. 48. 02 Amended 
11. 48. 03 Publication 
11. 48.04 Penalty 
S-39 
11. 48. 01 Code adopted There is hereby adopted by the city of Clarksville the State of Arkansas Mechanical Code, as recommended by the Southern Building Code Congress, being particularly the 1991 Edition thereof, save and except such portions as amended in Section 2 
below. These rules and regulations are adopted in an attempt to ensure safe mechanical installations including alterations, repairs, replacements, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings 
and appurtenances thereto, so as to safeguard life, health, and the public welfare. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the Building Official, his assistants, or any individual assigned by the Mayor, shall be the" Administrative Authority" authorized to enforce the 
provisions ofthe Mechanical Code. ( Ord. No. 362, Sec. 1.) 
11. 48. 02 Amended The aforementioned code shall be amended as follows: 
A. 	Flex duct shall be allowed only on branch lines; 
B. 	Flex duct shall be no longer than six ( 6) feet in length; 
C. 	Mechanically approved fittings are required for all turns; 
D. 	Mechanically approved fittings are required for take off, 
E. 	Fiber duct shall not be allowed; 
F. 	The following fee schedule shall be substituted for the" Schedule ofPermit Fees" found at Appendix B ofthe Mechanical code: 
Mechanical Code: 
Residential Inspections: 
One ( 1) unit 	20.00 
For each additional unit 	10.00 
Commercial Inspections: 
For up to four( 4) units 	30.00 
For each additional unit over and above 
four( 4) units 10. 00 

Note-One ( 1) unit consists of one ( 1) A.C. unit and one ( 1) heating or combination heat and air 
unit.) 
Inspection of Alterations: 
The fee for inspecting alterations and additions to an existing system shall be $ 15. 00 unless a new unit is installed. 
Reinspection: 
In case it becomes necessary to make a reinspection of a heating, ventilation, air conditioning or refrigeration system, the installer of such equipment shall pay a reinspection fee 
of$20.00. (Ord. No. 362, Sec. 2.) 
1 1.48.03PublicationThree (3) copiesofthiscodehavebeenand arenowfiledinthe office of the Clerk and/ or Building Official ofthe city of Clarksville, Arkansas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated, as amended, as fully set out at length herein. From the date on which this ordinance shall take effect, the provisions of the aforementioned code shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and other structures within the corporate limits of the city of Clarksville, Arkansas, except as regulated by other ordinances of the Clarksville 
Municipal Code. (Ord. No. 362, Sec. 3.) 
11.48.04 PenaltvA.C.A. 14-55-102empowersmunicipalcorporationstoadopt ordinances to provide for the safety, health, comfort, and convenience of inhabitants of the city. 
Violations of the Mechanical Code shall be considered a violation of this ordinance, and shall be 
punishable as a misdemeanor offense. Violations ofthe Mechanical Code shall be considered a 
violation of this ordinance, and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor offense. Violation of any 
ofthe provisions ofthe Mechanical Code as adopted as a result ofthis ordinance or other provisionsofthisordinance shall bepunishableby afine upto $250.00. Eachday thatsaid violation continues shall be a separate offense and each day subsequent to the first day of 
violationshallbepunishablebyafineofupto $250.00perday. (Ord. No. 362, Sec. 4.) 
182. 1 
S-36 
TITLE 12 
PARKS AND RECREATION 

Chapter: 
12. 04 Advisory Board 
CHAPTER 12.04 RECREATION COMMISSION Sections: 

12. 04. 01  Established  
12. 04.02  Appointment of members  
12. 04.03  Compensation  
12. 04. 04  Terms  
12. 04. 05  Organization of Board  
12. 04.06  Meetings  
12. 04.07  Quorum  
12. 04.08  Lapse of membership  
12. 04.09  Powers and duties  
12. 04. 10  Expenditure of funds  

12.04.01 Established Thereisherebycreated andestablished aboardconsisting offive 5) members, to be known as the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. One member shall be 
from Clarksville Light and Water. (Ord. No. 01-431, Sec. 1.) 
12. 04. 02 Appointment of members The members of said Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall be recommended by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the City 
Council. (Ord. No. 01-431, Sec. 2.) 
12.04.03 CompensationAllofthemembersofsaidBoardshallservewithout 
compensation. Members may be reimbursed for their actual expenses, including travel, lodging, and meal expenses incurred on official business of the Board, which has had prior approval by 
the City Council. (Ord. No. 01-431, Sec. 3.) 
183­
S-37 
12.04.04Terms Thetermsofthemembersfirstappointedshallbedeterminedbylotat the first meeting of the Board with one ( 1) member serving one ( 1) year; one ( 1) member serving two (2) years; one ( 1) member serving three ( 3) years; one ( 1) member serving four (4) years; 
andone ( 1) memberservingfive (5) years. Termsofofficethereaftershallbeforfive (5) years. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of the member whose office is vacant in the 
such member received the original appointment. ( Ord. No. 01-431, Sec. 4.) 
same manner as 
12.04.05 OrganizationofBoard Immediatelyafterappointmentandqualification, or until their successors qualify, the Board shall organize by election a chairman, vice-chairman, 
year. ( Ord. No. 01-431, Sec. 5.)
and a secretary who shall serve for one ( 1) 
12.04.06 Meetings Regular meetings shall be held at least quarterly at a regular date and time to be fixed by the members. A special meeting may be held upon the call ofthe chairman or any three members by giving three hours notice to the City Clerk in conformance with the 
(Ord. No.
Freedom of Information Act. Minutes of the Board shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
03-466, Sec. 1.) 
12.04.07 Quorum Three (3) membersshallconstituteaquorumforthetransactionof business, but a lessor number may adjourn from time to time. (Ord. No. 01-431, Sec. 7.) 
12.04.08 Lapse of membership After a member of the Board fails to attend three ( 3) consecutive meetings, unless excused by the Mayor, his/her membership shall automatically 
successor shall be appointed in the same manner as his predecessor. A
terminate, and his/her 
member ofthe Board may be removed from office by a two-thirds (2/3) vote ofthe City Council. 
Ord. No. 01-431, Sec. 8.) 
12.04.09 Powers and duties The Board shall have the following powers and duties: 
A. 	Act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor, City Council, and Director/Supervisor of Parks and Recreation in promoting, aiding, encouraging and conducting public recreation, including the development of park and recreation facilities and 
programs. 
B. 	Act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor, City Council, and Director/Supervisor of Parks and Recreation in the planning, maintenance, development and operation of all recreation areas and facilities owned, controlled, or leased by the city of Clarksville. 
184 
S-36 
C. 	Act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor, City Council, and Director/Supervisor of parks and Recreation in developing and periodically updating the long range plan for the city' s parks and recreation facilities. 
D. 	Act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor, City Council, and Director/Supervisor of Parks and Recreation in developing guidelines and agreements for the use of all Parks and Recreations areas and facilities owned, controlled, or leased by the city 
ofClarksville. (Ord. No. 01-431, Sec. 9.) 
12. 04. 10 Expenditure of funds The City Council may appropriate and expend funds from the city General Fund for the purposes to operate a recreation program; to acquire, develop, 
maintain and operate public parks and recreation facilities; and for the operation and maintenance of public parks, playfields, land and water areas, structures for centers ofrecreation, 
and for the payment of salaries of persons employed for said work. (Ord. No. 01-431, Sec. 10.) 
185­
TITLE 13 
PLANNING 
Chapter. 
13. 04 Planning Commission 
CHAPTER 13. 04 
PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
13. 04. 01 
Commission created 
13. 04. 02 
Terms ofmembers 
13. 04.03 
Election of officers; rules 
13. 04.04 
Employment of assistance; expenditures
13. 04. 05 
Powers and duties 
13. 04.01 Commission created There is hereby created a City Planning Commission for 
thecityofClarksville,Arkansas,toconsistofnine(9)members, andatleasttwo-thirds (2/3) of 
said Commission shall not hold any elective or appointive office. The members of the City
Planning Commission shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
Ord. No. 413, Sec. 1.) 
13. 04. 02 Terms of members The members of the City Planning Commission shall each 
beappointedforatermofsix (6) years, commencingwithanniversary dateofsaidappointment,
provided, that the members of said Commission first appointed on the enactment ofthis ordinancethree (3) membersshall beappointedinitiallyforatermoftwo (2)years, and three( 3)membersshallbeappointedinitiallyforatermoffour(4) years,three (3) membersshallbe appointedforatermofsix (6)years. Whenthetermofanymembershallexpireorwhen a 
vacancy shall otherwise occur, the Mayor shall make a nomination to fill such vacancy. ( Ord.
No. 413, Sec. 2.) 
13.04.03 Electionofofficers• rules AtatimeandplacetobedesignatedbytheMayor
which shall be within sixty( 60) days after the effective date of this ordinance, the City Planning
Commission shall meet and organize by electing from its members a chairman, a vice-chairman,
and a secretary. 
The chairman shall not hold any other municipal office or appointment. (Ord.
No. 413, Sec. 3.) 
govern its proceedings, which shall provide for a regular meeting date of said Commission at least once a quarter and oftener ifprescribed by the Commission, and such rules and regulations shall provide for such committees within the Commission as may be found necessary and advisable, and the duties of such committees shall be prescribed by the Commission. No 
committee may exercise duties delegated by the Acts of the state of Arkansas and this ordinance that are organic to the Commission. Such rules and regulations may also provide for special 
meetingsandthemannerofcallingsuch. (Ord.No. 413, Sec. 4.) 
13.04.04 Employmentofassistance; expenditures TheCityCommissionishereby 
authorized to employ such assistance, ( staff, consultants, etc.,) as deemed necessary in carrying 
out its duties and responsibilities. The City Planning Commission cannot expend or encumber 
city funds without prior appropriation by the City Council. ( Ord. No. 413, Sec. 5.) 
13. 04.05 Powers and duties The Commission is vested with all the powers and duties 
prescribed and set forth in A.C.A. 14-56-402— 14-56-409. 
STATE LAW REFERENCE A.C.A. 14-56-402, et seq. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAND SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
 
 
 
REVISED: ORD. 16-758 
MARCH 21, 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CLARKSVILLE, ARKANSAS 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
ARTICLE 1.   PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION ................................................................................ 1 
1.1   Purpose ................................................................................................................................................................ 1 
1.2   Authority .............................................................................................................................................................. 1 
1.3   Jurisdiction and Application ................................................................................................................................ 1 
1.4   Policies ................................................................................................................................................................. 2 
 
ARTICLE 2.   DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................................... 4 
2.1   Definitions ........................................................................................................................................................... 4 
 
ARTICLE 3.   DESIGN ........................................................................................................................................ 8 
3.1   General ................................................................................................................................................................ 8 
3.1.1   Conformance to Existing Plans ..................................................................................................................... 8 
3.1.2   Suitability of the Land ................................................................................................................................... 8 
3.1.3   Land Set-Aside .............................................................................................................................................. 8 
3.1.4   Design Where Future Resubdivision is Indicated ......................................................................................... 8 
3.1.5   Provision of Land for Public Use ................................................................................................................... 8 
3.1.6   Zoning or Other Regulations ......................................................................................................................... 9 
3.1.7   Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services ................................................................................................... 9 
3.1.8   Subdivision and Street Names ...................................................................................................................... 9 
3.1.9   Access ........................................................................................................................................................... 9 
3.1.10   Location of Streets ...................................................................................................................................... 9 
3.2   Subdivision Design Standards .............................................................................................................................. 9 
3.2.1   Streets ........................................................................................................................................................... 9 
3.2.2   Alleys........................................................................................................................................................... 11 
3.2.3   Easements................................................................................................................................................... 11 
3.2.4   Block ........................................................................................................................................................... 12 
3.2.5   Lots ............................................................................................................................................................. 12 
 
ARTICLE 4.   IMPROVEMENTS ....................................................................................................................... 14 
4.1   General Provisions ............................................................................................................................................. 14 
4.2   Streets and Street Name Markers ..................................................................................................................... 14 
4.2.1   Asphalt Street Standards ............................................................................................................................ 14 
4.2.2   Concrete Street Standards .......................................................................................................................... 14 
4.2.3   Curbs & Gutters .......................................................................................................................................... 15 
4.3   Water Lines and Fire Hydrants .......................................................................................................................... 15 
4.4   Sanitary Sewers ................................................................................................................................................. 15 
4.5   Drainage ............................................................................................................................................................ 15 
4.6   Monuments ....................................................................................................................................................... 16 
4.7   Lot Markers ........................................................................................................................................................ 16 
4.8   Sidewalks ........................................................................................................................................................... 16 
4.9   Street Lights ....................................................................................................................................................... 16 
4.10   Boundary/Perimeter Street Improvements .................................................................................................... 16 
4.10.1   Administration .......................................................................................................................................... 16 
4.10.2   Improvements Included ............................................................................................................................ 16 
4.10.3   Right-of-way dedication ........................................................................................................................... 17 
4.10.4   Master Street Plan .................................................................................................................................... 17 
4.10.5   In-lieu requirements ................................................................................................................................. 17 
4.10.6   In-lieu contributions ................................................................................................................................. 18 
 

ARTICLE 5.   PROCEDURE .............................................................................................................................. 19 
5.1   General .............................................................................................................................................................. 19 
5.2   Preliminary Plat ................................................................................................................................................. 19 
5.2.1   Pre-Application Conference ........................................................................................................................ 19 
5.2.2   Submission Requirements .......................................................................................................................... 19 
5.2.3   Preliminary Staff Review ............................................................................................................................. 20 
5.2.4   Preliminary Approval .................................................................................................................................. 20 
5.2.5   Authorization to Proceed ........................................................................................................................... 21 
5.2.6   Expiration of Preliminary Plat Approval...................................................................................................... 22 
5.3   Final Plat ............................................................................................................................................................ 22 
5.3.1   Submission Requirements .......................................................................................................................... 22 
5.3.2   Approval by Planning Commission ............................................................................................................. 23 
5.3.3   Acceptance of Public Dedications ............................................................................................................... 23 
5.3.4   Recording .................................................................................................................................................... 24 
 
ARTICLE 6.   PLAT REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................................................... 25 
6.1   Preliminary Plat ................................................................................................................................................. 25 
6.2   Final Plat ............................................................................................................................................................ 27 
 
ARTICLE 7.   MINOR SUBDIVISIONS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS .............................................................. 31 
7.1   Scope ................................................................................................................................................................. 31 
7.2   Approval Guidelines........................................................................................................................................... 31 
7.3   Approval Procedure ........................................................................................................................................... 31 
7.3.1   Application .................................................................................................................................................. 31 
7.3.2   Approval ..................................................................................................................................................... 32 
7.3.3   Fees ............................................................................................................................................................. 32 
7.4   Plat Specifications .............................................................................................................................................. 32 
 
ARTICLE 8.   SITE PLAN REVIEW .................................................................................................................... 33 
8.1   Procedure .......................................................................................................................................................... 33 
8.2   Site Plan Requirements ..................................................................................................................................... 33 
8.3   Approval Procedure ........................................................................................................................................... 34 
8.4   Expansion of Existing Buildings .......................................................................................................................... 35 
 
ARTICLE 9.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ................................................................................... 36 
9.1   Enforcement ...................................................................................................................................................... 36 
9.2   Fees .................................................................................................................................................................... 36 
9.3   Waivers .............................................................................................................................................................. 37 
9.4   Vacation of Plats ................................................................................................................................................ 38 
9.5   Amendments ..................................................................................................................................................... 38 
9.6   Penalty ............................................................................................................................................................... 38 
 
ARTICLE 10.   LEGAL STATUS ......................................................................................................................... 39 
10.1   Conflicting Regulations .................................................................................................................................... 39 
10.2   Separability ...................................................................................................................................................... 39 
10.3   Effective Date .................................................................................................................................................. 39 

ARTICLE 1.   PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION 
 
1.1   Purpose  The purpose of this code is to regulate and control the subdivision and development of land in order to protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City of Clarksville and those areas falling under the jurisdiction of these regulations. 
 
These regulations are designed, intended, and should be administered in a manner to: 
 
1) Implement the Comprehensive Development Plan for Clarksville, including the Land Use Plan and Master Street Plan. 
 
2) Enhance neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of slums and blight. 
 
3) Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to the future development of adjoining tracts. 
 
4) Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the tract. 
 
5) Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. 
 
6) Provide for adequate public utilities and facilities. 


 
7) Enhance safety from fire and other dangers. 


 
8) Encourage appropriate and best uses land. 


 
9) Provide for efficiency and economy in the process of development. 


 
1.2   Authority   This Land Subdivision and Development Code is promulgated in accordance with the authority cited in Arkansas Code Annotated § 14-56-401 through § 14-56-426. 
 
1.3   Jurisdiction and Application  The provisions of these regulations shall apply within the City of Clarksville and to all lands outside the city limits connected to Clarksville City Water. 
 
These regulations and development standards shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision and development: 
  
1)  The provisions of access to lots and parcels; 
 
2)   The extension or provision of utilities; 
 
3)   The parceling of land resulting in the need for access and utilities; 
 
4) All subdivisions or platting of a tract lot parcel of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites, or parcels, any of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than five acres in area. 


 
5) The construction of any street or public utility through any tract of land within the corporate limits of the City of Clarksville. 


 
6) A development, excluding single-family to four-family structures, on one lot containing a building or buildings with a combined square footage of 1,000 square feet or larger. 


 
7) All multi-family housing developments with more than 20 units. 


 
8) Any commercial building or establishment designed or intended for the sale of petroleum or other flammable products or any commercial or industrial use with accompanying hazards. 


 
9) Routine commercial developments not meeting any of the criteria listed above shall not require planning commission approval. However, in unique cases, the building inspector may require planning commission approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. 


 
Certain properties remain exempted from the requirements of the Land Subdivision and Development Code. These include the following. 
Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
1) The subdivision of land into tracts of five acres or greater that do not require the construction and dedication of new streets, vacation of existing streets or easements, or any improvements which might require the creation of any easements. 


 
1.4   Policies The policies underlying the provisions of this article are set forth in the following sections. 
 
1) It is declared to be the policy of the City of Clarksville hereinafter referred to as “the city” to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as subject to the control of the municipality pursuant to the Comprehensive Development Plan of the city for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the community. The term “adopted plans” shall specifically include the Comprehensive Development Plan consisting of a Land Use Plan and the Master Street Plan.  


 
2) Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until adequate public facilities and improvements exist and proper provisions have been made for drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreational facilities, transportation facilities, and improvements. 


 
3) The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the provisions and standards contained in the building code, zoning code, Comprehensive Development Plan, Official Zoning Map, and other capital budgets and programs of the city. 


 
4) Except in cases where the Fire Chief has discretionary authority or the City has adopted more stringent regulations, the Arkansas Fire Prevention Code shall supersede any regulations contained herein.  


 
5) Land that has been subdivided prior to the effective date of these regulations should, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of these regulations. 


ARTICLE 2.   DEFINITIONS 
Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
2.1   Definitions   Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices.  Wherever used in this Code, the word “may” is permissive, while the word “shall” will be interpreted in its mandatory sense.  For the purpose of interpreting this Code, certain words used herein are defined as follows: 
 
Access  The way of means by which a piece of property is ingressed or egressed or entered. 
 
Alley  A minor public way used for utility easements and vehicular services. 
 
Block: A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks, drainage channels, or a combination thereof. 
 
Bond  Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City. 
 
Boundary Street  A street abutting on only one (1)  side of the parcel of land being subdivided. 
 
Building Setback Lines  The phrase “building setback line” shall be the line within a property which defines the minimum horizontal distance between the building and adjacent property line. 
 
Building Official  The person designated by the City Council to administer the Land Subdivision and Development Code. 
 
Building Permit  Written permission issued by the Building Official for the construction, repair, alteration, or addition to a structure. 
 
City  City of Clarksville, Johnson County, Arkansas. 
 
City Attorney, City Clerk, Mayor  Any office referred to in this Code by title, i.e. City Attorney, City Clerk, Mayor, etc., shall be the person so retained by the City or elected to this position, or his duly authorized representative. 
 
Cul-de-sac  A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
 
Commission  The word “Commission” or “Planning Commission” shall be the official City Planning Commission of the City of Clarksville, Arkansas. 
 
Comprehensive Plan  The Comprehensive Development Plan for the City which has been officially adopted to provide long-range development policies for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision, zoning, and traffic circulation. The Comprehensive 
Development Plan consists of the City’s Master Street Plan and Land Use Plan. 
County Recorder  The Circuit Clerk of Johnson County, Arkansas. 
 
Easement  A grant by the property owner of the use, for a specific purpose or purposes, of land by the public, a corporation, or certain persons. 
 
Engineer: A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Arkansas Engineering Registration Act to practice the profession of engineering in the State of Arkansas. 
 
Improvements  Any betterment of the existing conditions of the land, such as streets, extension of utilities, grading or excavation, or other actions resulting in permanent changes in the condition of the land. 
 
In-Lieu Contribution  A cash contribution for required boundary street improvements instead of immediate construction. 
 
Landscaping  A combination of living plants and man-made materials arranged or persevered in such a way to produce a scenic setting. 
 
Lot  A distinct and separate undivided tract or parcel of land having access on a public street which is, or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer, or improvement as a building site. 
 
Lot, Corner  A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two or more streets. 
 
Lot, Double Frontage  A lot which runs through a block from street to street and which has two non-intersecting sides abutting on two streets. 
 
Lot, Pipe-Stem  A lot where no substantial street frontage is present except an access drive. 
 
Lot, Reverse Frontage  A double frontage lot which is designed to be developed with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and egress provided on a minor street. 
 
Lot Line Adjustment  The adjustment of a lot line of a recorded lot by the relocation of a common boundary where additional lots are not created. 
 
Lot Split  A lot-split is a subdivision which involves the dividing or redividing of platted land area or one or more lots within not more than one (1) block of a recorded subdivision, and which does not involve the dedicating, vacating, widening, narrowing or change of alignment of any thoroughfare, street, alley, or easement. A Lot Split shall be considered a form of Minor Subdivision. 
 
Low Impact Development  A development design approach involving drainage improvements and road design that preserves a landscape’s hydrological function to minimize and mitigate stormwater runoff close to its sources. 
 
One-Half Street Section  The area to the legal centerline of the required roadway. Where a clearly defined right-of-way does not exist, the City Engineer shall establish the 
centerline location. 
Pavement Width  The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, it is the distance from back of curb to back of curb. 
 
Plat, Preliminary  The phrase “preliminary plat” shall be any plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land that is not to be recorded, but is only a proposed division of land that is presented only for review and study by the City; and to provide the basis for installing site improvements and utilities, and for dedicating and/or reserving land for public use. 
 
Plat, Final  The phrase “final plat” shall be any plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land requested to be recorded in the deed and plat records of the County Recorder. 
 
Public Utility  Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or board, duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under regulations to the public, electricity, gas, telephone, television cable, telegraph, transportation, drainage, water, or sanitary sewage. 
 
Replatting  The word “replatting” shall be the resubdivision of any part of a previously platted subdivision, addition, or lot. A Replat shall be considered a form of Minor Subdivision. 
 
Right-of-Way  A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or other use. 
 
Right-of-Way Dedication The dedication to the city of sufficient right-of-way as required by the most recently adopted Master Street Plan. Right-of-Way Dedication for Boundary Streets shall apply to the One-Half Street Section abutting a proposed subdivision or development. 
 
Street  A public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent areas. 
 
Street Right-of-Way Width  The words “street right- of- way width” shall be the shortest distance between the lines which delineate the right-of-way of a street.  It runs from abutting property line to abutting property line. 
 
Street, Local  The term “local street” shall be a street which is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district, and which is not necessarily continuous through several residential districts. 
 
Street, Collector  The term “collector street” shall be a street which is continuous through several residential districts and is intended as a connection street between residential districts and thoroughfares or business districts. 
 
Street, Arterial  The term “arterial streets” shall be the principal traffic thoroughfares continuous across the City, which are intended to connect distant parts of the City or adjacent thereto, and act as principal connecting streets with State and Federal highways.  Each arterial street is designated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan for the City. 
 
 
Subdivider or Developer  Any individual, association, firm, corporation or any agent thereof dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein.  The terms “subdivider” and “developer” shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner, or authorized agent or such owner or equitable owner, of land to be subdivided.  He is sometimes referred to herein as the “applicant”. 
 
Subdivision  Means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the immediate or future purpose of sale or building development.  It shall include all divisions of land involving the need for new streets or a change in existing streets, or the provision or extension of utilities, or other portions intended for dedication for public use.  It also includes re-subdivision or replatting of the land, lots or tracts.   
 
Subdivision, Minor  A subdivision is classified as a “minor subdivision” when it contains six (6) or fewer lots and no streets, utilities, or other improvements are to be made.  All other subdivisions are classified as “major subdivisions or subdivisions”. Minor Subdivisions include forms of land subdivision traditionally called replats or lot splits and the conversion of previously unplatted land fitting the description indicated in this definition.  
 
Waiver  Administrative relief from the literal provisions of this Code when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 3.   DESIGN 
 
3.1   General  In addition to the specific requirements for improvements and their design, the following general principles shall guide the staff and planning commission in their review of proposed developments and subdivision of land. 
 
3.1.1   Conformance to Existing Plans  The purpose of this portion of the Code is to specify the basic and minimum requirements for lots, blocks, streets, and other physical elements in new subdivisions.  These standards constitute the minimums which are to be observed by developers.  In order that the various purposes of this Code may be accomplished, all subdivisions hereinafter established (1) shall conform with the various elements of the Comprehensive Development Plan including the location of major thoroughfares and streets, the location of parks, playgrounds, schools and other public sites, and appropriate land uses; and (2) shall be designed to conform with the minimum zoning and building regulations for the area in which the proposed subdivision is located. 
 
3.1.2   Suitability of the Land  Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, and erosion, and any and deemed by the Planning Commission to be topographically or otherwise unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor shall such land be platted for any other uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life or property unless steps are taken to diminish the above-mentioned hazards. 
 
3.1.3   Land Set-Aside  Such land within a proposed subdivision not detrimental to the development of the subdivision shall be set aside for uses as shall not be endangered by the conditions set forth in Section 3.1.4. In particular, land within the 100 year flood plain as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the appropriate federal agency shall not be platted unless the subdivider shall incorporate such improvements as will render the area substantially safe for development and in accordance with all flood plain regulations. 
 
3.1.4   Design Where Future Resubdivision is Indicated  Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that such lots will be eventually resubdivided into small building sites, the Planning Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets.  Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat. 
 
3.1.5   Provision of Land for Public Use  The Planning Commission may require reservation of suitable sites for public uses indicated on the Comprehensive Development Plan for a period of up to six (6) months after the filing of a Letter of Intent to Develop by the subdivider.  Such reservations shall be referred to the appropriate public board, commission, or body having jurisdiction or financial responsibility, to permit the opportunity to acquire said sites either through purchase, taking an option, or the filing of condemnation proceedings under the power of eminent domain.  The failure or refusal of any public entity to acquire lands designated as suitable sites for public uses within six (6) months of the filing of a letter of intent to develop by the subdivider shall relieve the subdivider of any responsibility to hold such land for future public purposes. 
 
 3.1.6   Zoning or Other Regulations No Final Plat of land within the force and effect of the Clarksville Zoning Ordinance shall be approved unless it conforms to such ordinance. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in zoning regulations, building code, or other official regulations or ordinance the most restrictive shall apply. The Planning Commission shall grant no waiver to the subdivision regulations that would have the effect of violating any provision of the zoning regulations. 
 
 3.1.7   Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services  Land which is neither provided, nor programmed by the city within the corporate limits to have adequate water, sanitary sewer services or storm drainage facilities shall not be subdivided for purposes which require such services unless the developer provides such services. 
 
 3.1.8   Subdivision and Street Names  The proposed name of subdivision and streets shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any street or subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The Planning Commission in consultation with the Johnson County 911 Address Coordinator shall review and have final authority to designate street and subdivision names. 
 
 3.1.9   Access  Every subdivision shall be served by a publicly dedicated street. Every lot or parcel within a subdivision shall have direct access to a public street. 
  
 3.1.10   Location of Streets  All highways and street right-of-ways, and other features of the Master Street Plan, shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and the dimension indicated on the Master Street Plan. 
 
 3.1.11  Low Impact Development  Low Impact Development design practices may be allowed when upon review of the City Engineer, the design of the development shall conform to accepted engineering standards and meet the spirit and intent of these regulations. Any subdivision or development using Low Impact Development design practices shall require a waiver for approval. Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
3.2   Subdivision Design Standards  The quality of design of the urban area is dependent on the quality of design of the individual subdivisions that compose it.  Good community design requires the coordination of the efforts of each subdivider and developer in the urban area.  Therefore, the design of each subdivision shall be prepared in accordance with the principles established by the Comprehensive Development Plan for land use, traffic circulation, community facilities, and public utility services, and in accordance with the following design standards. 
 
3.2.1   Streets  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to all of the elements of the Comprehensive Development Plan 
 and shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions: 
   
1)   Local residential streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.  The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship in the subdividing of adjacent properties.  The Planning Commission may require the dedication of street rights-of-way to facilitate the development of adjoining properties. 
 
2)   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or 
intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider.    
 
3)  Proper access in the form of stub streets or temporary dead-end streets shall be provided to adjacent unplatted property unless, in the judgment of the Planning Commission, topographic conditions or similar physical impediments preclude reasonable provision of such access, or alternate routes of access are, or will be available in the future. 
 
4)   Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed 
major street, the Planning Commission may require service streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.  There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the City under conditions approved by the Planning Commission. 
 
5)   Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets.  Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider.  The Planning Commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within his own subdivision boundaries. See Article 4, Section 4.10 for additional regulations on perimeter streets. 
 
6)   The street names shall require the approval of the Planning Commission.  Streets that obviously are in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. 
 
7)   Design Requirements 
 
A.   Right-of-Way and Pavement  Widths  The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line.  The minimum street right-of-way width shall conform to the street standards designated within the Master Street Plan. 
 
 Cul-de-sacs or courts designed to have one end closed should be no more than six hundred (600) feet long without special permission of the Fire Chief.  Such streets will be provided at the closed end with a turn-around of not less than one hundred (100) feet roadway diameter (outside to outside of roadway surface). 
 
Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the above minimum street width requirements from each side of the center line. In addition, paving and other improvements shall be installed in accordance with the established standards for improvements for that portion of the affected streets. 
 
When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way shall be dedicated. In addition, paving and other improvements shall be installed in accordance with the established standards for improvements for that portion of the affected streets. 
 
B.   Street Grades  The minimum grade for all streets shall be 0.5% unless the developer offers a suitable design for draining the street of surface storm water. 
 
C.   Intersections  The center line of no more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any point.  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees. 
 
Curb radii at street intersections shall not be less than twenty (20) feet; 
Unless trees or utility poles require less; and where the angle of a street intersection is less than seventy-five (75) degrees, the Planning Commission may require a greater curb radius.  When necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radium without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
 
Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be allowed unless special circumstances warrant a waiver as specifically approved by the Planning Commission. 
 
Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create any traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance. 
 
3.2.2   Alleys  Alleys may be allowed at the rear of all platted lots where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the Commission of the need for alleys.  The width of an alley shall be not less than twenty (20) feet. 
 
  Where alleys are provided: 
 
1)   Intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided. 
 
2)   Dead-ends shall be avoided. 
 
3.2.3   Easements  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. 
 
Where a subdivision is crossed by a creek, drainage way, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way shall be provided conforming substantially with 
the lines of such water course, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.  Parallel streets may be required in connection therewith.  No building or structure may be erected over or in an easement. 
 
3.2.4   Block  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard for the following: 
 
1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs  
of the type of use contemplated. 
 
2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
 
3)   Needs for convenient access, circulations, control, and safety 
of street traffic. 
 
4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
 
Blocks of less than three hundred (300) feet in length or more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length are discouraged except as the terrain itself makes blocks of other length desirable.  When a block exceeds six hundred (600) feet in length, the Planning Commission may require a dedicated easement not less than fifteen (15) feet in width and a paved crosswalk not less than four (4) feet in width to provide pedestrian access across the block. 
 
Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient width to allow for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth.  Blocks intended for business and industrial use should be of a width suitable for the intended use, with due allowance for off-street parking and loading facilities. 
 
3.2.5   Lots  The shape of residential lots shall not be required to conform to any stated pattern.  The Planning Commission shall judge lot shape on the type of development and on the use to which the lots will be put.  Corner Lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building set back from and orientation at both streets.  The following are lot dimension guidelines: 
  
1)   Lots within the city limits shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Code. 
 
2)   Lots not served by sanitary sewer and/or public water supply shall be of sufficient size to conform to the regulations and specifications of the Arkansas State Health Department. 
 
3)   The minimum building setback line shall conform to the setbacks appropriate to the property’s zoning district unless within the Planning Area. Those developments and subdivisions within the Planning Area shall designate a zoning district appropriate to the property and conform to the setback requirements of that district. 
 
Side Lot lines should be approximately at right angles or radial to street lines.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where they are needed to 
provide for the separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.  A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet shall be provided along the portion of the lots abutting such a traffic artery or other use where screening is required.  There shall be no right of access across a planting screen easement.  At the discretion of the Planning Commission, the developer may substitute for an easement and a planting screen with a permanent ornamental fence or wall of a height and architectural design which will appropriately  screen and be harmonious with residential or other neighborhood elements; but there shall still be a restriction upon the right of access, and such restriction shall be clearly designated on the plat and Bill of Assurance. 
 
In residential districts which abut railroad rights-of-way, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way.  This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: “This strip is reserved for screening.  The placement of structures hereon is prohibited.”  Additionally, rear yard setbacks shall not include this area. 
 
The size of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial uses should be adequate to provide for off-street parking facilities and services required by the type of use and development contemplated.  When developed within the city limits, they shall conform to the Zoning Code. 
 
Pipe-stem lots are to only be used on rare occasions in order to use otherwise unusable properties and shall require a waiver for approval. Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
ARTICLE 4.   IMPROVEMENTS 
 
4.1   General Provisions  Every subdivider shall be required to install streets, utilities, and public improvements in accordance with the following standards and specifications.  All projects shall be constructed according to the approved plans and specifications of a registered Professional Engineer.  All construction and improvements under the jurisdiction of review and approval of the City of Clarksville shall be subject to a Maintenance Bond as specified in Article 5, Section 5.3.  All other public utilities installed in a development shall be subject to the administrative review and bonding procedures as required by the respective public utilities, and shall not be subject to the provisions of this Section. 
 
4.2   Streets and Street Name Markers  The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential, commercial, industrial, or other purposes shall lay out, grade, and otherwise improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or that directly serve the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of the City. The subdivider shall bear the costs to have street name makers installed for the subdivision or development. The design of the markers and signs shall conform to the City’s standards.  Street pavement widths shall conform to the Master Street Plan with the indicated pavement width being measured from back of curb to back of curb: 
 
The subdivider shall bear the cost of paving streets for local and collector level streets. For an arterial street, the subdivider shall receive financial assistance from the City or other public body to pay the pro rata share of the cost of the street width in excess of 36 feet.  All streets shall be constructed utilizing the following specifications: 
 
4.2.1   Asphalt Street Standards  The subsurface grade shall consist of eight (8) inches of compacted gravel.  Gravel base shall consist of a natural or artificial mixture of 
 gravel and soil mortar uniformly well-graded from coarse to fine and so proportioned as  to meet all State Highway Department requirements for “Bank Run Gravel” or SB-2.   The gravel is to be compacted in keeping with the Arkansas Highway and Transportation  Department Standard Specifications, Section 302.  The surface grade shall consist of two  (2) inches, after rolled, of hot mix or one course of asphaltic concrete. 
 
4.2.2   Concrete Street Standards  Base course or subgrade is to be compacted in keeping with the Arkansas Highway and Transportation Department Standard 
Specifications, Section 302.  Concrete pavement is to be constructed according to Section 501, Portland Cement Pavement Specifications. 
 
1)   Concrete is to be 3,000 lbs. (psi) compressive strength placed on a thoroughly compacted and graded subgrade. 
 
  2)   Concrete is to be poured in separate lanes (maximum width of fifteen 
(15) feet).  Transverse joints shall be of two (2) inches wide felt strip; one-sixteenth (1/16) to one-quarter (1/4) inch thick at fifteen (15)feet intervals for contraction joints.  The poured surface grade shall have a minimum thickness of six (6) inches of concrete. 
 
3)   Reinforcing tie bars, where required, shall be in general conformance with Portland Cement Association recommendations. 
 
 
4.2.3   Curbs & Gutters  The subdivider shall provide permanent six (6) inch concrete curbs with twenty-four (24) inch integral concrete gutters or standard rolled curbs.  Asphalt curbs shall not be substituted. For residential subdivisions with all lots at least one (1) acre or more in size, curbs and gutters shall not be required.  
 
4.3   Water Lines and Fire Hydrants  All subdivisions shall be provided with water supply and distribution systems approved by the City and meeting the requirements of the State Health Department. 
 
The water supply and distribution system shall be designed to provide the anticipated water consumption within the subdivision, including fire protection. Design criteria for water supply shall conform to city standards. 
 
Fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider and shall be located in accordance with the State Fire Code and approved by the Fire Chief. 
 
4.4   Sanitary Sewers  All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved sewage collection and treatment system.  Connection with the City’s sanitary sewer system shall be required if the development lies within at least three hundred (300) feet of an existing sewer line that can serve the development by gravity flow. 
 
If a sanitary sewage treatment system or septic tank system is to be installed, the plans for said system shall be approved by the State Department of Health prior to approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission. 
 
The sewage collection system shall be designed to handle the anticipated flow of sewage from within the subdivision, including development of future sections of the same subdivision and adjacent areas within the same drainage basin or pump station service area.  Recognized engineering design criteria meeting the requirements of the State Department of Health and all city standards shall be used to design the system. 
 
4.5   Drainage  All subdivisions shall be provided with a storm drainage system that is designed and constructed to handle rainfall runoff that originates in or traverses the subdivision.  Storm drainage for residential areas, and for shopping centers, industrial areas, and highway commercial areas, storm drainage shall be designed for a twenty-five (25) year rainfall frequency.  The quantity of runoff shall be calculated using the Rational method of computation.  Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full width roadway and the required slopes.  The size openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot’s formula, but in no case shall the pipe be less than twelve (12) inches.  Cross drains shall be built on a straight line and grade, and shall be laid with the spigot end pointing in the direction of the flow and with the ends fitted and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth uniform invert.  They shall be placed at a sufficient depth below the roadbed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact, and in no case shall the top of the pipe be less than one foot below the roadbed.  These standards shall apply to the design of outfall structures and facilities. 
 
Street crowns shall not be flattened, or warped from one side of the street to the other for the purpose of causing water to flow from one side of the street to the other.  The storm drainage system shall include curbs and gutters on all streets with drop inlets spaced according to acceptable engineering design principles.  In general, rainfall that cannot be handled in streets 
shall be put into pipe or lined channels, except major outfall channels which handle water from drainage areas beyond the subdivision being constructed. Open drainage channels shall be not be constructed except where curb and gutter requirements are waived.  
 
The developer/subdivider shall pay all costs of the internal drainage system, including the cost of facilities to handle water coming into the subdivision from lands owned by a person other than the developer.  The City may participate in the cost of oversized storm sewer lines (above 60-inch diameter). 
 
4.6   Monuments  Concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter (or 4-inch square) and thirty (30) inches in length with one (1) one-half (1/2) inch metal reinforcing rod the length of the monument shall be placed with top flush to the ground at all points of intersection of the boundary of the subdivision and the location of all monuments shall be shown on the final plat. 
 
4.7   Lot Markers  The corners of all lots shall be marked by the placement of a metal reinforcing rod twenty-four (24) inches in length and one-half (1/2) inch in diameter placed with top flush to the ground. 
 
4.8   Sidewalks  Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Clarksville Zoning Code. 
 
4.9   Street Lights  In subdivisions with underground utilities, the developer shall install ornamental street lighting (in contrast to wood or metal poles normally installed). 
 
4.10   Boundary/Perimeter Street Improvements 
 
 4.10.1   Administration The planning commission shall be responsible for requiring improvements in the public right-of-way consistent with these regulations, with regard to subdivisions and all other affected developments. 
 
The City Treasurer’s office shall be responsible for receiving, recording, depositing, and reporting in-lieu cash contributions as determined by the planning commission. The City Treasurer’s office shall maintain a boundary street improvement account and shall furnish a yearly report summarizing the account to the Mayor and City Council. This report shall include both the principal and the interest earned for the accounting period. 
 
Subdivisions in residential zones containing six (6) or fewer lots and developments less than two (2) acres and 10,000 square feet in size shall be exempt from the provisions and requirements of Section 4.10, excluding the right-of-way dedication provisions contained in 4.10.3 and 4.10.4. Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
 4.10.2   Improvements Included 
 Amended by Ord.14-720 
When a proposed subdivision abuts an existing public street right of way, the developer will be responsible for installing boundary street improvements as defined by this section. Boundary street improvements shall include the following: 
 
1) Reconstruction of one-half section of the abutting street if the existing street is not up to city standards. 


 
2) Widening of one-half section of the abutting street to city standards. 


 
3) Reconstruction or construction of the entire street section of the street if the existing street is not up to city standards and is located wholly within the proposed subdivision. 


 
4) Curb and gutter for the length of the project boundary that adjoins the street. 


 
5) Standard drainage piping and drainage structures. 


 
6) One hundred (100) percent of bridge and box culvert construction. (Waivers may be granted in the case of arterial streets.) 


 
7) Other standard roadway or drainage improvements required by ordinance or as may be required to conform to accepted engineering principles, as identified by the City Engineer and relayed to the Planning Commission. 


 
 4.10.3   Right-of-way dedication 
The subdivision plat will reflect right of way dedication for one-half of the right of way for affected boundary streets. 
 
 4.10.4   Master Street Plan 
Right-of-way dedication and boundary street improvements shall be in accordance with the Master Street Plan adopted for the planning area jurisdiction of the City of Clarksville. 
 
 4.10.5   In-lieu requirements 
In-lieu cash contributions may be allowed solely at the discretion of the city in situations including, but not limited to, the following: 
 
1) The horizontal alignment of the existing street pavement or right-of-way is such that the required minimum radius centerline alignment is not obtainable without participation of adjacent properties being developed. 


 
2) The proposed horizontal centerline alignment of the existing pavement does not coincide with either the existing centerline of the right-of-way, or the land line, the discrepancy being so large as to: 


 
a) Necessitate the construction of more than one-half the street width. 



 
b) Necessitate construction of new curb within the projected edge of the existing pavement. 



 
3) The vertical alignment of the existing pavement is such that: 


 
a) The required safe stopping sight distance is not obtainable without extension of construction past the limits of the project. 



 
b) A reasonably smooth pavement or a properly crowned and shaped cross section is not obtainable within the length and width requirements of the project. 



 
c) Under the constraints of good engineering practice, maximum permissible centerline grades or minimum permissible gutter grades cannot be obtained within the length and width limits of the project. 



 
4) The location of the existing or proposed street in the one-percent floodplain precludes the construction of street and drainage facilities. 


 
5) A subdivision is so located that the presence of a drainageway necessitates construction of a drainage structure which would be unfeasible as half street construction. 


 
6) The state of adjacent land development along the street precludes further acquisition of improvements through plat processes. 


 
7) The length of the property boundary along the right-of-way is less than three hundred (300) linear feet and is not located at an intersection. 


 
8) The Building Official determines that in-lieu cash contributions would be in the best interest of the city. 


 
 4.10.6   In-lieu contributions 
In lieu of constructed improvements, the developer shall contribute to the city a cash payment equal to one hundred (100) percent of the City Engineer’s estimate of the cost of construction of the required boundary street improvements. Adjustments may be made by the City Engineer where deemed appropriate. In-lieu contributions shall be reimbursed with interest, as determined by the City Treasurer’s office, when not expended for the specific required improvements within five (5) years from the date of permit approval. Funds will be expended on the same street except that intersecting streets may be included when improvements to such intersecting streets are necessary to provide adequate drainage or traffic flow between the intersecting street and the original street. Such improvements to intersecting streets shall not exceed beyond 100 feet from their intersection with the original street. The City Council must approve all refunds and may, at its discretion, refund proceeds before the five (5) year deadline. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 5.   PROCEDURE 
 
5.1   General  A subdivider proposing to make or have made a subdivision within the territorial jurisdiction shall not proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, before obtaining preliminary plat approval; nor shall he attempt to record the plat of the subdivision or any part thereof prior to obtaining final plat approval from the Planning Commission, and acceptance of public dedications by the City Council. 
 
5.2   Preliminary Plat  When any subdivision of a tract of land is proposed to be made, the subdivider or his agent shall submit to the Planning Commission a letter of intention which may at the option of the subdivider include a preliminary sketch plan.  The subdivider’s letter shall indicate the location and size of the tract, the proposed time schedule, the date on which the subdivider proposes to submit his preliminary plat for Planning Commission review, and such other information as the subdivider deems important for recognition by the Planning Commission. 
 
If the proposed subdivision is a portion of a tract which is later to be subdivided in its entirety, then a tentative master plan for the entire subdivision shall be submitted with the preliminary plat of the portion first to be subdivided.  The master plan shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the preliminary plat, except that it may be on a scale of not more than 1" = 400', and all dimensions may be scaled. 
 
Upon review of the letter of intention, the Planning Commission may recommend a Pre-Application Conference to be held between the subdivider, a committee of the Planning Commission, and /or the Planning Commission’s designated agents for land planning and engineering. 
 
5.2.1   Pre-Application Conference  When a major subdivision of a tract of land within the Planning Commission’s jurisdiction is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the administrative staff of the City and/or designated members of the Planning Commission.  The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing  
existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision 
  
At such meeting, the general character of the development will be discussed and items will be included concerning zoning, utility service, street requirements, and other pertinent factors related to the proposed subdivision. 
 
The purpose of the Pre-Application review is to afford the subdivider an opportunity   to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the Planning Commission in order             to facilitate the subsequent preparation and approval of plans. 
 
A developer may request to have a sketch plat reviewed by the full Planning Commission. Comments and approvals made concerning a sketch plan are not binding on the Planning Commission; however, it is the policy of the City that, having tentatively approved a sketch plat, the Planning Commission shall not unreasonably withhold approval of a preliminary plat that is substantially identical to the sketch plan. 
 
5.2.2   Submission Requirements  The next required step in the process is the submission of an Application for Preliminary Plat Approval.  Requirements of this submission are set out in ARTICLE 6, Section 6.1.  A filing fee as specified in ARTICLE 
9, Section 9.2, shall be paid at time of filing, in the City Clerk’s office.  Any subdivision proposing street and/or drainage improvements and/or water or sewer improvements shall have the improvements designed by a Registered Professional Engineer currently registered in the State of Arkansas. 
 
An Engineer’s Cost Estimate of the construction costs of all proposed improvements shall be included with the submission of the Preliminary Plat.  The cost estimate shall contain amounts and unit prices for the various items involved.  Lump sum or unrealistic estimates will not be accepted. 
 
For purposes of preliminary engineering review, the Application and initial submission shall include six (6) complete sets of plans and specifications. 
 
The Preliminary Plat shall clearly depict the phase of development that is to be constructed within the next eighteen (18) months. Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall apply only to those phases of the development that shall be constructed in the next eighteen (18) months. 
 
The Preliminary Plat shall depict all land under contiguous ownership of which the proposed subdivision is a part. If the development depicted appears as a portion of a larger tract to be developed at a later time, the Planning Commission may require a master plan and phasing plan of the entire development. 
 
5.2.3   Preliminary Staff Review  The City’s Engineer, in council with Clarksville Light and Water, Street and Fire Departments, City Inspector, and other designated staff, shall review the documents received for compliance with design standards of the City’s Land Use Plan, Master Street Plan, zoning and subdivision codes, fire protection and utility requirements. Processing of the plat shall cease at this step for any Preliminary Plat that is not consistent with the above. The plat shall be returned to developer and design engineer with all deficiencies or required modifications noted. The developer may then revise the plat to achieve conformity or make a request for an amendment to the offending plan or code.  
 
The developer shall then supply six (6) complete sets of the plans and documents as modified to the City Engineer for his stamp of approval.  The application and supporting plans and documents will be placed on the agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration at their next regular meeting. 
 
5.2.4   Preliminary Approval  After the Planning Commission has reviewed the preliminary plat and construction plans and engineering report, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or additions.  The Planning Commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the Preliminary Plat within 45 days from receipt thereof, unless the Applicant is notified in writing by the Commission Chairman that additional time is required.  If disapproved, the preliminary plat shall be returned to the subdivider with a written statement as to the reasons for disapproval. 
 
The Planning Commission’s approval of a preliminary plat shall be deemed as an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, drainage, sewer, and other required improvements and utilities, the dedication of reservation of public lands, and to the preparation of the final 
plat.  Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat. 
 
When the Planning Commission finds that the preliminary plat, together with the site improvements plan, meets all the requirements of this Code, it shall approve the plat by placing a stamp of Preliminary Plat Approval upon the preliminary plat.  The stamp of Preliminary Plat Approval shall read: “This plat has been given preliminary plat approval only, and has not been approved for recording as a public record.  This certificate shall expire on____________________ (date).”  Such stamp of approval shall bear the signature of the Chairman of the Planning Commission; and shall be dated. 
 
If approved, the original copy will be filed in the Planning Commission’s records in City Hall and one copy in the Mayor’s office.  Other copies will be distributed to the City Engineer, Clarksville Light and Water, Fire Chief, and one to the subdivider. 
 
A preconstruction conference will be held between the city engineer, city inspector, fire chief, developer, and contractor after the preliminary plat is approved prior to beginning construction or any improvements. 
 
The Planning Commission shall approve a Preliminary Plat upon determining the following: 
 
1) That the plat conforms to all adopted plans, policies, and ordinances of the City of Clarksville. 


 
2) That the plat conforms to the regulations contained in this code. 


 
3) That the developer has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission the capacity to undertake the proposed improvements. 


 
4) That the Preliminary Plat will not add a financial burden to the City or its taxpayers. 


 
5) That the proposed development will not result in off-site improvement costs to the City unless confirmed by written agreement between the City and the developer. 


 
6) That all utilities, both public and private, are adequate to handle the demand to be created by the proposed subdivision. 


 
7) That all utility structures and streets within the subdivision are designed in such a manner to permit development of adjacent properties and that agreements are in place for cost-sharing of required oversized utility structures. 


 
5.2.5   Authorization to Proceed  Receipt of an approved or conditionally approved copy of the preliminary plat, together with an approved copy of the improvements plan shall constitute authorization of the Planning Commission for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plan, the installation of improvements, and the staking out of lots and blocks.  The subdivider, after approval of the preliminary plat, shall complete all 
improvements required under this Code. The approved copy of the preliminary plat must contain a signed Certificate of Preliminary Plat Approval to be considered valid. 
 
The City Engineer, Inspector, Light & Water or other designated staff may inspect the improvement work at any time to confirm materials used, construction methods employed, and conformance to approved plans and specifications and other applicable standards. 
 
5.2.6   Expiration of Preliminary Plat Approval   A preliminary plat which has been approved and received a signed Certificate of Preliminary Plat Approval shall be effective and binding upon the Planning Commission for no more than eighteen (18) months, as shown on the Certificate of Preliminary Plat Approval. If installation of all required improvements is not completed by the expiration date of the Certificate of Preliminary Plat Approval, the preliminary plat shall be considered null and void unless the subdivider is permitted an extension of approval. 
 
An extension of approval may be granted by the City Engineer or Planning Commission.  
 
1)   An extension of approval granted by the City Engineer shall be conditioned upon the subdivider providing a performance bond in accordance with the provisions of ARTICLE 5, Section 5.3.3, paragraph 3) of this code. Such extension of approval shall not extend longer than one month prior to the expiration date of the performance bond. Such performance bonds shall not be issued to have an expiration date of greater than twenty-four (24) months from the date of the City Engineer’s extension of approval.  
 
2)   An extension of approval granted by the Planning Commission shall not extend more than twelve (12) months and shall not require a performance bond.  
 
Any plat not receiving final plat approval or granted an extension of approval shall be required to resubmit for reapproval as a preliminary plat. Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
5.3   Final Plat  When the requirements of this Code have been satisfied and while the Preliminary Plat Approval is in effect, the subdivider may submit to the Planning Commission an application for review and approval of the final plat. 
 
5.3.1   Submission Requirements  At least twenty-one (21) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered, the subdivider shall submit an application which shall consist of: 
 
1)   A letter of application requesting review and approval of the final plat 
  
2)   The final plat in an original tracing or reproducible and four prints, and other     documents as specified in Article 6, Section 6.2. 
 
3)   The Contractor who performs the work shall post a maintenance bond with the city covering any defects in materials and workmanship for the required improvements in the amount of fifty (50) percent of the total cost of those improvements, and stating that any and all defects in materials and workmanship shall be corrected by the contractor by the end of the bond period.  Maintenance 
Bond(s) shall be in full force for not less than one (1) year from date of filing of Final Plat.  Work performed under terms of the Bond shall be approved by the City.  If the contractor is unable to post bond the developer shall post the required bond on behalf of the contractor. 
 
4)   A filing fee as specified in Article 9, Section 9.2. 
 
5.3.2   Approval by Planning Commission  The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for final approval within eighteen (18) months of the date on which the preliminary plat was approved.  If not submitted for final approval within such time, the preliminary plat shall be considered as having been abandoned, unless the Planning Commission agrees to an extension of time. 
 
If the subdivider requests permission to develop only a portion of the property for which the preliminary plat was approved, the Planning Commission may grant approval of a final plat for said portion alone. 
 
The City Engineer shall review the submission, in council with City Inspector, Street, Fire, and Light and Water department heads, and shall determine compliance of the project with approved plans and applicable standards.  The application, with engineer’s report, shall be filed with the Planning Commission for consideration at its regular meeting. 
 
The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat within forty-five (45) Days of receipt thereof, or notify the Applicant in writing that additional time is required. Disapproval of the plat shall be reported to the Applicant in writing within ten (10) days after the meeting at which the plat was disapproved. 
 
Upon approval, the original plat and all copies shall be signed, reviewed and distributed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 5.3.3 and Section 5.3.4 below. 
 
Approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission shall not constitute the acceptance by the public of the dedication of any streets or other public ways or grounds, nor does it constitute authority for the plat to be recorded. Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
5.3.3   Acceptance of Public Dedications  Before the Final Plat is recorded in the office of the County Recorder, an agreement shall be reached between the subdivider or his agent and the City Council.  Said agreement shall be with regard to the installation of any street improvements or utility construction called for in the subdivision plat; the dedication and/or reservation of lands for public use; the dedication and acceptance of utilities and public improvements; and other agreements as required in the Planning Commission’s approval of the plat.  The Maintenance Bond to cover public improvements shall be on file with the City Council before consideration of acceptance of public dedications. Additionally, before such action, the City Council must receive one of the following: 
  
1)   A certificate of completion from the City Engineer, stating that all required improvements and installations have been made, added, or installed; or 
 
2)   A cash deposit in the full amount as determined by the City, necessary to       complete the improvements and installations in compliance with this Code for the portion of the subdivision for which final plat approval is sought.  Such cash 
deposit may be withdrawn in direct proportion to the amount of work completed as approved by the City; or 
 
3)   An executed agreement with the City which shall: 
 
A.   Be in an amount determined by the City Engineer to be sufficient to complete the improvements and installations for the subdivision in compliance with this Code. 
 
B.   Specify the time for the completion of the improvements and installations. 
 
C.   Be accompanied by a performance bond which shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution.  The period of time shall be specified in the resolution approving the final plat and shall be incorporated in the bond, and shall not in any event exceed two (2) years from the date of final approval. Amended by Ord.16-758 
  
5.3.4   Recording  Upon approval of the final plat and acceptance of the public dedications by the City Council, the City Clerk shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the Circuit Clerk. The subdivider shall pay all fees in connection with the recording of said plat. 
 
The final plat shall be filed in the office of the Circuit Clerk within ninety (90) days after approval by the Planning Commission; and if not filed within such time, said approval shall be considered as having been abandoned. 
 
Upon recording the plat, the City shall retain the original tracing and one copy for the Planning Commission’s files, one copy shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. 
 
No building permits may be issued until proof of the recording of the approved final plat has been presented to the City Clerk, giving plat book and page number, or instrument number. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 6.   PLAT REQUIREMENTS 
 
6.1   Preliminary Plat  Six (6) copies of the preliminary plat are to be submitted to the Planning Commission. A digital copy shall be required in AutoCAD format in NAD83 Arkansas State Plane Coordinates, North Zone.  The preliminary plat shall be drawn clearly and legibly at a scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, and shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
 
1)   Name of subdivision; 
 
2)   Name and address of owner of record, subdivider, surveyor and engineer; 
 
3)   North point, graphic scale and date; 
 
4)   Vicinity map showing location and acreage of subdivision; this may be at a scale other than 1" = 100' ; 
 
5)   Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and distances; 
  
6)   Names of adjoining landowners and platted subdivisions; 
 
7)   Existing Streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, culverts, utilities and easements on and adjacent to the tract; 
 
8)   Proposed design including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with appropriate dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public use, and land to be used for purposes other than residential; 
 
9)   Block numbers and/or lot numbers; 
 
10)   Minimum building front yard setback lines; 
 
11)   The present zoning classification, if any, on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining land; and a designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision and any zoning amendments to be requested; 
 
12)   Contour intervals shown at intervals of not more than two (2) feet for terrain with an average slope of 5% or more, and at an interval of one (1) foot for terrain with slope of less than 5%; 
 
13)   If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flooding, the limit of such flooding shall be shown; 
 
14)   While the plat shall show the actual boundary survey, the layout of the proposed subdivision lots, blocks, and streets may be scaled dimensions; 
 
15)   State Health Department approval of the water supply and/or sewerage system if the requirement of the subdivision is to be met by any other means than by connection to a water supply or sewerage system operated by a governmental agency. Approval by the Arkansas Department of Environmental Quality for any wastewater treatment facilities. 
16)   If the proposed subdivision is a portion of a tract which is later to be subdivided in its entirety, then a tentative master plan for the entire subdivision shall be submitted with the preliminary plat of the portion first to be subdivided.  The master plan shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the preliminary plat, except that it may be on a scale of not more than 1" = 400', and all dimensions may be scaled. 
 
17)   Improvement plans for all specified facilities and utilities. 
 
18)   A draft of any Bill of Assurance proposed for the subdivision generally describing proposed covenants, restrictions and conditions applicable to the property included in the plat. 
 
19)  Drainage improvements and drainage runoff quantities (cubic feet per second), prepared by a professional engineer, with points of entry and exit for the development and including the federally designated flood hazard areas for the subdivision. 
 
20)   Each preliminary plat submitted to the Planning Commission shall carry the  
following certificate printed thereon. 
 
   A.    CERTIFICATE OF PRELIMINARY SURVEYING 
              ACCURACY 
    I,____________________hereby certify that this 
    plat correctly represents a boundary survey made 
    by me and all monuments shown hereon actually 
    exist and their location, size, type and material 
    are correctly shown. 
 
        Signed 
 
    ____________________ _____________________ 
        Date of Execution                  Name, Registered 
            Land Surveyor 
            No._____, Arkansas 
 
   B.    CERTIFICATE OF PRELIMINARY ENGINEERING 
      ACCURACY 
    I,_______________________hereby certify that this 
    plat correctly represents a plat made by me, and that 
    engineering requirements of the Clarksville Land 
    Subdivision and Development Code have been 
    complied with. 
 
        Signed 
 
    _____________________ ______________________ 
         Date of Execution      Name, Registered 
            Engineer, No._______ 
            Arkansas 
   C.    CERTIFICATE OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL 
    This plat has been given preliminary plat approval only, 
    and has not been approved for recording as a public record. 
    This Certificate shall expire ________________________. 
        Date 
 
        Signed 
 
    _____________________ _______________________ 
       Date of Execution      Chairman, Clarksville 
            Planning Commission 
 
 
6.2   Final Plat  The final plat shall be drawn in India ink on linen tracing cloth or Mylar film. The scale shall be no smaller than 1" = 100'.  The original tracing and four (4) prints shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.  The drawings shall be neat, legible and suitable for filing for record in the office of the Circuit Clerk-Recorder. A digital copy shall be required in AutoCAD format in NAD83 Arkansas State Plane Coordinates, North Zone. When more than one sheet is used for a plat, a key map showing the entire subdivision on a smaller scale shall be shown on the first sheet.  The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
 
1)   The name of the owner and developer 
 
2)   Names of the registered land surveyor and engineer making the survey and preparing the plat 
 
3)   The name of the subdivision and adjacent subdivisions 
 
4)   The name of all streets 
 
5)   The identifying numbers of lots and blocks in accordance with a systematic numbering system and arrangement 
 
6)   North point, date, scale, and acreage being subdivided 
 
7)   An accurate boundary survey of the property with bearings and distances referenced to survey lines and established subdivisions, with complete and accurate field notes of said boundaries.  The lines, with dimensions of all adjacent land, streets, alleys, and easements and adjacent subdivisions shall  be shown in dashed lines. 
 
8)   Location of lots, streets, alleys, easements, building setback lines (both front and side streets) and other features shall be shown with dimensions. 
 
9)   All necessary dimensions including linear, angular, and curvilinear dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot.  The angular dimension shall be shown by true bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds.  The length of all straight lines, deflection angles, radii, tangents, central angles or curves, and chords and arcs of curves shall be shown.  All curve information shall be shown for the center line of the street based on arc dimensions.  Dimensions shall be 
shown from all angle points of curve of lot lines.  All lots on curves shall be shown with curve length dimensions based on arc dimensions. 
 
10)   The locations of all survey monuments shall be shown on the plat including all lot corner markers. 
 
11)   Certification that all taxes and fees have been paid 
 
12)   “As built” drawings of all street improvements, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewer lines, water lines, and other utilities and public improvements shall accompany the final plat or be submitted to the Planning Commission as soon as possible after improvements are installed. 
 
13)   Copy of Bill of Assurance.  Such document shall incorporate the same provisions as those filed with the preliminary plat, including but not necessarily limited to the following: offering dedications of streets and alleys, parks and other public lands; establishing easements, setting forth privileges and conditions  pertaining thereto, and setting forth the restrictions and covenants of the subdivision; setting forth procedures by which amendments to the Bill of Assurance can be made.  Said Bill of Assurance shall contain reference to the approval of the final plat. 
 
14)  Drainage improvements and drainage runoff quantities (cubic feet per second), prepared by a professional engineer, with points of entry and exit for the development and including the federally designated flood hazard areas for the subdivision. 
 
15)   Each final plat submitted to the Planning Commission shall carry the following certificates printed thereon. 
 
A.   CERTIFICATE OF OWNER 
   We, the undersigned, owners of the real estate shown and  
   described herein, do hereby certify that we have laid off, 
   platted, and subdivided, and do hereby lay off, plat, and 
   subdivide said real estate in accordance with this plat. 
 
       Signed 
 
   _____________________ _______________________ 
       Date of Execution       Name 
            Address 
 
   Source of Title:    D. R.__________Page__________ 
   Instrument No.__________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.   CERTIFICATE OF RECORDING 
   This document, number _____ filed for record______,19__, 
   in Plat Book________, Page________. 
 
       Signed 
 
       ________________________ 
       (Name)       Clerk 
 
C.   CERTIFICATE OF ENGINEERING ACCURACY 
   I,_____________________, hereby certify that this plat 
   correctly represents a plan made by me, and that the 
   engineering requirements of the Clarksville Land 
   Subdivision and Development Code have been 
   complied with. 
 
       Signed 
 
   ______________________ ______________________ 
        Date of Execution        Name, Registered 
             Professional 
             Engineer No.______ 
             Arkansas 
 
D.   CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYING ACCURACY 
   I,___________________ hereby certify that this plat 
   correctly represents a boundary survey made by me 
   and boundary markers shown hereon actually exist 
   and their location, type and material are correctly 
   shown. 
       Signed 
 
   ______________________ ________________________ 
           Date of Execution      Name, Registered 
            Land Surveyor 
            No._________, Arkansas 
 
 
E.   CERTIFICATE OF FINAL APPROVAL 
   Pursuant to the Clarksville Land Subdivision and  
   Development Code, and all of the conditions of approval 
   having been completed, this document is hereby accepted. 
   This Certificate is hereby executed under the authority of 
   said Rules and Regulations. 
 
       Signed 
 
   ______________________ ________________________ 
        Date of Execution       Clarksville Planning 
            Commission 
F.   CERTIFICATE OF ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC DEDICATION 
   AND FILING OF PLAT AUTHORIZED BY ACTION OF CITY 
   COUNCIL BY ORDINANCE NO._________. 
 
 
   ____________________________   (City Seal) 
                       Mayor 
 
   DATE:______________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 7.   MINOR SUBDIVISIONS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
7.1   Scope This section covers the following: 
 
a. Minor Subdivisions 


 
b. Lot Line Adjustments 


 
c. One-lot Minor Subdivisions which convert a metes and bounds description into a subdivision plat suitable for filing at the Johnson County Circuit Clerk. 


 
7.2   Approval Guidelines   The Planning Commission hereby acknowledges approval of the following Minor Subdivisions and Lot Line Adjustments; said pre-approval subject to certification by the City Engineer that the following criteria have been met. If the following criteria are not met, the action shall require Planning Commission approval.  
 
1) No public improvement, including streets, alleys, utility mains or other improvements are required. 


 
2) No vacations of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control, or easements are required or proposed. 


 
3) Such action will not result in any significant increases in public service requirements, not will interfere with maintaining existing public service levels. 


 
4) There is adequate street right-of-way as required by these regulations and the Master Street Plan. 


 
5) Any lot created by the subdivision shall front on a public street that has been certified by the Fire Chief as meeting the requirements for a Fire Apparatus Access Lane as defined by the Arkansas State Fire Prevention Code. 


 
6) No substandard sized lots or parcels have been created. 


 
7) No waivers are requested. 


 
8) The City Engineer has determined that approval of the plat will not adversely affect drainage on adjacent properties or upon the city’s overall storm water drainage system. 


 
9) The City Engineer has not made any other finding in which professional judgment would dictate that the plat be reviewed by the full Planning Commission.  


 
7.3   Approval Procedure    
 
7.3.1   Application  Request for plat approval shall be made by the owner of the land to the Building Official. Five (5) copies of a drawing to scale of the lots involved shall accompany the applications.  A digital copy shall be required in AutoCAD format and georeferenced in NAD83 Arkansas State Plane Coordinates, North Zone. 
 
7.3.2   Approval  The City Engineer shall, in writing, either certify the proposed plat within thirty (30) days of application or notify the owner that it is scheduled for the next Planning Commission meeting. If certified, and after all conditions have been met, the Building Official shall have five (5) copies of the plat signed by the Planning Commission Chairman. The Building Official shall retain two copies for the City’s files and provide two copies to the applicant, as well as a copy for recordation with the Johnson County Circuit Clerk. 
 
7.3.3   Fees  The applicant shall submit all necessary fees at the time of filing the request as outline in Article 9, Section 9.2 
 
7.4   Plat Specifications  The final plat of a minor subdivision or lot-split shall be prepared on linen tracing cloth or Mylar film at a scale no smaller than 1" = 100'.  The final plat shall include the following: 
 
1)   Name of subdivision; 
 
2)   Name and address of owner (s) of subdivision; 
 
3)   Boundary and written legal description of subdivision 
  
4)   Legal description of parcels or lots that result from the subdivision or lot-splits; 
 
5)   Streets, alleys, and easements bordering or abutting the subdivision; 
 
6)   Dimensions in feet and decimal parts thereof, and curve data for all lots, blocks, and street lines; 
 
7)   Building setback lines with dimensions; 
 
8)   Name of engineer or surveyor preparing final plat; 
 
9)   Date, map, scale, and north arrow; 
 
10)   Acreage being subdivided; 
 
11)   Location of all monuments; and 
 
12)   Approval of the Arkansas Department of Health of the sanitary sewer system if the requirements for sewer disposal of the lot-split are to be met by any other means than by connection to a sewer operated by a governmental agency. 
 
 
ARTICLE 8.   SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
8.1   Procedure  The Site Plan Review process shall apply to the following types of development: 
   
1) The provisions of access to lots and parcels; 


 
2) A development, excluding single-family to four-family structures, on one lot containing a building or buildings with a combined square footage of 1,000 square feet or larger. 


 
3) All multi-family housing developments with more than one structure per lot or more than 20 dwelling units. 


 
4) Any commercial building or establishment designed or intended for the sale of petroleum or other flammable products or any commercial or industrial use with accompanying hazards. 


 
5) Routine developments not meeting any of the criteria shall not require planning commission approval. However, in unique cases, the building official may require approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. 


 
The Developer shall prepare and file an application for approval of the site plan. Applications requiring Planning Commission approval shall be filed at least twenty-one (21) days prior to a regular meeting of the Planning Commission. The application shall not be accepted until the Developer has paid the application fee as established by Article 9, Section 9.2. 
 
The application for approval of the development shall consist of a letter (describing the intended uses of the buildings), a site plan, and such other data and information that may be desirable to support approval. Twelve (12) copies of the site plan, prepared by a registered engineer or licensed surveyor, shall be included with the application. A digital copy shall be required in AutoCAD format and georeferenced in NAD83 Arkansas State Plane Coordinates, North Zone. The application must be signed by the owner of the property (supported by a deed of record), and any person representing the owner or developer.   
 
8.2   Site Plan Requirements  The site plan shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor. 
The site plan shall include the following: 
 
1) Name of development, type of activity, current zone; 


 
2) Name and address of owner(s); 


 
3) Bearings and distances of boundary from an actual survey of the property. 


 
4) Street names, class per Master Street Plan, rights-of-way, centerlines, and easements bordering or traversing the property; 


 
5) Building outline, sidewalks, curbs, drives, parking, and striping; 


 
6) Exterior lighting quantity, direction, and pattern; 


 
7) Exterior speaker location(s) and direction(s); 


 
8) Proposed curb cuts for development and curb cuts of adjacent properties, including those across the street, street intersections; these items shall be dimensioned relative to each other; 


 
9) Identify all adjoining property by activity and business name, if applicable; 


 
10) Drainage improvements and drainage runoff quantities (cubic feet per second), prepared by a Professional Engineer, with points of entry and exit for the development, show flood hazard area; 


 
11) Utility plan and Health Department approval; 


 
12) Green-spaces and landscaping. 


 
13) Letter from the Clarksville Water and Sewer Departments stating the status of water and sewer service. 


 
8.3   Approval Procedure    
Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
1) Site plans for developments on less than two (2) acres or less than 10,000 square feet in total building footprint size shall be reviewed by the Building Official, City Planner, and City Engineer for compliance with this code and other applicable codes and laws. Approval or denial of such site plans shall be handled by action of the City Engineer. Copies of any approved or denied site plan shall be provided to the Planning Commission along with a report of action taken. Any decision rendered by the City Engineer on a site plan application may be appealed to the Planning Commission. 
 
2) Site plans for developments on more than two (2) acres or greater than 10,000 square feet in total building footprint size shall be reviewed for compliance with this code and other city codes by the Building Official, City Planner, and City Engineer. The Planning Commission shall review the application at the next regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the completed application with all required attachments. The Commission may approve, deny, or conditionally approve the site plan application based upon its conformance with the provisions of this code and other applicable laws and codes. Upon obtaining approval from the Planning Commission, the developer may commence construction after obtaining a building permit and any other required permits. 
 
Approval shall be limited to the type of building/development stated within the letter accompanying the application. Should the developer decide to build or develop on the property in a manner inconsistent with the use as stated in the letter and site plan accompanying the application, the applicant must submit a new application for approval. Should the developer build or develop the property for a use contrary to the use stated in his/her application, the approval previously granted shall become null and void, and the developer shall cease construction/building on the property upon receipt of notice from the Building Official. 
 
Approval shall expire after six (6) months if construction has not commenced, and within two (2) years if construction has not been completed. Site plans for which construction is not completed within two (2) year shall require resubmission as a new application. 
 
8.4   Expansion of Existing Buildings  Expansions of existing buildings shall be reviewed only when they meet one of the following. 
 
1) The expansion increases the size of the building by greater than 1/3 of its original size.  


 
2) The expansion creates the need to change the existing design of the development’s access. 


 
3) Changes have occurred to adjacent properties that would require new site analysis of the proposed development. 


 
4) The development proposal, based upon the judgment of the Building Official, represents such a substantial change that full review by the Planning Commission is necessary. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 9.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
9.1   Enforcement  In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with all other applicable rules, regulations, and laws including, but not limited to: Comprehensive Development Plan, Zoning Code (within the City’s corporate limits), building and housing codes, and any other regulations adopted by the City Council; and any regulations or special requirements of the State Health Department, State Highway and Transportation Department, or other appropriate State agencies.  It shall be the duty of the building Inspector and the Planning Commission to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the Mayor and the City Attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
 
In order to carry out the purposes of the regulations and to assure an orderly program of land development after the effective date of these regulations: 
 
1)   No plat of any tract of land within the planning area of the Planning Commission shall be accepted by the Circuit-Clerk Recorder for filing of record unless the plat has been approved by the Planning Commission, and the City Seal affixed.  The City Clerk shall have all such plats sealed and recorded. 
 
2)   No conveyance by metes and bounds of tracts or lots coming under the definition of subdivision of land, within the planning area jurisdiction, without compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code or amendments thereto shall be permitted. 
 
3)   No dedication of streets shall by itself be accepted by the City unless the usage of the adjoining, affected land is shown; if the purpose of opening the street is to make the affected land available for sale as a redevelopment or subdivision, the street may not be accepted until accompanied by the required plat. 
 
4)   No public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, shall provide, extend, or authorize the extension of services to any lot, building, structure, or location within the area under the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission unless: 
 
A.   The lot, building, or structure was established before the adoption of this Land Subdivision and Development Code; or 
 
B.   A plat of the location has been approved by the Planning Commission and filed and recorded in the office of the Circuit Clerk-Recorder; or 
 
C.   The plan for the proposed service by the public utility has been approved by the Planning Commission as provided in the State Statutes. 
 
5)   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure on any lot or tract of land which does not comply with all of the provisions of this Code, including the installation of all improvements adjacent to or associated with said lot.   
 
9.2   Fees  The following guidelines apply to fees: 
 
1)   For each Preliminary Plat submitted, the fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each lot in the plat. 
 
2)   For each Final Plat submitted, the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each lot in the plat. 
 
3)   For each lot-split or minor subdivision filed, the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
 
4)  For each Large Scale Development, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
 
4)   In addition to the fees above, proposals which include street and drainage and/or utility improvements, shall be assessed a “Review Fee” which shall equal one percent (1%) of the “Engineer’s Cost Estimate” described in Article 5, Section 5.2.2.  Such Review Fee shall not be less than $100.00 or more than $2,900.00 per subdivision or development plat, or each subdivision phase plat submitted. 
 
5)   Recording Fees, and costs of all plans and documents required by this Code, shall be the responsibility of the subdivider or developer. 
 
9.3   Waivers  The rules and regulations set forth in this Code are the standard requirements of the City.  The Planning Commission may authorize a waiver from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship would result from requiring strict compliance.  No waiver shall be granted except upon written petition by the subdivider when the preliminary plat is filed.  The petition shall state fully the grounds for the waiver and all the facts upon which the petition is made.  In granting a waiver, the Commission shall prescribe any conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest.  In making the findings herein below required, the Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, proximity to public utilities, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such waiver upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare in the vicinity.  No waiver shall be granted unless the Commission finds: 
  
1)   That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this Code would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
 
2)   That the granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or injurious to other property in the area. 
 
3)   That the granting of the waiver will not have the effect of preventing  the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
 
4)  The conditions upon which the waiver request is based are unique to the property and not generally applicable to other property. 
 
5)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular detrimental effect to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out. 
 
6) The request will not violate any other city, state, or federal laws.  
 
Such findings of the Commission, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the Commission meeting at which such waiver is granted.  Waivers may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code so that the public health, safety, or welfare may be secured and substantial justice done.  Economic hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. Amended by Ord.16-758 
 
9.4   Vacation of Plats  The following guidelines apply to the vacation of plats: 
 
1)   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated.  Vacation of a plat shall be subject to the approval of the City Council if the plat is located within the corporate limits, and subject to approval of the Quorum Court if located outside the city limits but within the planning jurisdiction of the Clarksville Planning Commission as shown on the Planning Area Map which is included herein and made a part of this Code. 
 
2)   Such an instrument shall be approved by the Planning Commission in like manner as plats of subdivisions.  The City Council may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets, or alleys. 
 
3)   Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged, or approved, and recorded or filed, in a manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. 
 
4)   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing. 
 
9.5   Amendments  On any proposed amendments to these regulations, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, for which fifteen (15) days advance notice in a local newspaper of general distribution has been published.  Following such hearing, the City Council may adopt the amendment or amendments as recommended by the Planning Commission or as determined by a majority vote of the City Council. 
 
9.6   Penalty  Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any provision of these regulations or amendments thereto shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).  Each day that violation of these regulations is in effect shall constitute a separate offense and be subject to additional fines of twenty-five ($25.00) per day. 
 
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises, and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. 
ARTICLE 10.   LEGAL STATUS 
 
10.1   Conflicting Regulations  All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict with this Code are hereby repealed and amended to comply herewith by virtue of the ordinance adopting this Land Subdivision and Development Code. 
 
10.2   Separability  Any clause or provision of this Code declared invalid by the court shall not affect the validity of the regulation as a whole or any other part of the Code thereof. 
 
10.3   Effective Date  This Code shall take effect upon adoption by ordinance of the City Council of the City of Clarksville, Arkansas.  These regulations shall be printed in booklet form and made available to the general public.  Not fewer than three (3) copies shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk for examination by the public.  These regulations shall be published as required by law by title only through the City’s adoption of the Code entitled “Land Subdivision and Development Code”.  
 
CLARKSVILLE, ARKANSAS
ZONING CODE
Ordinance 2016-742
April 11th, 2016
-ii-
iii-
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Mayor
David Rieder
City Council
Freeman Wish
Danna Schneider
Heather Johnston
Eddie King
Judy Weaver
Edward Bradley
Planning Commission
Vickie Alston, Chair
Jazz Johnston
Iva Nell Gibbons
Greg Phillips
Jacob Gould
Rob Risinger
Katie Howard
Darrell Weathers
Joanie Liles
Staff
Shawn Grigsby, Building Official
Verla Clark, Administrator
Barbara Blackard, Clerk/Treasurer
Prepared with assistance from:
www.garverusa.com
-iv-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ................................................................................................................................. III
TABLE OF CONTENTS .................................................................................................................................... IV
ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE AND APPLICATION ........................................................................................................ 2
Section 1.1 Citation: ...................................................................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.2 Purpose: ...................................................................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.3 Nature And Application: ............................................................................................................................ 2
Section 1.4 Completion of Existing Buildings: ............................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.5 Illegal Lot or Yard Reduction: ...................................................................................................................... 2
ARTICLE 2. ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES .......................................................................................... 3
Section 2.1 Zoning Districts Established: ....................................................................................................................... 3
Section 2.2 Zoning Districts Map: .................................................................................................................................. 3
Section 2.3 Interpretation of District Boundaries:........................................................................................................ 3
Section 2.4 Zoning of Annexed Lands: ........................................................................................................................... 4
Section 2.5 Vacation of Public Easements: .................................................................................................................... 4
ARTICLE 3. SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS .................................................................................................. 5
Section 3.1 Residential Districts: ................................................................................................................................... 5
Section 3.2 Commercial Districts: ................................................................................................................................ 10
Section 3.3 Industrial Districts: .................................................................................................................................... 15
Section 3.4 Planned Unit Development – PUD: ........................................................................................................... 18
Section 3.5 Agricultural Districts: ................................................................................................................................ 21
Section 3.6 Rogers Street Overlay District: .................................................................................................................. 22
ARTICLE 4. SPECIAL USE PERMITS ................................................................................................................. 29
Section 4.1 Nature and Description: ........................................................................................................................... 29
Section 4.2 Uses: ......................................................................................................................................................... 29
Section 4.3 Procedure for Authorizing: ....................................................................................................................... 29
Section 4.4 Fees: .......................................................................................................................................................... 30
ARTICLE 5. SPECIAL PROVISIONS .................................................................................................................. 31
Section 5.1 Accessory Buildings: .................................................................................................................................. 31
Section 5.2 Child Care Facilities: .................................................................................................................................. 31
Section 5.3 Fences and Buffer Protection of Residential Zones: ................................................................................. 32
Section 5.4 Flammable Liquids and Gases: .................................................................................................................. 33
Section 5.5 Height Requirements: ............................................................................................................................... 33
Section 5.6 Home Occupations: .................................................................................................................................. 33
Section 5.7 Visibility at Intersections and Driveway Entrances: .................................................................................. 34
Section 5.8 Vehicular Storage and Parking in a Residential Zone: .............................................................................. 34
Section 5.9 Mining, Excavation, And Material Storage: .............................................................................................. 34
-v-
Section 5.10 Construction within Floodplain Area: ..................................................................................................... 35
Section 5.11 Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer Parks: .......................................................................................... 35
Section 5.12 Manufactured Home Subdivision: .......................................................................................................... 36
Section 5.13 Manufactured Home Parks: .................................................................................................................... 36
Section 5.14 Manufactured Homes: ............................................................................................................................ 37
Section 5.15 Mobile Homes: ....................................................................................................................................... 38
Section 5.16 Free-standing vending machines: ........................................................................................................... 38
Section 5.17 Driveways: .............................................................................................................................................. 38
Section 5.18 Sidewalks: ............................................................................................................................................... 38
Section 5.19 Live/Work Units: ..................................................................................................................................... 39
Section 5.20 Accessory Dwelling Units: ....................................................................................................................... 39
ARTICLE 6. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS ................................................................. 41
Section 6.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements: ............................................................................................................ 41
Section 6.2 Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements: .................................................................................... 42
Section 6.3 Surface Requirements: ............................................................................................................................. 42
ARTICLE 7. SIGNS ......................................................................................................................................... 44
Section 7.1 Purpose: .................................................................................................................................................... 44
Section 7.2 Rules of Interpretation: ............................................................................................................................ 44
Section 7.3 Permit Requirement: ................................................................................................................................ 44
Section 7.4 Permit Exemptions: .................................................................................................................................. 45
Section 7.5 Prohibited Signs: ....................................................................................................................................... 45
Section 7.6 Exemptions: .............................................................................................................................................. 46
Section 7.7 Standards: ................................................................................................................................................. 46
Section 7.8 Temporary Signs: ...................................................................................................................................... 47
Section 7.9 Sign Standards by Type: ............................................................................................................................ 48
Section 7.10 Signs Allowed by Zoning District: ............................................................................................................ 49
Section 7.11 Billboards: ............................................................................................................................................... 53
Section 7.12 Administration and Enforcement ........................................................................................................... 53
Section 7.13 Non-conforming Signs ............................................................................................................................ 54
ARTICLE 8. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES ..................................................................................... 55
Section 8.1 Purpose: .................................................................................................................................................... 55
Section 8.2 General: .................................................................................................................................................... 55
Section 8.3 Application: ............................................................................................................................................... 55
Section 8.4 Regulations: .............................................................................................................................................. 57
Section 8.5 Revocation of Special Use Permit: ............................................................................................................ 58
Section 8.6 Penalty: ..................................................................................................................................................... 59
Section 8.7 Expiration of Approval: ............................................................................................................................. 59
ARTICLE 9. AIRPORT PROTECTION ................................................................................................................ 60
Section 9.1 Authority and Scope: ................................................................................................................................ 60
Section 9.2 General: .................................................................................................................................................... 60
Section 9.3 Enforcement: ............................................................................................................................................ 64
Section 9.4 Airport Board of Appeals: ......................................................................................................................... 64
-vi-
Section 9.5 Penalties: .................................................................................................................................................. 65
Section 9.6 Conflicting Regulations: ............................................................................................................................ 65
ARTICLE 10. NONCONFORMING REGULATIONS ............................................................................................ 66
Section 10.1 Nonconforming Use Of Land: ................................................................................................................. 66
Section 10.2 Nonconforming Structures: .................................................................................................................... 66
Section 10.3 Nonconforming Use Of Structures: ........................................................................................................ 66
ARTICLE 11. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT .......................................................................................................... 68
Section 11.1 Creation and Appointment: .................................................................................................................... 68
Section 11.2 Organization: .......................................................................................................................................... 68
Section 11.3 Powers and Duties: ................................................................................................................................. 68
Section 11.4 Application Procedure: ........................................................................................................................... 69
Section 11.5 Appeals from Board of Adjustment: ....................................................................................................... 69
ARTICLE 12. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT .................................................................................... 71
Section 12.1 Administrative Official: ........................................................................................................................... 71
Section 12.2 Building Permit: ...................................................................................................................................... 71
Section 12.3 Demolition: ............................................................................................................................................. 72
Section 12.4 Certificate of Occupancy: ........................................................................................................................ 72
Section 12.5 Penalty For Violation: ............................................................................................................................. 72
Section 12.6 Amendments: ......................................................................................................................................... 72
Section 12.7 Fees: ........................................................................................................................................................ 73
ARTICLE 13. DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................................. 74
Section 13.1 Interpretation: ........................................................................................................................................ 74
Section 13.2 Other Definitions: ................................................................................................................................... 74
Section 13.3 Definitions:.............................................................................................................................................. 74
ARTICLE 14. VALIDITY AND REPEAL .............................................................................................................. 82
Section 14.1 Validity: ................................................................................................................................................... 82
Section 14.2 Repeal: .................................................................................................................................................... 82
Page 2 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE AND APPLICATION
Section 1.1 Citation: This Code is known and may be cited as the Clarksville Zoning Code, in accordance with
Arkansas Code Annotated §§ 14-56-401 et. seq.
Section 1.2 Purpose: The purpose of the Zoning Code is to implement the provisions of the Comprehensive
Development Plan for the City of Clarksville and to promote and protect the general health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of Clarksville.
Section 1.3 Nature And Application: The Zoning Code divides the city into separate zoning districts. Each of
these districts have standards that govern lot coverage, building height, area, bulk, building location, and
building size. They also govern open space and land use, buildings, and structures. These standards shall be
minimum requirements in each district, and are designed to promote public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare.
Unless expressly and directly allowed in this Code, all use and construction of land and buildings must conform
to the zoning district requirements where the building or land is located. All provisions of this Code must be
followed. These rules apply to the use of land, buildings, structures, and other improvements as well as to the
assembly, erection, construction, moving, alteration, enlargement, or rebuilding of any building, structure, or
improvement.
All subdivision of land must conform to the minimum size and area regulations of this Code.
Section 1.4 Completion of Existing Buildings: No change to the plans, construction, or designated building use
will be required for a building under construction at the time this Zoning Code was adopted. This also applies to
any building permit issued within 30 days before the adoption of this Zoning Code. However, construction must
be started within 60 days following the adoption of this Code.
Section 1.5 Illegal Lot or Yard Reduction: The required lot or yard areas for an existing or new building may not
be reduced or be allowed to count toward the required lot or yard area for another building or use. The
improper reduction of a lot or yard area for a building or use is a violation of this Code and subject to penalties.
Page 3 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 2. ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
Section 2.1 Zoning Districts Established: The City is divided into the following Zoning Districts:
R-1 Single Family Residential
R-2 Low Density Residential
R-2 (AH) Affordable Housing
R-3 Medium Density Residential
R-4 Manufactured Home Residential
R-O Residential Office
C-1 Central Business District
C-2 Neighborhood Commercial and Quiet Business
C-3 Highway Commercial
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 General Industrial
PUD Planned Unit Development
A-1 Agricultural District
Section 2.2 Zoning Districts Map: The location and boundaries of the Zoning Districts are shown on a map
designated as the “Official Zoning Map.” The map and all its contents are a part of the Zoning Code and may be
called the Zoning District Map or the Official Zoning Map in this code. The Official Zoning Map is kept and
maintained by the City Clerk at City Hall. It is available for review and access by the public during the normal
business hours of City Hall.
Section 2.3 Interpretation of District Boundaries: The following rules apply when boundary of a zoning district
shown on the Official Zoning Map is unclear or uncertain:
1) Boundaries that appear to follow the centerline of a street, highway, or alley shall be interpreted to
follow those centerlines.
2) Boundaries that appear to follow a platted lot line shall be interpreted to follow that lot line.
3) Boundaries that approximately follow the city limits shall be interpreted to follow the city limits.
4) Boundaries that appear to follow a railroad line shall be interpreted to follow the midway line of the
railroad tracks.
5) Boundaries that appear parallel to any feature mentioned in the list shall be interpreted as such.
Page 4 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
6) For situation not covered by these rules, the Clarksville Planning Commission shall interpret the
district boundaries.
Section 2.4 Zoning of Annexed Lands: Two options exist for the zoning of annexed land:
Option A: If no action is taken, the annexed property shall be zoned by default as R-1, Single Family Residential.
This zoning designation shall remain valid for only one year after the effective date of the ordinance annexing
the property. Before expiration of the one year default zoning designation, the City Council shall instruct the
Planning Commission to study and make recommendations on the proper land use of the annexed property.
These recommendations will conform to Clarksville’s Comprehensive Development Plan and promote the
general welfare of the public. After the Planning Commission provides its recommendation following a public
hearing, the City Council will rezone the annexed property according to procedures established in Section 12.6
of the Zoning Code.
Option B: Any zoning district or districts may be designated for the annexed property by the City Council. This
designation will not be subject to the one year expiration in Option A. The designated zoning district must be
provided in the annexation ordinance, and the City Council must hold a public hearing on the designation prior
to approval of the annexation ordinance.
Section 2.5 Vacation of Public Easements: When a street, alley, or public easement is vacated, the zoning
district classification of the property gaining the vacated area will apply to the vacated property also.
Page 5 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 3. SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 3.1 Residential Districts: The following regulations govern residential districts:
3.1.1 General Description: The residential zoning districts are designed to (1) protect the residential character
of the districts by excluding commercial and industrial activities, (2) encourage healthy neighborhoods by
allowing facilities as churches, schools and playgrounds, (3) permit certain community facilities and public
utilities for the convenience and general welfare of the people, and (4) preserve open space by requiring
minimum yard setbacks and lot sizes.
Six residential zoning districts are provided, including the following: R-1 Single-Family, R-2 Low Density
Residential, R-2 (AH) Affordable Housing District, R-3 Medium Density Residential District, R-4 Manufactured
Home District, and R-O Residential Office. A more specific description of each district is below.
1) R-1 Single-Family Residential - This is the most restrictive residential district. This district is primarily
intended for detached single-family dwellings. It is also intended for related parks, places of worship,
and schools that are needed for a healthy, attractive neighborhood. Adequate light, air, and open space
are provided to promote neighborhood stability, appearance, and efficiency.
This district is intended only for uses needed to provide a strong neighborhood. The R-1 district should
be buffered from commercial districts by other residential zoning districts such as R-2 or R-3. Where an
arterial street suitable for commercial development is located within an R-1 zone, only frontage lots
along the arterial street should be zoned commercial. In this case, other means of buffer protection shall
be required.
2) R-2 Low Density Residential District - This zoning district is intended to be similar to the R-1 district,
but allow more housing types and slightly higher population density. The district is primarily intended
for attached and detached single-family dwellings along with larger lot two-family dwellings.
3) R-2 (AH) Affordable Housing District - This district is similar to the R-2 zone except that manufactured
housing are permitted.
4) R-3 Medium Density Residential District - This is a residential district to provide for medium density
dwellings and a wide variety of housing types. It is primarily intended for single-family dwellings, twofamily
dwellings, townhouses, and multiple-family dwellings. It is also intended for related parks, places
of worship, and schools that are needed for a healthy, attractive neighborhood.
5) R-4 Manufactured Home District – This district is intended to provide for manufactured homes in a
either a rental park or subdivision. R-4 districts should be located in way that does not negatively impact
existing neighborhoods. It is also intended for related parks, places of worship, and schools that are
needed for a healthy, attractive neighborhood.
6) R-O Residential Office District – This district is intended to provide a place for those types of offices,
professional and service activities that provide for the regular needs or convenience of persons residing
in the city. It is further intended to preserve the residential character of the district while allowing for
the new construction of office structures and conversion of residential structures to office uses.
Page 6 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
3.1.2 Uses Permitted: For permitted uses see the table below. Permitted uses must meet the following
requirements:
1) Provide adequate off-street parking
2) Certain uses are allowed limited hours of operation, as noted below in the use table.
3) Provide an adequate subdivision site or lot for the type of dwelling unit or units.
Amended: Ord. 2014-732
USE TABLE ZONING DISTRICT
SPECIAL
PROVISIONS
P = Permitted Use
NP = Prohibited Use
SP = Special Use Permit (see Article 4)
R-1 R-2 R-2(AH) R-3 R-4 R-O
Accessory Dwelling Unit SP NP NP NP NP SP 5.20
Bed and Breakfast NP NP NP SP NP P
Personal Services (7 am – 8 pm) NP NP NP NP NP P
Child Care Center - Private NP NP NP NP NP NP 5.2.3
Child Care Center – Public or Non-profit SP SP SP SP SP SP 5.2.3
Child Care Family Home SP SP NP SP NP P 5.2.2
Club or Lodge, Private NP SP SP SP NP SP
Church or Place of Worship P P P P P P
Community Building SP SP SP SP SP P
Health Center,
Institution for Aged or Children
NP SP SP SP NP P
Live/Work Unit NP NP NP NP NP P 5.19
Medical Retail Store (7 am – 8 pm) NP NP NP NP NP SP
Nursing or Rest Home NP NP NP SP NP P
Offices, Professional/Medical (7 am – 8 pm) NP SP SP SP NP P
Park or Recreational Facility P P P P P P
School, Public or Parochial SP SP SP SP SP P
Field Crops, Gardens P P P P P P
Accessory Uses as defined in
Art. X that are accessory to
the permitted uses in these
districts
P P P P P P
Page 7 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
USE TABLE (continued) ZONING DISTRICT
SPECIAL
PROVISIONS
P = Permitted Use
NP = Prohibited Use
SP = Special Use Permit (see Article 4)
R-1 R-2 R-2(AH) R-3 R-4 R-O
Single-Family Detached Dwelling P P P P NP P
Single-Family - Manufactured Home NP NP P P P NP 5.14
Single-Family - Zero Lot Line (1) NP SP SP P NP NP
Single-Family Attached Dwelling NP P P P NP NP
Two-Family Dwellings NP P P P NP P
Multiple-Family Dwellings NP NP NP P NP NP
Manufactured Home - Subdivision NP NP NP NP P NP 5.12
Manufactured Home - Parks NP NP NP NP P NP 5.13
Note (1) - Zero Lot Line developments are allowed only on lots of 20,000 sq. ft. or more.
3.1.3 Units per lot: Only one main building per lot is allowed for all dwelling types except Multiple Family
Dwellings. This includes attached and detached single-family dwellings, manufactured homes, modular homes,
and two-family dwellings. This does not apply to manufactured home parks.
3.1.4 Lot, Yard and Height Regulations: No lot or yard can be created or reduced so that it does not meet the
minimum area requirements shown in the following table. No building or structure shall be constructed or
changed so that it will exceed the maximum building height requirements shown in the following table. Any use
not specifically listed in the following table must meet the most restrictive area, yard, and building height
requirements for its zoning district.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the structure, exclusive of chimneys, ventilators, or other extensions above the roof line that are not intended for
occupancy or internal usage by persons.
Building Line: The line of that face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered
porches whether enclosed or unenclosed but does not include steps.
Lot Width: The width of a lot measured at the front building setback line.
Setback: Distance between the lot line and the building line.
Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next
above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. A half story is a partial story under a
gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than 4 feet above the floor
of each story.
Page 8 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Zone Standards
Zoning District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Area Per Family Minimum Lot Width Front Yard Feet Feet Corner Rear Yard Max. Height Stories
R-1 7,500 7,500 70 25 7-1/2 25 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-2 S.F. Detached 6,000 6,000 60 25 6 25 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-2 S.F. Manufactured 6,000 6,000 60 25 6 25 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-2 S.F. Attached 6,000 6,000 60 25 10 25 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-2 S.F. Zero Lot 4,000 4,000 40 25 10 25 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-2 Two-Family 9,000 4,500 90 25 8 25 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-3 S.F. Detached 6,000 6,000 70 20 5 20 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-3 S.F. Manufactured 6,000 6,000 70 20 5 20 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-3 S.F. Attached 6,000 6,000 70 20 7 20 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-3 Two-Family 8,000 4,000 80 20 7 20 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-3 Townhouses 4,500 4,500 22 20 7 20 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-3 Multi-Family 10,000 2,500 70 20 10 20 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-4 Mobile home subdivision 5 acres 5,000 45 20 10 20 15 20 15 1
R-4 Mobile home park 2 acres 4,500 45 20 10 20 15 20 15 1
R-O S.F. Detached 7,500 7,500 70 25 10 25 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-O Two-Family 9,000 4,500 90 25 10 25 15 25 35 2-1/2
R-O Other Uses 20,000 N/A 100 25 25 25 25 25 35 2-1/2
Notes:
a) This applies to only one side of the dwelling. It allows for each detached dwelling unit to be "offset"
on the lot to create a more useable side yard. Where a zero lot line use is adjacent to a different
residential zone or use, a side yard of at least 8 feet is required adjacent to the other use or zone.
b) For unattached sides only.
c) This area includes both private and common area.
d) When a side yard is required, the lot width shall be increased to include the minimum lot width plus
the required side yard. This applies to unattached sides only.
e) Minimum lot width shall be increased by 10 feet for each dwelling unit over four. The maximum
required width is 200 ft.
f) For corner lots the side setback next to a street is 15 feet from the street right of way line.
3.1.5 R-O District Requirements:
Amended: 2016-762
1) Building Facades: Buildings shall be designed such that the front façade shall face the frontage on
which the property has primary access. At least fifteen (15) percent of the total square footage of the
front façade, exclusive of roof areas, shall contain windows or doors. All building façades shall be
constructed of wood, masonry, rock, exterior insulations finish systems (EIFS), glass, tile, stucco, or
similar architectural material.
Page 9 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
No front façade shall be allowed to be constructed of only corrugated metal. Use of other materials shall
require approval of the Planning Commission.
2) Roof Form: All buildings shall be required to have a hipped or gabled roof with no less than a 6/12
roof pitch. Use of other roof forms and pitches shall require approval of the Planning Commission.
3) Screening and Fencing: All mechanical and utility equipment as well as trash enclosures shall be
screened by fencing and/or vegetation so that it shall not be visible from a roadway or adjacent
property. No fencing shall be permitted on any property within the front yard or side yard facing a street
frontage unless the fence is of a decorative design and see-through. Chain-link and barbed wire fences
shall not be considered decorative.
4) Parking: All parking and vehicular use areas shall be placed within the side or rear yard of the lot and
shall be setback from all property lines by a greenspace of at least ten (10) feet.
5) Lighting: Lighting equipment shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. Lighting equipment shall be
located, aimed, and shielded to minimize light trespass across property boundaries.
6) Landscaping: The area between the front façade of the principal building and front lot line/right-ofway
line shall be required to be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of shrubs, trees, grasses, ground
cover, and/or mulch. No areas of open soil shall be permitted.
Page 10 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 3.2 Commercial Districts: These regulations govern commercial districts:
3.2.1 General Description: The commercial zoning districts are designed to provide areas for businesses and
services used by the residents of Clarksville and surrounding areas. Three different commercial districts are
provided. These include the C-1 Central Business District, the C-2 Quiet Business and Office District, and the C-3
Highway Commercial District.
3.2.2 C-1 Central Business District: This district is intended for Clarksville’s downtown area. It is designed to
allow for a mix of uses that create a vibrant downtown. Within the district are design standards to protect
downtown’s character and property values.
They are as follows:
1) No building shall be constructed or changed to have exposed metal walls on any side
or facade. Metal fascia, ornamental trim, and metal siding typically used in residential
buildings are allowed.
2) Outdoor display of merchandise is allowed under the following conditions only:
A. Sidewalks are kept free of any objects or merchandise at least five (5) feet from back of curb
at all times.
B. No merchandise is displayed or stored in a public alley.
C. Merchandise is displayed during business hours only.
3.2.3 C-2 Neighborhood Commercial and Quiet Business District: This district is intended to allow for quiet
businesses, professional offices, medical and dental clinics, and similar uses. Uses in this district should be
compatible with adjacent multi-family residential uses. This district should not encroach into existing
neighborhoods. The C-2 district should be limited to frontages on arterial streets when near zoning districts that
allow single-family residential development. Within the district are design standards to reduce impacts on
adjacent neighborhoods.
They are as follows:
1) No building shall be constructed or changed to have exposed metal walls on any side
or facade. Metal fascia, ornamental trim, and metal siding typically used in residential
buildings are allowed.
3.2.4 C-3 Highway Commercial District: This district is intended for commercial uses not appropriate in C-1 and
C-2 that are mostly supported by vehicle traffic such as motels, restaurants, gas stations, and other similar uses.
Within the district are design standards to reduce impacts on adjacent areas.
They are as follows:
1) Outdoor display of merchandise is allowed under the following conditions only:
A. No merchandise is displayed or stored on any sidewalk, public alley, or parking space
required in Article 6.
Page 11 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
B. Merchandise is displayed during business hours only.
2) These requirements do not apply to automobiles or other items typically stored or used outdoors.
However, trucks or trailers delivering merchandise shall not be used for storage or the sale of
merchandise.
3.2.5 Uses Permitted: For permitted uses see the table below. Permitted uses must meet the following
requirements:
1) Provide adequate off-street parking
2) Meet any special provisions that apply to the use (see Article 5)
3) Provide an adequate site for the type of use.
USE TABLE ZONING DISTRICT
P = Permitted Use
NP = Prohibited Use
SP = Requires Special Use Permit (see Article 4)
C-1 C-2 C-3
Adult Daycare Center SP SP P
Amusement Facility Commercial P NP P
Antique or Gift Store P P P
Appliance Sales & Service P SP P
Automotive Accessory & Supply Store P SP P
Automotive & Truck Sales (New &
Used) & Service NP NP P
Automotive Body Shop NP NP P
Automotive Car Wash NP NP P
Automotive Service Station,
not including body or motor
repair or painting NP NP P
Bank, Savings & Loan P P P
Barber or Beauty Shop P P P
Bed and Breakfast SP SP SP
Child Care Center – Private (with one on-
Site dwelling unit) P P P
Child Care Center – Public or Non-Profit
(with one on-site dwelling unit) P P P
Page 12 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
USE TABLE ZONING DISTRICT
P = Permitted Use
NP = Prohibited Use
SP = Requires Special Use Permit (see Article 4)
C-1 C-2 C-3
Church or Place of Worship P P P
Clinic, Dental, Medical or
Osteopathic, Chiropodist,
Pharmacy P P P
Clinic, Veterinary NP NP SP
Club or Lodge P SP P
Convenience Store SP NP P
Drug Store P SP P
Dry Cleaners & Laundry P NP P
Eating Place, which does not
provide service in automobile
(with interior dining facilities) P P P
Eating Place W/Service in Automobiles NP NP P
Florist Shop P P P
Free-Standing Vending Machines NP NP SP
Funeral Home, Mortuary, or Undertaking Establishment P NP P
Hotel SP NP P
Light Industry with Retail Sales SP NP SP
Live/Work Unit SP NP NP
Motel SP NP P
Mini-Storage SP SP P
Multi-Family Residential SP SP SP
Manufactured Home – Individual NP NP SP
Offices: Professional P P P
Public Buildings and Facilities P SP P
Repair Outlet with Outdoor Storage NP SP NP
Retail Establishment with No Outside Display P SP P
Retail Establishments with Outside Display P NP P
RV and Travel Trailer Park NP NP SP
School, Nursery, or Day Care NP SP P
Page 13 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
USE TABLE ZONING DISTRICT
P = Permitted Use
NP = Prohibited Use
SP = Requires Special Use Permit (see Article 4)
C-1 C-2 C-3
Single-Family Detached Dwelling SP SP SP
Studio, Photographic, Musical P P P
Theater, Indoor P NP P
Warehousing, Inside Storage Only P NP P
Utility Staging Yard with Outdoor Storage NP SP NP
Wholesale Establishment P NP P
Wrecker Service NP SP SP
Accessory Uses to Permitted Uses P P P
3.2.6 Lot, Yard, Height Requirements: No lot or yard can be created or reduced so that is does not meet the
minimum area requirements shown in the following table. No building or structure shall be constructed or
changed so that it will exceed the maximum building height requirements shown in the following table.
AREA REQUIREMENTS
ZONING DISTRICT
C-1 C-2 C-3
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) 2,500 5,000 5,000
Minimum Lot Width at Building
Line (Feet)
25 50 50
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage)
100 40 50
YARD REQUIREMENTS (Feet)
Building Coverage: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building. The building area shall include all overhanging roofs.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the structure, exclusive of chimneys, ventilators, or other extensions above the roof line that are not intended for
occupancy or internal usage by persons.
Building Line: The line of that face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered
porches whether enclosed or unenclosed but does not include steps.
Lot Width: The width of a lot measured at the front building setback line.
Setback: Distance between the lot line and the building line.
Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next
above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. A half story is a partial story under a
gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than 4 feet above the floor
of each story.
Page 14 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
AREA REQUIREMENTS
ZONING DISTRICT
C-1 C-2 C-3
A. Minimum Front Yard None 25 25
B. Minimum Rear Yard None 25 25
C. Minimum Side Yard
1) Interior
(a) When abutting property
in residential district
10 20 20
(b) When abutting property
in nonresidential
district
None 15 15
2) Exterior None 20 15
BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS
Maximum Number of Feet 55 30 35
Maximum Number of Stories 5 2 3
1) Setbacks shall be measured from the anticipated right-of-way shown in the Master Street
Plan.
2) The minimum required setback for service station pumps and pump islands is 15 feet from
all property lines.
Page 15 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 3.3 Industrial Districts: The following are regulations for Industrial Districts:
3.3.1 General Description: The industrial districts are intended to provide areas where manufacturing and
industrial activities can take place. They provide space for manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing, processing,
storage, assembling, packaging, and similar types of industrial uses and activities. These are the industrial
districts:
1) I-1 - Light Industrial District: This industrial use district represents the industrial park areas and also
areas suitable for the location of industries which place a heavy emphasis on aesthetics and public
relations as evidenced by the nature of their operations which is not detrimental to nearby residential
and quiet business districts and by their allocation of an ample amount of the site for landscaping, paved
off-street parking, and setbacks from surrounding property lines.
2) I-2 - General Industrial District This industrial district is intended for general and customary industrial
uses and activities as listed above in association with the I-1 district, but including also the bulk storage
of liquids and solids outside buildings and in the open spaces and the storage and assembly of goods and
materials in the open areas outside enclosed buildings.
3.3.2 Permitted Uses: The permitted uses in the industrial districts are set forth below:
1) I-1 - Light Industrial District Property and buildings in the I-1 Industrial District shall be used only for
the following purposes:
A. Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, and/or assembling of products which,
by the nature of the operation, does not produce noise, dust, odor, or vibration that is
detrimental or dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community.
B. Any business, commercial, or industrial uses which do not create unusual hazards of fire,
explosions, noise, vibration, dust, or the emission of smoke, odor or toxic gases. No use which
would involve the manufacture, processing, or storage of any material or goods which has a high
hazard of fire, explosion, or of a toxic nature shall be permitted as a use by right in the I-1 Light
Industrial District.
C. Certain uses permitted in the C-3 Highway Commercial District by right, namely automotive
accessory and supply store, automotive body shop, automotive car wash, dry cleaners and
laundry, florist shop and greenhouse, professional offices, mini-storages, nursery or day care
center, photographic or musical studio, warehousing with inside storage only, wholesale
establishment, and accessory uses; and other selected uses by special permit, namely public
buildings and facilities, automotive and truck sales and service, and service station.
D. Dwellings for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises.
2) I-2 - General Industrial District Property and buildings in the I-2 Industrial District shall be used only
for the following purposes:
A. Permitted uses in the I-1 Light Industrial District as stipulated above in Subsection 3.3.2
except the uses so permitted by virtue of their being permitted in a C-3 Highway Commercial
District and specifically listed in paragraph 1) of Section 3.3.2 are not permitted in the I-2
Industrial District.
Page 16 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
B. Uses or activities which involve in addition to customary and normal manufacturing and
industrial processes the storage of bulk materials when it is found that the specific location and
the safeguards provided so reduce the danger from fire or explosion as not to be dangerous to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the community and especially nearby properties.
C. While the permitted uses described above in Sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) are permitted in the
I-2 District by right, the following provisions pertain to extraordinary situations and those which
do not mesh with the stipulations and regulations prescribed above in this subsection. Industrial
uses having unusual accompanying hazards, such as fire, explosion, noise, vibration, dust, or the
emission of smoke, odor, or toxic gases may, if not in conflict with any law or ordinance in the
City of Clarksville or the State of Arkansas, be located in the I-2 Industrial District only after the
location and nature of such use shall have been approved by the City Council after public
hearing and report by the Planning Commission as normally required and provided in Article 4.
The City Council shall review the plans and statements and shall not permit such buildings,
structures, or uses until it has been shown that the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare will be properly protected, and that necessary safeguards will be provided for the
protection of surrounding property and persons. The City Council, in reviewing the plans and
statements, may consult with other agencies created for the promotion of public health and
safety, and may attach such special conditions or safeguards as it deems necessary to protect
the public interest, health and safety. With regard to the situations described herein, the
approval of the Planning Commission and the City Council shall be in accordance with the
stipulations and requirements pertaining to special permit uses as contained in Article 4. This
means that the use so allowed is not by right but rather by special permit.
3.3.3 Area Regulations: The following area regulations apply to uses and activities located in the two industrial
districts. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the regulations contained in Article
VI.
AREA REQUIREMENTS
ZONING DISTRICT
I-1 I-2
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) N/A N/A
Minimum Lot Width at Building
Line (Feet)
N/A N/A
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage)
35 50
YARD REQUIREMENTS (Feet)
A. Minimum Front Yard 40 25
B. Minimum Rear Yard 25 25
C. Minimum Side Yard 25 25
D. Yard abutting Railroad Line 0 0
Page 17 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
AREA REQUIREMENTS
ZONING DISTRICT
I-1 I-2
BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS
Maximum Number of Feet 35 45
Maximum Number of Stories 2 3
Within I-2, all bulk storage of goods or materials must be located within the confines of structures, or enclosed
entirely by a sight-proof fence not less than 6 feet and not more than 8 feet in height so that the goods or
materials may not be seen from the street or any adjacent property. Screening adjacent to railroad siding
facilities is not required.
Page 18 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 3.4 Planned Unit Development – PUD: The following regulations are for Planned Unit Developments
(PUD):
3.4.1 General Description: The purpose of this district is to allow innovative developments and/or to address
environmental conditions in the development process in a way that would not be possible using the standards of
the other zoning districts in this code. To use the PUD process the tract of land must be at least one acre in size.
A plan must be submitted for the entire tract and may be developed with a mix of uses. Any residential
development should generally follow the requirements of one or more of the residential zoning districts in this
code. However, innovative development concepts are allowed. A permit is required. The application, with
payment of fee as set forth by the City Council.
3.4.2 Site Plan Required: Five copies of a detailed site plan of the proposed Planned Unit Development District
shall be submitted to the City Inspector for study. If necessary, the Inspector shall have the proposed site plan
reviewed by the City’s Engineer and/or City Planner, the Fire Chief and street and utilities managers. Any
provision of the plan may be negotiated based on issues relating to the public health and safety of the residents
of Clarksville. Following review and any required negotiations, the site plan as revised shall be considered by the
Planning Commission at its next regular meeting. Approval shall require a majority vote of the entire Planning
Commission. Final approval shall be made by the City Council based on the recommendation of the Clarksville
Planning Commission.
3.4.3 Uses Permitted: Uses to be included in a specific Planned Unit Development District will be a part of the
proposed plan. The City of Clarksville will allow flexibility in proposed uses but reserves the right to limit certain
uses in keeping with the objectives of the comprehensive plan and the purposes of this Code.
3.4.4 Regulations: The following regulations apply to Planned Unit Development (PUD):
1) Residential Lot Size: No minimum lot sizes are established, per se, so the housing can be clustered or
otherwise concentrated or arranged in planned locations on the site to take advantage of its natural
features.
2) Open Space Reservation: In any Planned Unit Development, the amount of land not used by
residential buildings, accessory structures, and yards but required by the residential zoning of the site,
shall be reserved collectively in contiguous units accessible to all the building sites in the development
as maintained open space for the purpose of providing parks, recreational facilities, ways for pedestrian
movement and circulation, and conserving visually pleasing elements of the environment. Prior to the
sale of any lot, site, home or other structure a bond of sufficient surety determined by the
Administrative Official shall be posted with the City for completion of said open space improvements
prior to such sale. The open space developed will constitute no less than an equivalent proportional
amount to the area being developed in the case of partial development.
3) Development Density: Business uses in any Planned Unit Development District shall not constitute
over 25 percent of the land area of such development. Land area occupied by residential, business,
public and other buildings and accessory structures shall not exceed 45 percent of the total land area of
such development. Parking areas for business facilities are considered a commercial use of land. Be it
further provided that business development may not be started until the residential development is at
least one-fourth complete.
4) Homes Association: As part of the plan proposed for any Planned Unit Development, the developer
shall submit a set of covenants running with the land providing for an automatic membership in the
Page 19 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Homes Association, to be an incorporated nonprofit organization, operating under recorded land
agreements, through which each property owner in the Planned Unit Development is automatically
subject to a charge for an appropriate proportionate share of the expenses for maintaining the common
property, open space and/or other activities of the Association. Once established, the covenants shall
continue and remain in force during the entire existence of the Planned Unit Development.
5) Responsibility for Open Space: Nothing in this Section of the Code shall be construed as a
responsibility of the City of Clarksville, either for maintenance or liability of the following, which shall
include, but not be limited to, any private open areas, parks, recreational facilities; and a hold harmless
clause shall be incorporated in the covenants running with the land to this effect. It shall be provided
further, however, that when an owner of a Planned Unit Development desires to dedicate certain land
areas to the City for public parks and recreational facilities, and the City approves the nature and
location of such lands, and accepts the dedicated areas, the City shall be responsible for the operation
and maintenance of these lands and properties.
6) Common Spaces: Common open spaces shall be provided within a planned unit development in
accordance with the Land Development Code of Clarksville, Arkansas. The size, shape, dimension and
location of the open spaces shall be determined by the city in conjunction with the developer or
subdivider with consideration being given to the size and extent of the proposed development and the
physical characteristics of the land being developed. Consideration should also be given in providing
parks, recreational facilities, both active and passive, and pedestrian walkways.
Common open space shall be guaranteed by a restrictive covenant describing the open space and its
maintenance and improvement running with the land for the benefit of the residents of the planned
unit development. The developer shall file, at the time the approved final plat is filed, legal documents
which will produce the aforesaid guarantees and, in particular, will provide for restricting the use of
common open spaces for the designated purpose.
7) Preservation: In order to minimize the disturbance of the natural environment, a general landscaping
plan shall be required at the time of preliminary plat submission showing the spacing, sizes, and specific
types of landscaping material. The city shall review the landscaping plan in conjunction with the review
of the preliminary plat.
The preservation of the natural amenities within the planned unit development shall be given due
consideration which shall include topography, trees, and ground cover, natural bodies of water, and
other significant natural features. Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible. The location of
trees shall be considered when planning the common open space, location of buildings, underground
services, walks, paved areas, playgrounds, parking areas, and finished grade levels. The city shall inquire
into the means whereby trees and other natural features will be protected during construction.
Excessive site clearing of top soil, trees and natural features before the commencement of building
operations shall be discouraged by the city.
8) Transportation: The vehicular circulation system shall be designed so as to permit smooth traffic flow
with minimum hazards to pedestrian traffic. Minor streets within planned unit development shall not be
connected to streets outside the development in such a way as to encourage their use by through
traffic.
The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be insulated as reasonably as possible
from the vehicular movement. This shall include, when deemed to be necessary by the city, pedestrian
Page 20 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
underpass or overpass in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, local shopping areas, and other
neighborhood uses which generate a considerable amount of pedestrian traffic.
9) Land Subdivision: In the construction and installation of all subdivision improvements in the planned
unit development, said improvements shall conform to all requirements and standards as set forth in
the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Clarksville, unless exception to the requirements is
recommended by the Planning Commission.
10) Private Streets: If the owners in the future should request that the private streets be changed to
public streets, the owners do fully agree that, before the acceptance of such streets by the City, the
owners will bear full expense of reconstruction or any other action necessary to make the streets fully
conform to the requirements applicable to public streets, prior to dedication and acceptance. The
owners also shall agree that these streets shall be dedicated to public use without compensation to the
owners.
11) City Council Approval: Planned Unit Development Districts and establishment of zoning therefore
must be approved by the Clarksville City Council. However, the development shall be in accordance with
the approved site plan. Any contemplated deviation from the approved site plan shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission consideration, and all recommendations shall be submitted to the Clarksville
Council for approval. The Clarksville Planning Commission has the authority to require reasonable plan
changes for the Planned Unit Development as a prerequisite to approval.
Any variation from the submitted plans shall be considered a violation of the Planning and Zoning Code
and shall incur the penalties set forth for such violation in Article 8, Section 8.4 of the Clarksville Zoning
Code.
Page 21 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 3.5 Agricultural Districts: The following regulations are for Agricultural Districts:
3.5.1 General Description: The A-1 Agricultural District is designed to provide areas for agricultural uses
within the city limits so that they remain compatible and are protected as a valuable natural resource.
3.5.2 Uses Permitted: Permitted uses are limited to the following:
1) Agriculture except hog farms.
2) Animal husbandry - the care and breeding of animals, excluding hogs, for sale.
3) Single-family dwellings.
4) Public facilities and Churches or Places or Worship.
The following uses may be allowed with a Special Use Permit (See Article 4).
1) Commercial recreation uses of 2 acres or more.
2) Golf courses and fairgrounds.
3.5.3 Area Regulations: The following area regulations apply to the A-1 Agricultural district.
AREA REQUIREMENTS USES
Agricultural, Animal
Husbandry, and Others
Residential
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet - sf) 43,560 sf or 1 acre(a) 7,500 sf
Minimum Lot Width at Building Line (Feet) N/A 70
YARD REQUIREMENTS (IN FEET)
A. Minimum Front Yard(b) 50(c) 50
B. Minimum Rear Yard 50(c) 50
C. Minimum Side Yard 50(c) 50
a) Minimum lot area requirement for commercial recreation uses is 2 acres.
b) Setbacks shall be measured from the anticipated right-of-way shown in the Master Street
Plan.
c) The minimum setback for agricultural and animal husbandry structures from any residential
zoning district is 100 feet.
3.5.4 Approval of Expansions: The expansion of any existing use, including proposed new improvements,
must be approved with a Special Use Permit (see Article 4).
Page 22 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 3.6 Rogers Street Overlay District: The following regulations apply within the Rogers Street Overlay
District:
Amended: Ord. 2014-732, 2015-741
3.6.1 Purpose: The purpose of the Rogers Street Overlay District shall serve as follows:
1) To protect and enhance the area surrounding the Rogers Street gateway such that it will provide an
attractive and pleasing entryway to the City of Clarksville.
2) To encourage development within the district that will create a distinctive city district and serve as a
long-term asset for Clarksville and it residents.
3) To minimize the number of curb cuts along Rogers Street so that the roadway will function at an
efficient level of service.
4) To promote utilization of property within the overlay district for its best and most appropriate use.
5) To create development standards and land use regulations that will allow for the compatible and
appropriate transition of the area from residential to commercial uses.
3.6.2 Boundaries: The boundaries of the district are indicated on the Official Zoning Map for the City of
Clarksville.
Page 23 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
3.6.3 Application: These regulations shall apply to all properties falling within the boundaries described in
Section 3.6.2. The regulations shall be in addition and shall overlay all other zoning, subdivision, and signage
regulations. Therefore, properties falling within the boundaries of the overlay district shall be bound to all
zoning, subdivision, and signage regulations in addition to being bound by regulations of the overlay district.
Where the requirements or standards of the overlay district conflict with other regulations, the requirements
and standards of the overlay district shall control. Where at least twenty-five (25) percent of a property’s area
falls within the bounds of the overlay district, the requirements and standards of the overlay district shall apply
to the entire property.
3.6.4 Site and Development Standards: The following regulations apply to development and redevelopment in
the overlay district. Conformance to ALL of these standards shall be triggered by construction of a new building
of more than 500 square feet in gross floor area or an addition to an existing structure of greater than one-third
(1/3) the structure’s existing size.
Exterior building modifications with a cost greater than $10,000 and requiring a building permit shall trigger the
building façade requirements of item 3.
1) Prohibited Uses: The permitted uses of the underlying zoning district for a property shall constitute
the permitted uses for a property, except that the following uses shall not be permitted in any zone
within the overlay district:
2) Area Requirements: Minimum Front Yard: 15 ft.
TABLE OF PROHIBITED USES
Maufactured Homes
Manufactured Homes Parks
Automotive & Truck Sales and Service (New and Used)
Automotive Body Shop
Freestanding Vending Machines
Light Industry with Retail Sales
Mini-Storage
Repair Outlet with Outdoor Storage
Retail Establishments with Outside Display
Utility Staging Yard with Outdoor Storage
Warehousing
Wrecker Service
Wholesale Establishment
Junk or Salvage Yard
Any commercial structure of less than 500 square feet
Page 24 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
3) Access: Access along Rogers Street shall be limited to preserve the function of the street according to
the following standards:
A. To the greatest extent possible while allowing access for each property, all new access drives
on Rogers Street shall be located at least fifty (50) feet apart, as measured from the nearest to
nearest curb.
B. No new access drive on Rogers Street shall be permitted within thirty-five (35) feet of a street
intersection, as measured from the nearest curb to the nearest curb.
C. Unless an already existing condition, only one (1) curb cut per street frontage shall be
permitted for properties with two hundred (200) feet of street frontage or less per street
frontage.
4) Building Facades: Buildings shall be designed such that the front façade shall face the frontage on
which the property has primary access. Front and side building façades viewable from a public right-ofway
shall be constructed of wood, masonry, rock, exterior insulations finish systems (EIFS), glass, precast
concrete, tile, stucco, Aluminum Composite Panels (ACP), or similar architectural material. Side
building façades shall be allowed to meet this requirement by cladding the front fifteen (15) feet of the
side façade or front 1/3, whichever is greater, with the approved materials listed above. Those unclad,
rear portions of the side façade shall be screened with a vegetative buffer at least six (6) feet in height.
No front façade shall be allowed to be constructed of only corrugated metal. Use of other materials shall
require approval of the Planning Commission. Sites with multiple buildings shall be required to have a
unifying architectural theme and design.
5) Screening and Fencing: All mechanical and utility equipment as well as trash enclosures shall be
screened by fencing and/or vegetation so that it shall not be visible from a roadway or adjacent
property. No fencing shall be permitted on any property within the front yard or side yard facing a street
frontage unless the fence is of a decorative design and see-through. Chain-link and barbed wire fences
shall not be considered decorative.
Commercial properties adjacent to residential zoning districts and uses must meet additional buffering
requirements. All interior sides and/or the rear of a C-2 or C-3 lot adjacent to a residential zoning district
or use shall be fenced with an opaque ornamental fence, wall, or dense evergreen hedge between 5 and
7 feet tall at the time of planting, except as prohibited by visibility requirements in Section 5.7. The
fence, wall, or hedge shall be kept in good condition and shall not extend beyond the front façade of the
structure on the commercial property or the adjacent residential property.
6) Parking: All parking and vehicular use areas shall meet the following standards:
A. All new parking and vehicular use areas along a public or private roadway frontage shall be
separated from the back edge of the sidewalk by a greenspace of at least five (5) feet.
B. All new parking and vehicular use areas shall be separated from all side and rear property
lines with a greenspace of at least two (2) feet.
C. No parking area may be configured to allow the backing of vehicles into a public street.
Page 25 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
D. The placement of parking in the rear or side yard is strongly encouraged.
7) Utilities: All above-ground utilities shall be placed along the rear property line or be placed
underground.
8) Lighting: All parking and loading areas shall have lighting. Lighting equipment shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet in height. Lighting equipment shall be located, aimed, and shielded to minimize light trespass
across property boundaries.
9) Signage: Signage shall follow these standards:
A. No off-premise signage shall be allowed.
B. Freestanding Signs:
1. Maximum Sign Surface Area: Street frontage may only be counted from the street on
which the sign will be placed.
a. Lots with less than 75 linear feet of public street frontage: 32 square feet.
b. Lots with more than 75 linear feet of public street frontage: 32 square feet
plus 1 square foot, up to 100 square feet, for each 4 linear feet of public street
frontage over 75 feet.
2. Only one freestanding sign shall be allowed per structure. The permitted freestanding
sign shall be allowed to serve as a directory sign for any multi-tenant structure.
C. Wall Signs: Business identification, façade, window, and awning signs shall be considered wall
signs.
1. Maximum Sign Surface Area and Number:
a. Single-Tenant Structure: The maximum number of wall signs shall be limited
by the total sign surface area permitted for wall signs. The total area for all wall
signs shall not exceed 10% of the total square footage of the wall on which the
sign is placed or 100 square feet, whichever is less. The maximum size for any
wall sign shall be 100 square feet. These requirements shall apply independently
to each building façade.
b. Multi-Tenant Structure: The maximum number of wall signs shall be limited
by the total sign surface area permitted for wall signs. The total area for all wall
signs shall not exceed 10% of the total square footage of the wall on which the
signs are placed. The maximum size for any wall sign shall be 100 square feet.
These requirements shall apply independently to each building façade.
10) Landscaping: A minimum of five (5) feet of landscaped green space shall be required on the
property along and parallel to the right-of-way or easement of any public or private street on which the
development has frontage. This shall apply to all street frontages. All landscaping shall conform to the
standards below.
Page 26 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
A. No parking areas shall encroach into the required landscaping area.
B. Landscaping shall consist of shrubs, trees, grasses, ground cover, mulch, or rock. No areas of
open soil shall be permitted.
C. One (1) tree shall be required for each fifty (50) linear feet of roadway frontage. One (1)
shrub shall be required for each ten (10) linear feet of roadway frontage.
D. Trees planted shall be at least six (6) feet in height with at least a two (2) inch caliper width at
the time of planting.
E. The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the landscaping in an orderly
and living condition, including pruning, weeding, watering, and replacement when plants die or
become diseased. Should the installed landscaping die or become diseased, the property owner
shall replace the diseased or dead landscaping.
10) Landscaping Planting List: The following trees, shrubs, grasses, and ground covers are recommended
for planting. They are found to be well suited to the area and require little maintenance. This list
contains the species which may be planted within a required landscaping area.
Medium Trees (40’ H x 30’ W)
1. Swap Red Maple – Acer rubrum
2. Red Sunset Maple – Acer rubrum
3. River Birch - Betula nigra
4. Ginkgo (Male) - Ginkgo biloba
5. Pistachio – Pistachia chinensis
6. Bald Cypress - Taxodium distichum
7. Chinese Elm - Ulmus parvifolia
8. American Holly - Ilex opaca
9. Eastern Red Cedar - Juniperus virginiana
10. Sweet Bay Magnolia – Magnolia virginiana
Small Trees (20’ H x 15’ W)
1. Amur Maple - Acer ginnala
2. Trident Maple - Acer buergerianum
3. Redbud - Cercis
4. Dwarf Southern Catalpa - Catalpa bignonioides
5. Eastern Redbud - Cercis canadensis
6. Flowering Dogwood - Cornus florida
7. Parsley Hawthorn - Crataegus marshallii
8. Green Hawthorn - Crataegus viridis
9. Deciduous Holly - Ilex decidua
10. Crape Myrtle - Lagerstroemia
11. Saucer Magnolia - Magnolia × soulangeana
Page 27 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
12. Camellia – Camellia japonica
13. Sasanqua Camellia - Camellia sasanqua
14. Foster Holly – Ilex attenuate ‘Fosterii’
15. Burford Chinese Holly – Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii’
16. Canaert Red Cedar – Juniperus virginiana ‘Canaertii’
17. Silver Red Cedar – Juniperus virginiana ‘Glauca’
Shrubs
1. Forsythia - Forsythia
2. Evergreen Hollies - Ilex species
3. Nandina - Nandian domestica
4. Yew - Taxus baccata
5. Abelia - Abelia grandiflora
6. Boxwood - Buxus sempervirens primary
7. Dwarf Crape Myrtle - Lagerstroemia indica nana
8. Dwarf Purpleleaf Japanese Barberry - Berberis thunbergii “Atropurpurea”
9. Juniper species - Juniperius species primary
Ground Covers
1. Bugleweed – Ajuga reptans
2. English Ivy - Hedera helix
3. Bigleaf Periwinkle – Vinca major
4. Dwarf Periwinkle – Vinca minor
5. Leadwort - Ceratostigma plumbaginoides
6. Stonecrop - Sedum rupestre 'Angelina'
7. White Nancy - Lamium maculatum
Grasses
1. Mayer Z-52 Zoysia
2. Emerald Zoysia
3. Bermuda grass
4. Bermuda grass hybrids
5. Centipede
6. St. Augustine
3.6.5 Review Procedure: All development within the overlay district, except for the construction of a singlefamily
dwelling in a platted subdivision, shall be reviewed through the Site Plan Review procedure in Article 8 of
the Clarksville Land Subdivision and Development Code. If the property proposed for development is part of a
larger tract of land under the same ownership or is adjacent to land under the same ownership, the applicant
shall submit a conceptual master plan for the entire tract or adjacent properties along with required submittals
for the property under consideration.
Page 28 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
1) All development applications shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrative Official. The
Administrative Official shall have the authority to defer review and approval of any application to the
planning commission where concerns regarding the hours of operation of a business,
buffering/screening of adjacent property, or placement of required parking area may exist.
Any decision by the Administrative Official in reviewing a development application may be appealed by
anyone to the Planning Commission. This provision shall supersede the normal appeal procedure in
Article 11, Section 11.3.1.
2) In reviewing an application the planning commission may impose conditions on approval. These
conditions shall be restricted to:
A. Limiting the hours of operation of a business
B. Requiring additional buffering/screening to protect adjacent property.
C. Limiting placement of required parking areas.
3) The Administrative Official/Planning Commission shall not deny an application for development in
the Rogers Street Overlay District except on a basis of findings supported by at least one of the following
standards:
A. The development application is incomplete or contains/reveals violations of this Code or
other applicable regulations which the applicant has failed to supply or correct.
B. The development application creates pedestrian or vehicle safety hazards on-site and/or offsite.
C. The development application will create financial burdens to the City and its taxpayers.
D. The development application will result in off-site improvements costs to the City for which
there is no written agreement between the City and the developer on how those costs will be
handled.
E. There are not adequate public/private utilities to handle the demand created by the
proposed development.
F. The development application does not conform to the provisions of the Clarksville
Comprehensive Plan or Clarksville Master Street Plan.
Page 29 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 4. SPECIAL USE PERMITS
Section 4.1 Nature and Description: Because of their unique character and impact on adjacent properties, some
uses in this code are designated as special uses and require a permit. Depending on the nature of the use, such
uses may or may not be desirable and appropriate in all circumstances. Each application must be individually
considered to provide for conditions of approval and special restrictions. These conditions and restrictions are
used to protect the adjacent area where the special use will be located.
Section 4.2 Uses: A list of allowable special uses specific to each zoning district can be found in the permitted
use table or list for the zoning district (See Article 3). However, the uses below may be allowed in any zoning
district. All special use permits must be approved following the procedure in Section 4.3.
1) Cemetery or mausoleum.
2) Greenhouse or nursery.
3) Hospital or nursing home.
4) Landing field or strip for aircraft.
5) Radio tower or broadcasting station.
6) Removal of gravel, topsoil or similar natural material. (see Section 5.9)
7) Public utility structure, such as water treatment plant, power plant, etc.
Section 4.3 Procedure for Authorizing: The following is the review procedure for all special use permits:
1) An application shall be filed with the Administrative Official for review. The
application shall show the location and proposed use of the site, existing land uses
within 200 feet, and any other material or information the Planning Commission may
require.
2) The Administrative Official will set the date for a public hearing on the application.
The public hearing must be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
of Clarksville not fewer than 15 days before the public hearing. The Public Notice shall give
the location of the property and the proposed use desired for the permit. The
Administrative Official must also post a noticeable sign on the property advertising the
public hearing.
3) In considering the application, the Planning Commission shall pay attention to the
nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures. The application may be denied
or approved. If approved, conditions and restrictions on location, construction,
maintenance, and operations may be imposed as necessary to protect adjacent
properties and the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
4) A majority vote of the entire Planning Commission (at least five votes) shall be
required to recommend approval of a Special Use Permit application to the City Council.
Page 30 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
5) The City Council, by majority vote, may approve a recommended Special Use Permit
application, may approve with changes, or may deny the application. If denied, another
application cannot be re-filed for the property within 12 months from the date of the
City Council’s vote.
Amended – Ord. 2001-430
6) A Special Use Permit shall run with the land, meaning the permit is independent of
the property owner. However, any expansion of the original development allowed by
the Special Use Permit exceeding 100 square feet or an estimated construction cost of
$10,000 shall require a new Special Use Permit.
Section 4.4 Fees: Before the application is reviewed, an application fee must be paid to the City Clerk. The fee is
set by the City Council in its Schedule of Fees. This fee is non-refundable.
Page 31 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 5. SPECIAL PROVISIONS
The provisions of this Article shall apply to any permit or approval granted through this Code. The requirement
applies regardless of any pre-existing use, condition, or non-conformity.
Section 5.1 Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings must meet the following standards:
5.1.1 Location: An accessory building may be placed in the rear or side yard. It may not be placed in any public
easement and must be at least 5 feet from all property lines.
5.1.2 Carports: Metal Carports are considered permanent structures and must meet the provisions of the
Arkansas State Fire Code and other building codes adopted by the City of Clarksville. All metal Carports when
installed in front yards or side yards next to streets, shall be subject to the same setbacks as govern for the
particular zone as listed in Article 3, Section 3.1.3 and Article 3, Section 3.2.3. When installed in a rear yards
away from the street side they shall comply with accessory building setback requirements.
Section 5.2 Child Care Facilities: Child care facilities must meet the following standards.
5.2.1 Child Care Facilities not requiring city approval or permits: The following do not require city approval or
permits.
- Registered Child Care Family Home
- Relative Child Care Family Home
- In-home Child Care Provider
5.2.2 Child Care Family Homes: Child Care Family Homes in residential zoning districts must meet the following
standards:
1) It must be located in a single- family dwelling that is the permanent residence of the facility’s
operator. The facility’s operation must not change the character of the residence.
2) The dwelling shall have a minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet. All areas used for outdoor play must
be located in the side or rear yard, and be fenced with an opaque fence at least 6 feet tall.
3) The dwelling shall meet all City, County, and State Health Department requirements as to safety,
design, facilities, equipment, and other features. Its operation must not adversely affect other
properties and uses in the area.
4) An off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee of the center.
5) An off-street parking space shall be provided for use as a loading/unloading zone.
Accessory Buildings and Uses: An accessory building is a subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is
clearly incidental to, or customarily found in connection with, and (except as otherwise provided in this Code) located on the same
lot as, the use of the main building or principal use of the land. An accessory use is one which is clearly incidental to, or customarily
found in connection with, and on the same lot as, the main use of the premises. When "accessory" is used in the text, it shall have
the same meaning as accessory use.
Page 32 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
6) City Fire Chief inspection and approval is required.
7) Where permitted (see Section 3.1.2), a Special Use Permit is required.
5.2.3 Child Care Centers: Child Care Centers must meet the following requirements:
1) Child Care Centers are only permitted in commercial zoning districts (See Section 3.2.5).
2) City Fire Chief inspection and approval required.
Section 5.3 Fences and Buffer Protection of Residential Zones: An ornamental fence or wall less than 4 feet tall
is allowable in a front or side yard. Ornamental fences or walls less than 6 feet tall are allowable from the front
edge of the building to the rear lot line. Ornamental fences or walls in excess of these height limits shall require
approval of the Planning Commission.
Amended: Ord. 2014-732
Fences on corner lots are subject to visibility requirements (see Section 5.7).
1) Commercial or industrial properties adjacent to residential zoning districts must meet additional
buffering requirements. All interior sides and/or the rear of a C-2, C-3, I-1, or I-2 lot adjacent to a
residential zoning district shall be fenced with an opaque ornamental fence, wall, or dense evergreen
hedge between 5 and 7 feet tall at the time of planting, except as prohibited by visibility requirements in
Section 5.7. The fence, wall, or hedge shall be kept in good condition.
2) Further buffer protection as appropriate for these zones shall be provided by increased setback
requirements at issuance of building permits.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING
CURB AND STREET
PROPERTY LINE
25' REQUIRED FRONT
YARD SETBACK
BUILDING LINE
RESTRICTED TO 4' HEIGHT
FENCE MAY
BE 6' FROM
HERE TO REAR
Fence: A man-made barrier constructed to provide privacy or visual separation between one ownership and another.
Page 33 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
3) The buffer protection requirement may be waived by the Administrative Official if the adjoining
residential property owner or owners object to the buffer. The objection must be submitted in a letter
to the Administrative Official. The letter must be signed by all owners of all the properties adjacent to
the buffer.
Section 5.4 Flammable Liquids and Gases: The storage of flammable liquids and gases shall comply with the
State of Arkansas Fire Prevention Code.
Section 5.5 Height Requirements: Chimneys, cooling or water towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers,
monuments, stacks, storage towers, tanks, spires, church steeples, radio towers or necessary mechanical
apparatus may exceed the zoning district’s allowed building height as long as the construction and building
height do not violate any other City ordinance.
When permitted in a district; public and semi-public buildings, hospitals, institutions, churches, and schools may
be built taller than the zoning district’s allowed building height. However, the required yard setbacks shall
increase by one foot for each foot the building exceeds the zoning district’s allowed building height.
Section 5.6 Home Occupations: When permitted, home occupations must meet the following standards:
1) No commercial vehicles are allowed to be used or parked at the residence.
2) No more than two rooms normally used as living space may be used for the home occupation.
3) The use of accessory buildings, yard space, or activity outside the main building not normally
associated with residential use is not allowed for the home occupation.
4) The display of goods or services visible outside the structure is not allowed.
5) The occupation can only be operated by the occupant family of the residence.
6) One sign, not exceeding two square feet in area is permitted (See Article 7).
Home Occupation: Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main
or accessory building.
Page 34 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 5.7 Visibility at Intersections and Driveway Entrances: Visibility at intersections shall comply with the
graphic below. The same shall apply to driveway entrances except the required sight triangle distance shall be
15 feet as measured from the intersection of the driveway curb edge with the street right-of-way line.
Section 5.8 Vehicular Storage and Parking in a Residential Zone:
1) Storage and parking of motor homes, trailers (camping, hauling, travel, or other type) at any dwelling
or within any residential zone shall be limited to one week, unless the trailer or motor home is located
behind the front yard building line.
2) The occupancy of Camping or Travel Trailers or Motor Homes is not allowed, either temporarily or
permanently within the incorporated limits of the City of Clarksville unless within an approved
Recreation Vehicle or Travel Trailer Park. (see Section 5.12)
3) Commercial Vehicles less than one and one-half tons may be parked in Residential Zones. One
Commercial Vehicle less than one and one-half tons is allowed per Family living at the dwelling.
4) Commercial Vehicles (previously or currently used commercially) over one and one-half tons are not
allowed in a Residential Zone.
Section 5.9 Mining, Excavation, And Material Storage:
Mining, excavation, and the storage of mined or excavated materials in any zoning district shall require a Special
Use Permit (see Article 4). However, the following activities do not require a Special Use Permit:
1) The grading of land for a permitted use, if no bank more than 10 feet high is left standing and
exposed.
8’
2’
10’
Clear between
2’ & 10’
Restricted
Area
25’
25’
Curb
Varies
Right-of-way
property line
Travel Trailer: The travel trailer unit is a temporary single-family dwelling unit built on a chassis not exceeding 8 feet wide and 32
feet long designed for short-term occupancy and frequent travel, requiring park services for utility and sanitary facilities. Unit may
be self-propelled or towed behind a vehicle without a special permit required.
Mining, Excavation, and Material Storage: The extraction, removal, or storage of clay, gravel, or sand; quarrying of rock or stone;
earth moving and excavation; depositing of construction material, clay, earth, gravel, minerals, rocks, sand, or stone on the ground.
Page 35 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
2) Grading in a subdivision approved by the City.
3) An extractive or mining operation existing and operating when this code was passed.
Section 5.10 Construction within Floodplain Area: The following regulates flood hazard areas. The boundaries
of the floodway or floodplain area shall be determined from the official Flood Hazard Boundary Map or the
official Flood Insurance Rate Map. No building or structure of any kind is allowed within a designated floodway.
Any structure within a 100-year floodplain area shall comply with the following standards:
1) The structure’s lowest floor elevation, including basements, shall be at least 2 feet above the Base
Flood Elevation.
2) Nonresidential structures together with any associated utility and sanitary facilities shall be flood
proofed up to the level of the 100-year flood in compliance with the Arkansas State Fire Prevention
Code and other adopted building codes in Clarksville.
To obtain a building permit within a designated floodplain area, the applicant must provide adequate
engineering data with the permit application to allow the Administrative Official to determine if the
requirements of this Section can be met.
Section 5.11 Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer Parks: Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer Parks for shortterm
temporary occupants are only allowed within commercial districts as permitted. (see Section 3.2.5) RV or
Travel Trailer Park sites should be well-drained and properly graded in order to insure rapid drainage and
prevent the pooling of water. There is no maximum density requirement for Travel Trailer Parks. However, all
travel trailers shall be separated from each other by at least 10 feet. The separation requirements include any
accessory or supporting structures like awnings or carports.
Plans for a Recreation Vehicle or Travel Trailer Park shall be submitted to the Administrative Official for approval
and issuance of a building permit. The plans submitted shall include at least the following:
1) Adequate space dimensions to accommodate the different sizes of expected vehicles.
2) Street and access roads located within the travel trailer park.
3) Service building plans to house restrooms, lavatories, showers, and other sanitary facilities as
required by State Department of Health for the number of spaces available in the park.
4) Water and sewer services for each trailer space.
5) Electrical master fuse or breaker panel, and receptacles in compliance with the electrical code used
by the City.
6) Trash containers placed for every two trailer parking spaces.
7) Letter of approval from State Department of Health.
Travel Trailer Park/ Recreational Vehicle Park: A unified development under private ownership designed primarily for transient
service, on which travel trailers, pick-up coaches, and self-propelled motorized vehicles are parked or situated for short-term
occupancy. The owner shall provide park services for utility and sanitary facilities.
Page 36 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
The Administrative Official will review the plans and application, and issue a building permit if the plans and
application meet the required standards and all applicable City ordinances.
Section 5.12 Manufactured Home Subdivision: Where permitted in residential zoning districts, development of
Manufactured Homes Subdivisions will be governed by the Clarksville Land Subdivision and Development Code.
All manufactured homes will be subject to the requirements of Section 5.15.
Section 5.13 Manufactured Home Parks: Where permitted, any new or existing Manufactured Home Park that
is expanded must the standards and requirements of this Section.
5.13.1 Development Standards: Manufactured Home Parks are required to meet the terms of the following
guidelines:
1) Be located on a well-drained site that is graded to insure rapid drainage and prevent pooling of
water.
2) Be located on at least 2 acres of land.
3) Meet the setback and area requirements for Manufactured Homes Parks listed in Section 3.1.4.
4) Be designed to accommodate at least five manufactured homes.
5) Manufactured homes must be placed to provide at a least 20 foot clearance between manufactured
homes.
6) All manufactured home spaces must directly access a hard-surfaced driveway that is at least 20 feet
in width. The driveway must have unobstructed access to a public street.
7) Internal streets and drives shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all manufactured home
spaces. These street and drives shall be privately owned, built, and maintained. They shall be at least 20
feet wide and be built with bituminous asphalt or concrete.
8) Provide two off-street parking spaces, which are 9 feet wide and 20 feet long, for each manufactured
home space.
9) Set aside open space as required by the Arkansas Health Department.
10) Manufactured homes shall be set up and anchored according to the manufacturer’s instructions as
recognized by the Arkansas Manufactured Home Commission.
5.13.2 Approval Procedure: All licenses and permits as required by the City of Clarksville in this Code or other
applicable Ordinances shall be fully complied with before the park is open to occupants.
1) The owner or developer shall submit a Letter of Intent and the preliminary plans for development of
the Manufactured Home Park to the Planning Commission for review and approval. This is required prior
to preparation of a final plat to insure conformity with plans and regulations.
Page 37 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
2) The preliminary plans submitted shall include an approval by the Clarksville Light and Water
Company, the natural gas utility, and any other utilities or City governmental departments that may
become involved in the final development of the site.
3) The Manufactured Home Park owner and developer shall submit evidence indicating that he is
responsible for the complete cost of the development including site preparation, Manufactured Home
spaces, installation of all utilities, driveways, parking areas, park facilities and recreational facilities.
4) After review of the submitted Letter of Intent, preliminary plans, and other information, the Planning
Commission may approve these plans if it finds that all appropriate regulations have been followed.
5) After approval by the Planning Commission, the developer shall prepare a final plat of the proposed
Manufactured Home Park. This plat shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer in
accordance with the Land Subdivision and Development Code of the City of Clarksville. A building permit
for construction of the park cannot be issued until a final plat has been approved for the Manufactured
Home Park site.
Section 5.14 Manufactured Homes: Where permitted, manufactured homes meet all of the following
requirements and limitations:
1) The Manufactured Home must have all necessary building and occupancy permits and other
certifications required by the City for a dwelling unit.
2) The front door of the home must be oriented to the front of the lot. No variances or exceptions to
the required yard setbacks are allowed.
3) The home shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions as recognized by the
Arkansas Manufactured Home Commission, including site preparation, pier foundations-footings, pier
support columns, and anchoring. Installation shall include building a perimeter foundation enclosure.
The enclosure shall be of materials approved by the City of Clarksville and installed in conformance with
the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
4) The home shall be covered with an exterior material customarily used on site-built residential
dwellings.
5) The home shall have a pitched roof that is covered with materials customarily used on site-built
residential dwellings, such as fiberglass, shake, asphalt or tile.
6) The home must only be used as a single-family dwelling.
7) Manufactured Homes in an R-2 (AH) zone shall be multi-sectional and shall have all elements of
transportation, (hitches, wheels, axles,) removed.
Manufactured Home: A dwelling unit constructed in a factory in accordance with the Federal Standards and meeting the definitions
set forth in the Federal Standards and under Arkansas Code Annotated § 20-25-102.
Federal Standards: The Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards promulgated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development under the authority of 42 U.S.C. 5401 et. seq., as it existed on January 1, 1976.
Page 38 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 5.15 Mobile Homes: Mobile homes are prohibited in the City of Clarksville. Any existing mobile home
shall only be replaced by a manufactured home.
Section 5.16 Free-standing vending machines: Free-standing vending machines shall be the main building on a
lot and shall provide adequate off-street access and parking so that traffic on a public street is not blocked or
impeded.
Section 5.17 Driveways: The City does hereby adopt the Arkansas State Highway Department’s standards,
except as set forth in Sections1- 3, below, as related to commercial and residential driveway widths, setback
requirements from corners, and distance requirements between ingress and egress drives. Any such
construction within the City shall meet or exceed the requirements set forth by said state standards.
1) Driveways used for residential ingress and egress may have a width equal to 36% of the street-side
lot width used for the ingress but shall not exceed 36 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns. In the case
of multiple frontage lots, the side used for the ingress shall be used as the basis for the calculation.
Driveways used for commercial/industrial ingress and egress shall not exceed 40 feet in width, exclusive
of curb returns.
2) On any new driveway, the construction shall include the removal of any curbs so that the driveway
itself will be street level. Surface requirements as set out in Article VI, Section 3 shall apply.
3) Before construction of any new driveway, or relocation, or alterations in dimensions of any existing
driveway connecting to a city street, the owner must apply for a driveway permit by completing
application and paying the designated fee, in the office of the City Clerk. The City reserves the right to
have access plans to be reviewed by the Planning Commission in cases where traffic flow and safety may
be a concern.
Section 5.18 Sidewalks: Sidewalk requirements shall be addressed in all building permits. Construction
standards shall be adopted by the City. Following are minimum requirements; the City may require additional
sidewalks and wider sidewalks near commercial areas, schools and other places of public assembly.
1) Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets in the Central Business District.
2) Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of collector streets and major arterials and minor arterials
when new sidewalk will be constructed within 300 feet of existing sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required
on both sides of collector streets and major arterials and minor arterials when the entire area is a new
development or part of a new commercial subdivision.
3) Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all residential streets, abutting property lines. The
sidewalks will be constructed in conjunction with the building and driveway improvements on each lot.
Mobile Home: A dwelling unit constructed in a factory before the enactment of the Federal Standards.
Federal Standards: The Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards promulgated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development under the authority of 42 U.S.C. 5401 et. seq., as it existed on January 1, 1976.
Free-Standing Vending Machine: A coin operated machine that dispenses merchandise intended as a stand-alone business to be
accessed by automobile.
Page 39 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
4) Sidewalks shall be in compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act.
5) Questions or appeals concerning the construction of sidewalks must be addressed prior to the
approval of a site plan and the issuance of a building permit.
Section 5.19 Live/Work Units: In addition to any Special Use Permit requirements (see Article 4), Live/Work
Units shall also be subject to the following requirements and standards:
1) Residential use of the structure and property shall be clearly secondary or accessory to the
commercial use of the structure.
2) The residents of the Live/Work Unit shall be limited to one family unit that includes the owner or
employee of the commercial use within the structure.
3) The commercial use of the property must be otherwise allowed in the zoning district, but shall not
include sexually oriented businesses or warehousing.
4) The front façade of the structure must be maintained to appear commercial in nature.
5) The commercial portion of the structure must be contained at least in part on the first floor of the
structure and be accessed from the front façade of the building facing the street.
6) The commercial and residential portions of the building shall be physically separated, with those
portions of the structure accessible to the public occupied by commercial space.
7) In C-1 zones, the property shall be required to provide two off-street parking spaces for the structure.
This parking requirement can also be met through an offsite parking agreement with a different
property within 300 feet. In all other districts, off-street parking shall be provided to meet the
requirements of the commercial use of the property.
8) The residential portions of the structure must have separate kitchen and sanitary facilities.
9) All portions of the structure must the requirements of the Arkansas State Fire Prevention Code.
Section 5.20 Accessory Dwelling Units: In addition to any Special Use Permit requirements (see Article 4),
Accessory Dwelling Units shall also be subject to the following requirements and standards:
Amended: Ord. 2014-732
1) Owner Occupancy: The property owner must permanently occupy either the Principal Building or the
Accessory Dwelling Unit.
Live/Work Unit: A building used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the building is
secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work.
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A smaller, secondary site-built dwelling unit on the same lot as an existing single-family dwelling. The unit
includes its own independent living facilities with provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, designed for residential
occupancy independent of the primary dwelling unit.
Page 40 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
2) Maximum Occupancy: Occupancy of the Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be limited to one family, with
only one room provided for sleeping.
3) Number Allowed: Only one Accessory Dwelling Unit per lot shall be allowable.
4) Size Limits: The Accessory Dwelling Unit must be less than 40% of the size of Principal Building or 800
square feet in gross floor area, whichever is less. It must also be at least 400 square feet in gross floor
area.
5) Setbacks: The unit shall meet all the required setbacks for the Principal Building of the zone in which it
is located. The structure must be located at least 10 feet away from the Principal Building, and no more
than 30 feet from the Principal Building.
6) Location and Orientation: The unit must be placed within the rear yard of the lot, behind the Principal
Building. The front door of the unit must be oriented towards the principal building.
7) Design: The façade materials of the unit must match or complement the façade materials of the
Principal Building.
8) Parking: One additional off-street parking space shall be provided adjacent and abutting to the
existing required parking area for the Principal Building.
9) Utilities: The Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be provided separately metered water and electric utilities
that are directly connected to the public water and electric systems.
10) After the Accessory Dwelling Unit is approved and before a building permit is obtained, the property
owner shall file a deed restriction with the Johnson County Clerk. The deed restriction shall contain a
reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the current property owner and state
the following:
A. The Accessory Dwelling Unit shall not be sold separately from the principal building.
B. The Accessory Dwelling Unit is restricted to the size approved by the Planning Commission.
C. The property owner shall permanently reside on the property.
D. All of these restrictions are binding upon all successive owners of the property, and shall run
with the property.
Page 41 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 6. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
The provisions of this Article shall apply to any permit or approval granted through this Code. The requirement
applies regardless of any pre-existing use, condition, or non-conformity.
Section 6.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements: Off-street parking must meet the following standards.
6.1.1 Standards: These parking standards apply in all zoning districts except the C-1, Central Business District.
Whenever a building or development is built, made larger, or increased in capacity; the standards below must
be met. Parking, back out spaces, and fire truck access must also meet all requirements of Arkansas State Fire
Prevention Code. Spaces shall be constructed on the property owner’s property and out of the street right-ofway
or any easements.
Use
Standards
Required Spaces
Single-Family Dwelling 2 spaces (a)
Two-Family Dwelling 4 spaces (a)
Multi-Family Dwellings (3 or more
units)
1.5 per dwelling unit.
Medical/Dental Clinics or Offices 5 spaces per doctor + 2 spaces for each 3 employees.
Hospitals
1 space per bed + 1 space per 2 employees (based on maximum
employment of largest shift.
Nursing Homes
1 space for each 6 patients + 1 space for each staff/visiting doctor +
1 space for each 4 employees including nurses.
Community Center/Theater/Auditorium 1 space for each 3 seats, based on maximum seating capacity.
Convention
Hall/Lodge/Club/Library/Museum/Place
of Amusement or Recreation
1 space for each 50 square feet of floor area used for assembly or
recreation in the building.
Office Building
1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area in the building,
exclusive of the area used for storage, utilities, and building service
area.
Restaurants and Eating Places
1 space for each 4 seats of seating capacity + 1 space for each 2
employees working at a given shift.
Commercial Establishments (Not
otherwise covered)
1 space for each 150 square feet of floor space in the building used
for retail trade, or used by the public, whichever is greater.
Industrial Establishments (Not
otherwise covered)
Adequate area to park all employees’ and customers’ vehicles at all
times + adequate space for loading, unloading, and storing all
vehicles used in connection with the establishment.
Church Sanctuary/Place of Worship 1 space for each 3 seats, based on maximum seating capacity. (c)
All Others (Not otherwise covered)
Determined by the Planning Commission (Determined standard
shall apply to the future establishments of the same use)
a. Required spaces shall be constructed and arranged to allow each space to have direct access to the
street.
b. Churches may establish joint parking facilities with public institutions that have different times of
primary operation. The joint parking facility may satisfy up 50 percent of the church’s parking
requirements and must be located within 400 feet of the church.
Page 42 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
6.1.2 Application of Standards: The following requirements must be met when applying the parking standards:
1) Joint parking facilities may be allowed for mixed uses or adjacent structures. However, the total
parking spaces of the joint facility must be the same as the total number required for each separate use
or building, except as allowed by Section 6.1.1, paragraph (b).
2) If the calculated number of required parking spaces results in a fraction more than one-half (1/2), the
fraction will be counted as one (1) parking space.
3) These standards will apply any time a use is changed, a new structure is constructed, or an existing
structure is expanded.
4) Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, no parking space in any zoning district may be
designed to require a vehicle to back out into a public street.
6.1.3 Size: The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having
dimensions of not less than 9 foot by 20 foot plus adequate area for ingress and egress.
Section 6.2 Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements: These requirements apply to off-street loading
and unloading facilities:
1) Retail uses shall provide one (1) off-street loading and unloading space for buildings with a gross floor
area of up to 10,000 square feet, plus one (1) space for each additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
2) Manufacturing, repair, wholesale, and similar uses shall provide one (1) off-street loading and
unloading space for buildings with floor area of up to 10,000 square feet, plus one (1) space for each
additional 40,000 square feet of floor area.
3) Loading and unloading spaces used by tractor-trailers must be at least 12 feet wide and 50 feet long
with a height clearance of 14 feet. The spaces must be designed to allow the tractor-trailer adequate
maneuvering areas as well as access to the street or alley.
4) No parking space may be substituted for a loading space, and no loading space may be substituted for
a parking space.
Section 6.3 Surface Requirements: The following apply to driveway and required off-street parking, loading, and
unloading areas:
6.3.1 Commercial Driveways: All areas used for parking, drives, sales, loading and unloading of any type, and for
use by the general public or employees shall meet or exceed the following: paved with a two inch asphalt
surface over a six inch compacted sub-base, or a six inch reinforced concrete surface over a compacted subbase.
Areas used for storage, display, and maneuvering may be graveled.
Commercial Driveways, used only by non-commercial vehicles, to access storage buildings by company
personnel, and not used by the public in any way, shall meet commercial driveway turnout requirements listed
below:
Page 43 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Commercial Driveway Turnouts: The portion of the drive between the edge of the street and the street right of
way line shall be constructed with a minimum of 6 inch reinforced concrete on a stable compacted sub-base.
6.3.2 Residential Driveways: Residential driveways shall meet or exceed the following: paved with a two inch
asphalt surface over a six inch compacted base course, or a four inch reinforced concrete surface over a stable
compacted sub-base. The hard surface requirements of this section shall not apply to residential driveway
sections in excess of 100 feet.
Residential Driveway Turnouts: The portion of the driveway between the edge of the street and the street right
of way line shall be constructed with a minimum of four inch reinforced concrete on stable compacted sub-base.
This requirement shall not apply to lengths in excess of the first 20 feet per drive.
6.3.3 Maintenance: All areas not surfaced as above described shall be landscaped and maintained in such a
manner as to prevent dust and soil run off from these areas.
Page 44 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 7. SIGNS
Amended: Ord. 2016-762
Section 7.1 Purpose: The purpose of this article is to:
1) Promote the creation of an attractive visual environment that promotes a healthy economy.
2) Protect and enhance the physical appearance of the community in a lawful manner.
3) Foster public safety and welfare of drivers and pedestrians along public and private streets within
the community by assuring that all signs are constructed and displayed in a safe manner by avoiding
unsafe and harmful visual clutter.
4) Have administrative review procedures that allow consistent enforcement, minimize discretion in
review, and minimize the time required to review applications.
This article is in addition to regulations established under U.S. Code by the Federal Highway Administration and
the Arkansas State Highway and Transportation Department under Regulations for Control of Outdoor
Advertising on Arkansas Highways.
Section 7.2 Rules of Interpretation: The following rules apply to all signage:
1) When determining setback, the leading edge of the sign nearest the curb or edge of street shall be
the point from which the setback is determined. All setbacks shall be measured from the property
line or the projected edge of the Master Street Plan right-of-way, whichever is greater.
2) When determining maximum signage area of a sign, the total area of one side of the sign shall be
used, except for signs having more than two sign faces. The total area of all sign faces shall be used
for such signs.
3) When determining maximum signage area where signage is made from individual letters or figures
(sometimes referred to as channel letters), the area shall be calculated by measuring a continuous
boundary around the entirety of the signage elements.
4) Window signs shall count toward the maximum sign surface area allowed for wall signs.
Section 7.3 Permit Requirement: No sign shall be erected, transferred, rebuilt, or structurally altered within the
city unless a permit has been issued by the Administrative Official. Addition or modification to the illumination
of any existing sign which changes the type or intensity of the lighting shall require a new sign permit. Refacing a
sign or a change in message of a permitted sign shall not require a permit unless it involves modification to the
electrical or structural components of the signs. A separate permit shall be required for each sign. Electrified
signs shall also require an electrical permit.
1) Applications: Application for a sign permit shall be made on forms provided by the Administrative
Official. Requirements shall include but are not limited to location by street address, names and
addresses of owner(s) and sign contractors (s), scale drawing of the sign, scale drawing showing
exact location of the sign, and lighting and construction design.
Page 45 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
2) Application Approval and Permit Issuance: The Administrative Official will be charged with review of
all sign permit applications based upon the provisions of this code and other applicable regulations.
The Administrative Official shall have 20 business days from receipt of the completed application to
approve or deny the sign permit application. If the Administrative Official fails to render a decision
on a completed sign permit application that appears to meet the provisions of this code and other
applicable regulations within 20 business days, the applicant shall be issued a permit for the sign
immediately. A written explanation of denial shall be provided for denied permit applications upon
request of the applicant. All decisions rendered by the Administrative Official concerning sign permit
applications can be appealed to the Board of Adjustment by the applicant.
3) Sign Erection Deadline: Permit for any sign not erected within six (6) months of date of issuance
shall be void.
4) Inspection: The person or contractor responsible for completion of the sign erection shall notify the
Administrative Official upon completion of work. A final inspection shall be required, including
electrical inspection, if needed, to confirm compliance with the terms of the sign permit.
5) Fees: Fees shall be submitted upon approval of the application, in the amount set by the schedule of
fees set by the City Council. If a penalty has been assessed for non-compliance, both the penalty and
the normal permit fee must be paid before a permit shall be issued.
Section 7.4 Permit Exemptions: The following signs are exempted from the sign permit requirements, but must
comply with all other requirements of this title:
1) Temporary Signs
2) Governmental and official public signs, including wayfinding signs.
3) Window displays and signs affixed to windows.
Section 7.5 Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited within city limits:
1) Signs imitating warning signals or which constitute a traffic hazard.
2) Billboards.
3) Abandoned signs.
4) Signs within a public right-of-way, excluding wayfinding signs.
5) Signs painted on or attached to trees, rocks, or other natural formations, fence posts, street signs, or
utility poles.
6) Off-premise signs. (See Section 7.7.6)
7) Signs affixed or painted on a vehicle or trailer that is parked adjacent to a public right-of-way for
more than 5 days.
Page 46 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
8) Rotating signs.
9) Signs containing flashing or intermittent illumination unless part of a permitted Electronic Message
Sign.
10) Roof signs.
Section 7.6 Exemptions: The following are exempted from the provisions of Article 7:
1) Signs not visible or which are clearly not intended to be visible from the public right-of-way.
2) Flags of any nations, government, or non-commercial organization. Flags must be flown in
accordance with the federal flag code established by the United States Congress. Any flag not
meeting the federal flag code shall be considered a sign and shall not be exempted from these
regulations.
3) Signs which are mandated to be displayed by law or action of a governmental entity.
4) Any display or construction not defined as a sign.
5) Art displays that do not contain a commercial message.
6) Signs for sexually oriented businesses. (Regulated by separate ordinance)
Section 7.7 Standards: The following apply to all signs:
7.7.1 Prevention of Access: No sign shall be erected which prevents free ingress and egress from any driveway ,
parking lot, or structure door, window, or fire escape. No sign of any kind will be attached to any part of a fire
escape or building standpipe.
7.7.2 Obstruction of Vision: In addition to the provisions of Section 5.7, no sign shall be placed in manner that
would allow it to obstruct the vision of drivers and pedestrians at driveway entrances
7.7.3 Interference with Utilities: No sign shall be located:
1) Within the designated safety zone of overhead electrical conductors as directed by the utility owner.
2) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
3) Upon any easement.
7.7.4 Illumination adjacent to Residential Areas: If facing or adjoining a residential lot line or district, except RO,
no freestanding sign or wall sign on a side or rear façade shall be internally illuminated unless shielded in a
manner to minimize the trespass of light into the residential lot or district. This provision shall apply to signs
within R-O zones facing or adjacent to other residential lots or districts.
7.7.5 Construction Standards: All signs and sign structures permitted herein shall conform to the applicable
building and electrical codes adopted by the City of Clarksville. All signs, except Temporary Signs, shall be
Page 47 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
constructed of materials that are durable and permanent in nature, and permanently affixed through secure
anchoring to the ground or a building. Temporary signs shall be securely anchored to the ground or a building in
a non-permanent fashion.
7.7.6 Content of Signs: These regulations are not intended to regulate the message or content of noncommercial
signs or temporary signs, meaning only signs with a commercial message are subject to the offpremise
signage prohibition. A sign with a non-commercial message may substitute a sign with a commercial
message, provided it meets all requirements of this code.
Section 7.8 Temporary Signs: Temporary signs shall not be electrified or illuminated.
7.8.1 Temporary Signs – Type 1: Temporary sign allowed while a building or property is under construction or
renovation.
1) Allowable Zones: All zones
2) Maxiumum Size: 16 square feet in residential zones, 50 square feet in all other zones
3) Maximum Height: 10 feet
4) Minimum Setback: 10 feet
5) Number Allowed: 1 sign per lot
7.8.2 Temporary Signs – Type 2: Temporary sign allowed while a property or building is for sale, lease, or rent.
1) Allowable Zones: All zones
2) Maxiumum Size: 6 square feet in residential zones, 32 square feet in all other zones
3) Maximum Height: 10 feet
4) Minimum Setback: 10 feet
5) Number Allowed: 1 sign per lot
7.8.3 Temporary Signs – Type 3: Temporary Signs.
1) Allowable Zones: All zones
2) Maxiumum Size: 6 square feet in residential zones, 32 square feet in all other zones
3) Maximum Height: 10 feet
4) Minimum Setback: 10 feet
5) Number Allowed: 1 sign per lot
Page 48 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
6) Time: Signs may be displayed a maximum of 30 consecutive days within a 90 day period. The 90 day
period shall be counted to begin from the first day a temporary sign is displayed. The sign shall be
allowed to be displayed only within the first 30 consecutive days of the 90 day period.
7) Other Requirements: To be valid and allowed such signs shall require a sticker from the
Administrative Official to be affixed to the sign indicating the starting and expiration date for when
the sign will be displayed. The starting date shall not be more than 15 days after the date which the
sticker is requested from the Administrative Official.
8) Election Period: During a period of 120 days prior to and 7 days after any public election authorized
by the Johnson County Election Commission, items 5, 6, 7 of this subsection shall not apply to
temporary signs.
7.8.4 Temporary Signs – Type 4: Sandwich Board Signs.
1) Allowable Zones: C-1
2) Maxiumum Size: 12 square feet
3) Maximum Height: 4 feet
4) Number Allowed: 1 sign per building
5) Placement: The sign shall be placed on private property, or may be placed on a public or private
sidewalk. The sign shall be placed such that sidewalk remains ADA compliant with at least five (5)
feet of total sidewalk width clear of any obstructions.
6) Time: Signs may be displayed only from 7 a.m. in the morning to 10 p.m. in the evening each day.
Section 7.9 Sign Standards by Type:
7.9.1 Electronic Message Signs:
1) Sign Type and Zoning: Electronic message signs shall only be allowed on freestanding signs in C-2
and C-3 zones.
2) Size: The maximum sign surface area of an electronic message sign shall not exceed 32 square feet.
Such sign may be considered part of a larger freestanding sign and count against the maximum
allowable surface area of the freestanding sign.
3) Dimming and Brightness: Signs shall be equipped with dimming technology that automatically
adjusts the display brightness based on ambient light conditions. The sign shall not exceed 0.3 foot
candles of illumination above ambient light level.
4) Flashing Illumination and Movement: The illusion of movement by means of a preprogrammed
(repetitious or sequential) switching action in which illuminated elements of the sign are turned off
or on to visually simulate the impression of motion characteristic of flashing, chasing, running,
Page 49 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
blinking, oscillating, twinkling, scintillating, or expanding and contracting light patterns, is
prohibited.
5) Rate of Change: No electronic message sign shall change copy more frequently than once every 8
seconds.
7.9.2 Wayfinding Signs: Wayfinding signs shall be allowed on public property or within a public right-of-way
under the following conditions:
1) Entity: The sign shall direct the reader to the location of a public or educational institution, a facility
operated by a non-profit entity that is intended to attract out-of-town patrons, a facility relating to
the public safety and welfare or public health, a scenic or historic structure, or trails and parks.
2) Approval and Installation: Wayfinding signs must be expressly approved by the Administrative
Official and any additional authority having jurisdiction. The signs must be fabricated, installed, and
maintained by the City or its agent.
3) Traffic Hazard: The signs shall not be allowed to be installed in a location or manner that would
constitute a hazard to vehicles or pedestrians.
4) Maximum Number: The maximum number of signs allowed each entity shall be 7. This limitation
shall not apply to scenic or historic structures and trails or parks.
7.9.3 Wall Signs and Roof Signs:
1) Placement: A wall sign shall not project above the façade on which it is mounted. Wall signs shall
not be allowed on roofs. A mansard roof shall be considered a façade under the terms of this Article.
Signs affixed to roofs are prohibited.
Section 7.10 Signs Allowed by Zoning District:
7.10.1 Central Business District (C-1):
1) Wall Signs:
A. Maximum Size and Number: The maximum number of wall signs shall be limited by the total
sign surface area permitted for wall signs. The total sign surface area for all wall signs shall not
exceed 2 square feet for each linear foot of building façade or 100 square feet, whichever is less.
These requirements shall apply independently to each building façade. Signs upon awnings shall
be considered wall signs. No wall signs shall be allowed to project above the roof line of the
building façade.
2) Projecting Signs:
A. Maximum Size: 10 square feet for signs at least 80 inches above the surface grade of the
sidewalk; 40 square feet for signs at least 12 feet above the surface grade of the sidewalk.
B. Number: 1 per building façade
Page 50 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
C. Minimum Height: 80 inches above the surface grade of the sidewalk
D. Distance from Street: All elements of the sign including any support structures must be at
least 2 feet from back of the curb of the adjacent street.
3) Temporary Signs: See Section 7.8
7.10.2 Neighborhood Commercial and Quiet Business (C-2):
1) Wall Signs:
A. Maximum Size and Number: The maximum number of wall signs shall be limited by the total
sign surface area permitted for wall signs. The total sign surface area for all wall signs shall not
exceed 10% of the total area of the wall on which the sign is placed. These requirements shall
apply independently to each building façade. In the case of multi-tenant structure, each tenant
space shall be considered a separate building façade.
2) Projecting Signs:
A. Maximum Size: 10 square feet
B. Number: 1 per building façade in a single tenant structure or 1 per tenant space in a multitenant
structure
C. Minimum Height: 8 feet above the surface grade of the sidewalk
3) Freestanding Signs:
A. Maximum Sign Surface Area: The maximum size for a free-standing sign for a single tenant
structure shall be 100 square feet. The sign surface are shall not exceed one square foot for
every four linear feet of public street frontage, counted from along the street where the sign
will be placed.
The maximum size for a free-standing sign for a multi-tenant structure shall be 200 square
feet. The sign surface are shall not exceed one square foot for every three linear feet of
public street frontage, counted from along the street where the sign will be placed.
B. Number: 1 per main building
C. Maximum Height: 20 feet above the surface grade of the street
D. Minimum Setback: 10 feet, 5 feet if ground-mounted and not exceeding 8 feet in height
E. Electronic Message Sign: Allowed, See Section 7.9
4) Temporary Signs: See Section 7.8
Page 51 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
7.10.3 Highway Commercial (C-3):
1) Wall Signs:
A. Maximum Size and Number: The maximum number of wall signs shall be limited by the total
sign surface area permitted for wall signs. The total sign surface area for all wall signs shall not
exceed 10% of the total area of the wall on which the sign is placed. These requirements shall
apply independently to each building façade. In the case of multi-tenant structure, each tenant
space shall be considered a separate building façade.
2) Projecting Signs:
A. Maximum Size: 10 square feet
B. Number: 1 per building façade in a single tenant structure or 1 per tenant space in a multitenant
structure
C. Minimum Height: 8 feet above the surface grade of the sidewalk
3) Freestanding Signs:
A. Maximum Sign Surface Area: The maximum size for a free-standing sign for a single tenant
structure shall be 150 square feet. The sign surface are shall not exceed one square foot for
every four linear feet of public street frontage, counted from along the street where the sign
will be placed.
The maximum size for a free-standing sign for a multi-tenant structure shall be 250 square
feet. The sign surface are shall not exceed one square foot for every three linear feet of
public street frontage, counted from along the street where the sign will be placed.
B. Number: 1 per main building
C. Maximum Height: 35 feet above the surface grade of the street, an additional 15 feet in
height is permitted if the sign is to be located within 150 feet of the right-of-way of an
Interstate Highway.
D. Minimum Setback: 10 feet, 5 feet if ground-mounted and not exceeding 8 feet in height
E. Electronic Message Sign: Allowed, See Section 7.9
4) Temporary Signs: See Section 7.8
5) Commercial Cul-de-sac: A commercial subdivision forming a cul-de-sac for individual commercial lots
may have a freestanding sign located at the entrance to the cul-de-sac. Such sign shall not exceed 35
feet in height above street grade, and shall be located in such a manner not to restrict the view of
traffic entering or exiting the subdivision.
Page 52 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
7.10.4 Industrial Zones (I-1 & I-2):
1) Wall Signs:
A. Maximum Size and Number: The maximum number of wall signs shall be limited by the total
sign surface area permitted for wall signs. The total sign surface area for all wall signs shall not
exceed 10% of the total area of the wall on which the sign is placed. These requirements shall
apply independently to each building façade. In the case of multi-tenant structure, each tenant
space shall be considered a separate building façade.
2) Projecting Signs:
A. Maximum Size: 10 square feet
B. Number: 1 per building façade in a single tenant structure or 1 per tenant space in a multitenant
structure
C. Minimum Height: 8 feet above the surface grade of the sidewalk
3) Freestanding Signs:
A. Maximum Sign Surface Area: The maximum size for a free-standing sign for a single tenant
structure shall be 150 square feet. The sign surface are shall not exceed one square foot for
every four linear feet of public street frontage, counted from along the street where the sign
will be placed.
The maximum size for a free-standing sign for a multi-tenant structure shall be 250 square
feet. The sign surface are shall not exceed one square foot for every three linear feet of
public street frontage, counted from along the street where the sign will be placed.
B. Number: 1 per main building
C. Maximum Height: 35 feet above the surface grade of the street, and additional 15 feet in
height is permitted if the sign is to be located within 150 feet of the right-of-way of an
Interstate Highway.
D. Minimum Setback: 10 feet, 5 feet if ground-mounted and not exceeding 8 feet in height
7.10.5 Residential and Agricultural Zones (R-1, R-2, R-2AH, R-3, R-4, R-O, A-1):
1) Residential Uses:
A. General Requirements: Internal or external illumination is prohibited.
B. Wall Signs:
1. Number: 2 on front façade
2. Maximum Sign Surface Area: 2 square feet per sign, 4 square feet total
C. Temporary Signs: See Section 7.8
Page 53 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
2) Non-Residential Uses:
A. General Requirements: Internal or external illumination is allowed. See Section 7.7.4
B. Wall Signs:
1. Number: 1 on front façade
2. Maximum Sign Surface Area: 32 square feet
C. Freestanding Signs:
1. Number: 1
2. Maximum Sign Surface Area: 32 square feet.
3. Maximum Height: 8 feet above the grade of the street or surface grade, whichever
is greater. Sign shall be ground-mounted.
4. Minimum Setback: 10 feet
D. Temporary Signs: See Section 7.8
7.10.6 Planned Unit Development (PUD): All signs in the PUD districts shall be submitted for review and
approval as part of the PUD approval process.
Section 7.11 Billboards: The following regulations apply to billboards in the City of Clarksville.
7.11.1 Placement: Placement of billboards is not allowed anywhere within the city limits of Clarksville.
7.11.2 Existing Billboards: Existing billboards lawfully permitted by the State or Federal Highway Agencies shall
be allowed to remain under the terms of the issuing agencies’ agreement and permit for such signs. If damaged
to an extent beyond one-half (1/2) of its current replacement cost, it shall not be replaced.
Section 7.12 Administration and Enforcement
7.12.1 Responsibility and Maintenance: Any person having express or implied authority over the size,
appearance, and/or location of a sign, together with the landowner or lessor upon which the sign is sited, shall
be responsible for causing the sign to be in full compliance with this ordinance and shall be jointly and severally
liable for any violations of this ordinance. All sign(s)/sign structure and premises surrounding the same shall be
maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and free and clear of all rubbish and weeds. All sign components,
including supports, braces, anchors, etc., shall be kept in compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in
conformance with the requirements of this Code. All components should be free from deterioration, termite
infestation, rot, rust or loosening. Repair and replacement of any faded, peeled, cracked or otherwise damaged
or broken parts of a sign is required by this Code.
7.12.2 Violations: Violations shall be handled according to the provisions of Article 12 of this Code.
7.12.3 Removal of Signs: The Administrative Official shall have the authority to remove any sign placed within a
dedicated or prescriptive public right-of-way.
Page 54 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 7.13 Non-conforming Signs
7.13.1 General: Non-conforming signs shall be brought into compliance or eliminated by attrition. A
nonconforming sign shall not be relocated, replaced, expanded, or altered except to bring the sign into
compliance with this Code. Non-conforming signs which have been deemed abandoned shall be removed. Nonconforming
signs damaged to an extent beyond one-half (1/2) of its current replacement cost, shall not be
replaced or repaired. Where a sign is non-conforming due to an encroachment of the required setback, such
sign may be structurally altered or expanded without a variance. The expansion or alteration shall not reduce
the amount of the sign’s existing setback, and the sign must have an existing setback of at least 5 feet from the
property line or master street plan right-of-way, whichever is greater.
Page 55 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 8. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Section 8.1 Purpose: The following regulate the construction, placement and operation of Wireless
Communication Facilities.
Section 8.2 General:
8.2.1 Special Use Permit Required: A special use permit is required for Wireless Communication Facility
construction, placement, and operation.
8.2.2 Wireless Communication Facilities Permitted: These regulations are not intended to effectively prevent or
eliminate the construction, placement, and operation of Wireless Communication Facilities. The City Council
may refuse to grant any permit if it is not in the best interest of the City of Clarksville as determined by the City
Council.
Section 8.3 Application:
8.3.1 Special Use Permit Application: The application for a special use permit shall be made to the office of the
Mayor by the owner or agent of the proposed Wireless Communication Facility.
1) The completed application, including all supporting documents, must be received by the Mayor’s
office at least thirty (30) working days before the date that work is expected to begin. The fee for
processing a special use application is Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). The following must be provided
with the special use permit application:
A. The street address or addresses for the property.
B. The zoning classification of the property
C. Description of the proposed use of the property.
D. A copy of the appropriate FCC license or license application.
E. The projected route of truck traffic to and from the operation site including the projected
number of trips. The number of trips and route may be regulated by the City Council.
F. A drawing or other rendering depicting the Wireless Communication Facility. Said drawing
should indicate any artificial illumination or signage, logo, decal, symbol or any other
message of a commercial or noncommercial nature.
G. A drawing and description of the height of the Wireless Communication Facility as well as its
width at the base and a detailed description of the length and type of guide wires or other
item used to stabilize the Wireless Communication Facility.
Wireless Communication Facility: A wireless communication facility is defined as any unstaffed facility covered by the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 for the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunication services, usually consisting of
an Antenna Array, connection cables, an Equipment Facility, and a Support Structure, also known as an antennae or tower, to
achieve the necessary elevation.
Page 56 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
H. A description and drawing of opaque security fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
I. The pertinent and relevant Federal Aviation Regulations and proof that the Wireless
Communication Facility complies.
J. A statement agreeing to allow collocation of other Wireless Communications Facility users.
The statement shall include the applicant’s policy regarding collocation of other providers
and the methodology to be used by the applicant in determining reasonable rates to be
charged other providers. The Co-location Agreement shall be considered a condition of
issuance of a Special Use Permit.
K. Applicants proposing to collocate on an existing wireless communication facility shall include
a Radio Frequency Intermodulation Study with their application.
L. In addition to the above information, the applicant shall submit supporting documents that
may be required by the City Council. If additional information is requested, an additional
seven (7) working days shall be required for the processing of the application.
2) A site plan of the proposed use and survey of the property is required to be
provided with the application. Four (4) copies are required that meet the
following requirements:
A. The site plan and survey must be prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer.
B. Be provided on paper no smaller than 12 inches by 24 inches, and no larger than 24 inches
by 36 inches.
C. Be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet, or other scale approved by the
City Council.
D. Show the total land parcel used for the Wireless Communication Facility with a written legal
description of the property.
E. Indicate the location and dimensions of all public rights-of-way on or abutting the property.
F. Show Location of all points of vehicular entrance and exit to the site and the Location and
dimensions of all existing easements and public improvements on the property.
G. The location of permanent or temporary structures or proposed structures to be placed on
the property.
H. Location of all security fencing around the site.
I. Scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations and other documentation
showing the location and dimensions of the wireless communication facility and all
associated improvements. This must include information concerning specifications, antenna
locations, equipment facility and shelters, landscaping and screening, topography, adjacent
uses and existing vegetation.
Page 57 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
8.3.2 Limitations: The City Council may impose reasonable conditions and restrictions upon the application in
order to limit the impact of the special use permit operation upon nearby property or public property. The
limitations placed upon a special use permit may include, but are not limited to:
1) Limitations on height.
2) Limitations on width at base.
3) Landscaping and screening.
4) Collocation with other wireless communication providers.
5) Use of pre-existing structures.
6) Method of controlling traffic (flagman or traffic control device may be required at contractor’s
expense.
7) Weight limits to be determined by the Mayor or his/her designated agent).
8) The number of hours that site preparation work can be conducted on the premises may be
regulated by the City Council to minimize harmful effects on nearby property owners.
Section 8.4 Regulations: The applicant must be in compliance with the FAA Regulations and must also meet the
following conditions:
8.4.1 Collocation: All Wireless Communication Facilities shall be engineered, designed and constructed to be
capable of sharing the facility with other providers, to collocate with other existing wireless communication
facilities and to accommodate the future collocation of other Wireless Communication Facilities. Applicants
proposing a new Wireless Communication Facility shall demonstrate that it has made a reasonable good faith
attempt to find a collocation site. Competitive conflict and financial burden are not deemed to be adequate
reasons against collocation.
8.4.2 Antenna Array: All Wireless Communication Facilities with support structures up to a height of 150 feet
shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least a three (3) antenna array. All Wireless
Communication Facilities with support structure that exceed 150 feet in height shall be engineered and
constructed to accommodate at least four (4) antenna array.
8.4.3 Additional Requirements: All reasonable conditions required for a special use must be met before any
operations may begin. The owner or applicant filing for a special use permit shall sign a binding agreement with
the City of Clarksville that all damages to public property related to this operation, for which the owner or
applicant is legally responsible, shall be repaired at the expense of the applicant. The Mayor shall determine the
condition of public facilities (including photos and documentation) prior to the initiation of the operation. A
bond, for a reasonable amount, shall be required for the amount determined by the City Council. Immediately
after completion of the Wireless Communication Facility, repairs will commence on the damage that has been
done to the public property. Failure of the applicant to correctly repair all damaged public facilities, for which it
has been determined responsible, may result in the revocation of all existing permits for said company and the
City Attorney is authorized to take what means are necessary to insure that the public facilities are repaired.
Page 58 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
8.4.4 Removal of Abandoned Wireless Communication Facilities: Any Wireless Communication Facility that is
not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the wireless
communication facility owner shall remove the wireless communication facility within ninety (90) days after
notice from the City to remove the wireless communication facility. If the abandoned wireless communication
facility is not removed within 90 days, the City may remove it and recover its costs from the wireless
communication facility owner. If there are two or more users of a single wireless communication facility, this
provision shall not become effective until all providers cease to use the wireless communication facility. If the
owner of an abandoned wireless communication facility cannot be located or is no longer in business, the
Requirements of this section shall be the responsibility of the landowner on whose property the wireless
communication facility is located.
8.4.5 Nonconforming Wireless Communication Facilities: Wireless Communication Facilities constructed and in
existence on the date of the adoption of this Article which do not comply with the requirements of this Article
(nonconforming wireless communications facility) are subject to the following conditions:
8.4.6 Expansion: Nonconforming wireless communication facilities may continue, but may not be expanded
without complying with this Article except as further provided in this section.
8.4.7 Additions: Nonconforming wireless communication facilities may add additional antennas (belonging to
the same provider or other providers) subject to approval of a separate special permit application.
8.4.8 Repairs or Reconstruction: Nonconforming wireless communications facilities which become damaged for
any reason or cause, may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions subject
to the requirements of this Article. However, if the damage to the wireless communication facility exceeds 50%
of the replacement cost, it may only be reconstructed or repaired in compliance with this Code.
8.4.9 Unused Facility: Any wireless communications facility not in use for six (6) months shall be deemed
abandoned. All rights as a nonconforming use shall cease at this point.
Section 8.5 Revocation of Special Use Permit: Any Special Use Permit issued may be revoked after a hearing.
The following include the reasons a permit may be revoked:
1) The Mayor and the City Council find that any permit holder has violated the requirements of this
Article.
2) The permit holder or applicant has failed to make good faith reasonable efforts to provide or seek
collocation.
Prior to initiation of the revocation proceedings, the City shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of the specific
areas of non-compliance. A date by which the problems much be corrected will be provided. The provided time
will not exceed sixty (60) days.
The permit holder shall provide the City with evidence that the required corrective action has been taken.
Should the permit holder fail to correct any problem in the time provided, the Mayor and the City Council shall
convene a public hearing to consider revocation of the Special Use Permit.
Page 59 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Notice of the hearing date will be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10 days before the
hearing, and written notice will be provided to the permit holder. Interested persons may comment. The Mayor
and City Council may impose reasonable restrictions with respect to time and procedure.
Section 8.6 Penalty: The fine or penalty for violating any provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction in the
municipal court, be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less for any one specified offense or violation. A
violation may be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues.
Section 8.7 Expiration of Approval: Construction must begin within six (6) months of the authorization unless a
special time limit of less than six (6) months has been imposed as a condition of approval.
Page 60 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 9. AIRPORT PROTECTION
Section 9.1 Authority and Scope: This article is adopted under the authority of Arkansas Code Annotated §§ 74-
301 et.seq.,and serves to protect the Clarksville Municipal Airport through the control of property.
Section 9.2 General:
9.2.1 Definitions: The following definitions apply to airport protection:
1) Airport: Clarksville Municipal Airport.
2) Airport Board Of Appeals: A Board consisting of five members, appointed by the Airport Zoning
Board, as provided in Arkansas Code Annotated § 74-301 et. seq.
3) Airport Elevation: 485.0 feet above mean sea level.
4) Approach Surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending
outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone
height limitation slope set forth in Section 5 of this Article. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
5) Approach, Transitional, Horizontal, And Conical Zones: These zones are set forth in Section 4 of this
Article.
6) Conical Surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
7) Hazard To Air Navigation: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe
and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
8) Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this Article and
shown on the airport zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise
specified.
9) Horizontal Surface: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this
Article and shown on the airport zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless
otherwise specified.
10) Joint Airport Zoning Board: A board consisting of members appointed by the City of Clarksville and
Johnson County as authorized by Arkansas Statutes.
11) Larger Than Utility Runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller
driven aircraft of greater than 12,5000 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft.
12) Non-Conforming Use: Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land that is
inconsistent with the provisions of this article or an amendment thereto.
Page 61 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
13) Non-Precision Instrument Runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure
utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for
which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
14) Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a
limiting height set forth in Section 5 of this Article.
15) Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association
or government entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of
them.
16) Primary Surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially
prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The width
of the primary surface is set forth in Section 4 of this Article. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
17) Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length.
18) Structure: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but
without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission
lines.
19) Transitional Surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at ninety degree (90) angles to the runway
centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet (7’) horizontally from the edge of
the approach surface and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
20) Tree: Any object of natural growth.
21) Visual Runway: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach
procedures.
9.2.2 Airport Zones: The four zones listed below cover the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal
surfaces, and conical surfaces of the area surrounding the Clarksville Municipal Airport. These zones are shown
on the Clarksville Municipal Airport Zoning Map. This map is a part of these regulations and is kept on file by the
city clerk in city hall. When a property is located in multiple zones, the requirements of the more stringent zone
will apply.
1) Runway Larger than Utility with Visibility Minimums as low as 1-Mile Non-Precision Instrument
Approach Zone: As shown on the airport zoning map, the inner edge of this approach zone coincides
with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone extends outward
uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
centerline is the continuation of the runway.
2) Transition Zone: These are adjacent to each instrument and non-instrument runway and approach
zone as shown on the airport zoning map.
3) Horizontal Zone: This zone is defined by swing arcs of 10,000 feet from the center of each end of the
primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs.
The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
Page 62 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
4) Conical Zone: This zone is the area that commences at the edge of the horizontal zone and extends
outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
9.2.3 Airport Zone Height Limitations: Unless allowed in this Article, no tree shall be allowed to grow and no
structure shall be built, altered, or maintained so that it exceeds the height limits within its zone. The height
limits for each zone follow:
1) Runway Larger than Utility with Visibility Minimums as low as 1-Mile Non-Precision Instrument
Approach Zone: Slopes thirty-four (34) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along
the extended runway centerline.
2) Transitional Zone: Slopes seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and approach surfaces, and extending to a height of one
hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation.
3) Horizontal Zone: Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation.
4) Conical Zone: Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height
of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation.
5) Exception: None of these height limits shall prevent tree growth or the construction or maintenance
of a structure up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of the land.
9.2.4 Use Restriction: Unless allowed by this Article, land and water shall not be used in a way that creates
electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between aircraft and the airport,
makes it difficult for pilots to tell airport lights apart from other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using
the airport, impairs visibility near the airport, creates bird strike hazards, or creates danger or interferes with the
landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
9.2.5 Nonconforming Uses: The following are nonconforming uses related to Airport Zone Height limitations:
1) Regulations Not Retroactive: These regulations shall not require the removal, lowering, or other
change of any nonconforming structure or tree existing prior to the date this Article was adopted. The
regulations shall also not prevent a nonconforming use from continuing.
2) Marking and Lighting: The owner of an existing nonconforming structure or tree shall be required to
allow the installation, operation, and maintenance of markers and lights as deemed necessary by the
Joint Airport Zoning Board. These markers and lights shall point out the presence of airport obstructions
to operators of aircraft near the airport. These markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and
maintained at the expense of the City of Clarksville.
Page 63 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
9.2.6 Permits:
1) Future Uses: Except as specifically allowed in a, b, and c below, no physical change to land shall be
made, no structure shall be built or constructed, and no tree shall be planted in any airport zone unless a
permit has been obtained.
The permit application will list the proposed use or change to the land. It will provide adequate
information to determine if the use, structure, or tree will conform to this Article. No permit for a use
inconsistent with this Article shall be granted without approval a variance.
None of these exceptions are intended to permit the construction/alteration of any structure or the
growth/planting of any tree taller than the height limits provided in this Article, except as specifically
allowed in Section 9.3.2., item 5.
A. Within the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when,
because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, the tree or structure would extend
above the height limits allowed for these zones.
B. Within the approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each
end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five
(75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when the tree or structure would extend
above the height limit allowed in the approach zones.
C. Within the transition zones beyond the edge of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the
ground, except when the tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic
features, would extend above the height limit allowed in the transition zones.
2) Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an
obstruction, or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air
navigation, than it was when the original application for the use was made or than it was on the
effective date of this Article.
3) Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed: Whenever the Joint Airport Zoning Board determines
that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than eighty percent (80%) torn
down, physically deteriorated, or decayed; no permit shall be granted that would allow the structure or
tree to exceed the applicable height limit or deviate from this Article.
4) Variances: A variance shall be necessary to permit the following when it does not meet the standards
and requirements of this Article:
A. The construction or alteration of a structure or increasing the height of a structure to a
height greater than allowed within its zone.
B. Permit the growth of a tree taller than allowed within its zone.
C. Start a use that would not be otherwise permitted.
Page 64 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Application for a variance must be made to the Airport Board of Appeals. The application for a variance
shall include, from the Federal Aviation Administration, a determination of the effect of the proposal on
the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace.
Variances shall be allowed when it is found that word for word application or enforcement of the
regulations will result in unnecessary hardship. However, it must also be found that the variance will
serve the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be
in accordance with the spirit of this Article.
No application for variance may be considered by the Airport Board of Appeals unless a copy of the
application has been provided to the Joint Airport Zoning Board for advice as to the aeronautical effects
of the variance. If the Joint Airport Zoning Board does not respond to the application within thirty (30)
days after receipt, the Airport Board of Appeals may act on its own to grant or deny the application.
5) Obstruction Marking and Lighting: The installation of adequate marking and lights on structures and
trees may be required as a condition of approval for any permit or variance. The installation, operation,
and maintenance shall be at the owner’s expense. With approval of the Airport Board of Appeals, the
installation, operation, and maintenance may be carried out at the expense of the City of Clarksville.
Section 9.3 Enforcement: The Joint Airport Zoning Board shall administer and enforce the Airport Zoning
Regulations within this Article. All applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Joint Airport
Zoning Board. The Joint Airport Zoning Board shall provide application forms. Applications submitted to the Joint
Airport Zoning Board shall be promptly reviewed and granted or denied. Application made to Airport Board of
Appeals shall also be provided to the Joint Airport Zoning Board.
Section 9.4 Airport Board of Appeals:
9.4.1 Powers: The Airport Board of Appeals will have the following powers:
1) Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Joint
Airport Zoning Board enforcing this Article.
2) Hear and decide special exception to the terms of this Article that the Airport Board of Appeals may
be required to pass.
3) Hear and decide variance applications.
9.4.2 Members: The Airport Board of Appeals shall have five members appointed by the Joint Airport Zoning
Board. Each shall serve for a term of three (3) years until a replacement is appointed and qualified. Of the
members first appointed, one (1) shall serve a one (1) year term, two shall serve a two (2) year term, two shall
serve a three (3) year term. Members may be removed by the Joint Airport Zoning Board for cause. Written
charges must be provided and public hearing held on the issue.
9.4.3 Operations: The Airport Board of Appeals shall adopt governing rules consistent with the regulations in
this Article. The Airport Board of Appeals shall meet when requested by the Chairman or as determined by the
Airport Board of Appeals. The Chairman or, in the absence of the Chairman, the Acting Chairman may
administer oaths and require the attendance of witnesses. All hearings and meetings of the Airport Board of
Page 65 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Appeals shall be public. The Airport Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its meetings. The minutes shall show
the vote of each member for each application, record of all official actions, and all statements provided by
applicants or the public. The minutes will be kept on file for public access by the City Clerk.
9.4.4 Written Findings: The Airport Board of Appeals shall provide a written finding of facts and conclusion of
law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order,
requirement, decision, or determination.
9.4.5 Voting: A majority vote by all members of the Airport Board of Appeals shall be necessary to approve a
variance or reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Joint Airport Zoning Board.
9.4.6 Appeals: The following regulate appeals made to the Airport Board of Appeals.
1) Any person aggrieved or taxpayer affected by a decision of the Joint Airport Zoning Board made
enforcing this Article, may appeal to the Airport Board of Appeals.
2) To file an appeal, the applicant must provide written notice of appeal to the Joint Airport Zoning
Board. The notice of appeal must specify the reason for the appeal. The Joint Airport Zoning Board will
provide the appeal to the Airport Board of Appeals along with all records related to the appeal. All
appeals must be heard within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Airport Board of
Appeals.
3) An appeal shall stay all proceedings on the action appealed, unless the Joint Airport Zoning Board
certifies to the Airport Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the Joint Airport Zoning Board cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the
Airport Board of Appeals on notice to the Joint Airport Zoning Board and on due cause shown.
4) The Airport Board of Appeals shall set a date to hear the appeals, and give public notice of the
meeting. Notice shall also be given to the applicant and parties in interest. The hearing may be attended
by anyone and any party may represented by an agent or attorney. All appeal decisions shall be made
within a reasonable time.
5) The Airport Board of Appeals may, in conforming with the provisions of the Article, reverse or affirm
in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate
under the circumstances.
9.4.7 Judicial Review: Any person aggrieved or taxpayer affected, by a decision of the Airport Board of Appeals,
may appeal to the Circuit Court as provided in Arkansas Statutes.
Section 9.5 Penalties: Each violation of this Article, or of any regulation, order, or ruling provided shall be
considered a misdemeanor and be punishable by, either or both, a fine of $500 dollars or less or imprisonment
for 180 days or less. Other remedies shall be allowed as by law. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
Section 9.6 Conflicting Regulations: Where a conflict exists between this Article and other regulations, the more
strict regulations and limitation shall apply.
Page 66 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 10. NONCONFORMING REGULATIONS
Section 10.1 Nonconforming Use Of Land: A legally established land use that is prohibited by this Code and
which existed prior to September 8, 2014, may continue, under the following conditions:
1) The nonconforming use shall not be made larger or increased, or occupy a greater land area than it
did prior to September 8, 2014.
2) The nonconforming use may not be resumed if it ceases for more than six (6) months. After a use has
ceased for six (6) months, all future use of the land shall conform to the requirements of this Code.
3) The nonconforming use shall remain otherwise legal.
Section 10.2 Nonconforming Structures: A structure that was legally permitted to be constructed prior to
September 8, 2014, which would be prohibited by this Code because of restrictions on area, lot coverage,
building height, yard requirements, or other characteristics of the structures or its location on the lot, may
continue, under the following conditions:
1) The nonconforming structure shall not be rebuilt or repaired if it is considered destroyed unless it will
be brought into conformance with this Code. A structure shall be considered destroyed if the cost of
damage to the structure exceeds more than sixty (60) percent of its replacement cost at the time of
destruction. Nonconforming structures destroyed by means of fire or natural disaster shall be allowed
to be rebuilt within existing foot print of the structure.
2) The nonconforming structure may be added to if the addition meets the area requirements of the
lot’s zoning district and the structure’s land use is conforming. An addition of this type shall require
approval of the Board of Adjustment. If the addition does not increase the structure’s nonconformity in
any way or affect those portions of the structure causing the nonconformity, no approval from the
Board of Adjustment shall be required.
3) The nonconforming structure may be remodeled, with approval of the Board of Adjustment, to
maintain it in a safe and usable condition.
4) The nonconforming structure shall remain otherwise legal.
Section 10.3 Nonconforming Use Of Structures: A use of a structure or the use of a structure and premises that
was legally established prior to September 8, 2014, which would be prohibited by this Code, may continue,
under the following conditions:
1) A structure with a nonconforming use shall not be structurally altered unless the structure’s use is
changed to a conforming use.
2) A nonconforming use of a structure shall be allowed to expand or increase within the structure. The
structure is required to have been designed or arranged for the nonconforming use prior to September
8, 2014, and the nonconforming use shall not be allowed outside of the structure.
Nonconforming Use: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this Code which does not conform with
the use or area regulations of the district within which it is located.
Page 67 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
3) A nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises, may be changed to another
nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be permitted, and approval from the Board of
Adjustment for the change of use is required. The Board of Adjustment shall not approve the change if
the proposed use is of greater intensity than the existing nonconforming use.
4) A nonconforming use of structure, if changed to a conforming use, shall from then on be required to
conform to the requirements of this Code. All future uses of the structure and premises shall be
conforming uses.
5) A nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises may not resume if considered
abandoned. A nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises shall be considered
abandoned when it is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months. All future use of the structure and
premises shall conform to requirements of this Code.
6) Should a structure containing a nonconforming use be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than 50 percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, the owner may request permission of the
Board of Adjustment to reconstruct the structure and to continue the nonconforming use. The Board of
Adjustment may grant or deny a request to reconstruct such a structure. In granting a request to
reconstruct the structure, the Board may require conformance to yard requirements, on-lot parking
space, adequate screening from adjacent uses and such other items deemed appropriate to the district
in which located.
7) The nonconforming use of a structure shall remain otherwise legal.
Page 68 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 11. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 11.1 Creation and Appointment: This Article creates a Board of Adjustment. The membership of the
Board of Adjustment shall consist of the membership of the Planning Commission. The term for a member of the
Board of Adjustment shall be same as the member’s term on the Planning Commission.
Section 11.2 Organization:
11.2.1 Officers: Each year a Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be elected by the Board of Adjustment from its
membership. The Chairman, or in his/her absence, the Vice Chairman, shall preside at all meetings, shall decide
all points of order or procedure, and, as necessary, shall administer oath and require the attendance of
witnesses.
11.2.2 Rules and Regulations: The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business.
Meetings shall be held on a regular schedule and at such other times as the Board may determine. All meetings
shall be open to the public and notice of all meetings must be advertised seven (7) days in advance in a
publication of general circulation within Clarksville. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its meetings.
The minutes shall show the vote of each member upon each question as well as when a member is absent or
fails to vote. It shall keep records of all its official actions. All its records shall be public record and be filed with
the City Clerk. A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of its membership. When a quorum is present,
the majority vote of the board members present shall be necessary to override a decision or action of the
Administrative Official, or to decide any application or matter it is required to hear.
Section 11.3 Powers and Duties: The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law
and this Code. They are described in the following:
11.3.1 Administrative Review: The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals of decisions or
interpretations made by the Administrative Official on enforcement of the Zoning Code. The Board of
Adjustment may uphold, overturn, or partially overturn a decision or interpretation made by the Administrative
Official.
11.3.2 Variances: The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide variance applications. A variance from the
terms of this Zoning Code shall not be approved by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
1) The applicant demonstrates that the literal enforcement of the Zoning Code would cause undue
hardship, and that the effect of the variance would not be contrary to the public interest.
2) The applicant demonstrates that special conditions and circumstances exist which are unique to the
land, structure or building involved. These special conditions and circumstance must not be applicable to
other lands, structures or buildings in the same district.
3) The applicant demonstrates that literal interpretation of the provisions of this Code would deprive
them of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this Zoning
Code
4) The applicant demonstrates that the special conditions and circumstances are not the result of
actions by the applicant
Page 69 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
5) The applicant demonstrates that granting the variance requested will not give the applicant any
special privileges denied by this Zoning Code to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
6) The Board of Adjustment makes a finding of fact that the reasons provided by the applicant justify
granting the variance; that the variance is the minimum variance needed to make possible the
reasonable use of the land, building, or structure; that the granting of the variance would not violate the
spirit and intent of the Zoning Code; and that the effect of the variance will not cause injury to the
surrounding neighborhood or damage the public welfare.
No variance may be approved that would allow a use that is not permitted or that is implicitly or expressly
prohibited. The existence of a nonconforming use or structure shall not be used as grounds to justify approval of
a variance. The Board of Adjustment may provide conditions on the approval of a variance. Violation of these
conditions shall be considered a violation of this Zoning Code.
11.3.3 Special Exceptions: The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to decide the following special
exceptions after holding a public hearing:
1) Permit the extension of a zoning district boundary when a lot is divided between two zoning districts.
2) Interpret zoning district boundaries when the boundary of a zoning district is unclear.
3) Permit changes to nonconforming uses and structures as described in Article 10 of this Code.
Section 11.4 Application Procedure:
11.4.1 Application: The application for an Administrative Official Appeal, variance, or special exception shall
follow these guidelines:
1) Administrative Official Appeals may be made by any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Administrative Official. The Appeal shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Board, within 10
days after the Administrative Official’s decision was made. The Appeal will be filed in the City Clerk’s
office. Fee for filing appeal shall be set by ordinance of the City Council, and is to be paid at the time of
filing.
2) Applications for variances and special exceptions shall be filed on forms approved by the Board of
Adjustment and available at City Hall. The application must be filed at the City Clerk’s office at least 21
days before the next regular meeting of the Board of Adjustment. Required fees, as set by the City
Council, are paid at the time of filing. If all documentation is in order, a public hearing will be set for the
next regular meeting.
11.4.2 Public Hearing and Notice: The Board shall set the meeting time and date for the public hearing of an
appeal or application. Public notice of the hearing shall be advertised seven (7) days in advance in a publication
of general circulation within Clarksville. The public notice shall give the address and location of the property, as
well as a brief description of the appeal or application. The public hearing shall be open to comment by anyone.
Section 11.5 Appeals from Board of Adjustment: All decisions of the Board of Adjustment may be appealed to a
court of record, as provided by state law.
Page 70 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 11.6 Effect of Appeal: An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from, unless the
person affected by such appeal certifies to the Board, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted or a court of record.
Page 71 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 12. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 12.1 Administrative Official: The provisions of this Zoning Code shall be administered by the
Administrative Official, which is designated by the Mayor. He/she may be provided with assistance, as directed
by the Mayor. Decisions by the Administrative Official may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. The
Administrative Official is charged with the proper enforcement of this Code which includes, but is not limited to,
the following activities:
12.1.1 Permits: The Administrative Official shall have the authority to issue or deny building permits and
certificates of occupancy based upon compliance with this Code. Written notice stating the reasons for denial
will be provided with any building permit or certificate of occupancy that is denied.
12.1.2 Records: The Administrative Official will keep records of all building permits and certificates of occupancy
issued or denied, all violation complaints received, and record of actions taken on violation complaints.
12.1.3 Inspections: The Administrative Official shall have authority to inspect any building or land to determine
whether any violations of these regulations have been committed or exist.
12.1.4 Enforcement: The Administrative Official shall have authority to enforce these regulations and take all
necessary steps to remedy any condition found in violation. The City of Clarksville may instruct any individual or
property owner who is in violation of this Code to prevent or correct such violation. Any individual aggrieved by
a violation of this Code may request an injunction against any individual or property owner in violation of this
Code or may request or require by court order any official to enforce the provisions of this Code.
12.1.5 Advisements: The Administrative Official shall, as needed, keep the Mayor, Planning Commission, and
Board of Adjustment advised of all matters which relate to the administration and enforcement of these
regulations.
12.1.6 Questions: The Administrative Official shall have the authority to bring to the Board of Adjustment
questions regarding interpretation or enforcement of any provision of this Code which may be uncertain or
unclear or any question they may have concerning any “gray area” the Zoning Code Book does not clearly define
or address. They may also address said board or commission concerning any requirement in the zoning
ordinance code book which should be waived for a particular situation or circumstance. This in no way precludes
the right of any citizen to seek relief from a decision of the building official as provided for in Article 10.
Section 12.2 Building Permit: Site Preparation for Commercial or Industrial Construction may begin upon
approval of the “Site Plan” by the Administrative Official and payment of the required fee, if required. However,
it shall be unlawful to begin residential site preparation or any construction, reconstruction, or structural
alteration of a building until the Administrative Official has issued a building permit for the work. No building
permit shall be issued unless the proposed construction or use conforms to all the provisions of this Code and
other applicable building laws, ordinances, or regulations. All applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by a plan in duplicate drawn to scale. The plan shall include the size of the building to be erected,
location on the lot, driveway, sidewalk, parking plan, and other information as may be required.
12.2.1 Expiration: Building permits shall expire within six (6) months if construction has not begun and within
twelve (12) months if construction is not complete. The Administrative Official may approve an extension of the
permit for up to an additional six (6) months to allow completion.
Page 72 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Section 12.3 Demolition: No building shall be moved or demolished without first obtaining a demolition permit
from the Administrative Official and paying a fee as set by the City Council. Application for the permit will be
reviewed by the Administrative Official. The permit for moving shall require that the building be in place and
conform to the Arkansas State Fire Code, city building codes, and this Code within 120 days from the date of the
permit.
The permit for demolition shall require that the building be completely removed and the site cleared of all
debris within 120 days from the date of the permit.
Section 12.4 Certificate of Occupancy: No building built or structurally altered shall be supplied with electrical
service or be used, occupied, or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Administrative Official. It shall be the responsibility of the builder or contractor to obtain a certificate of
occupancy prior to selling, renting or making the building available for occupancy. A certificate of occupancy
may be revoked by the Administrative Official when it is found that the building or land does not conform to the
use or condition, if any, in the certificate. Each day a use continues after revocation of the certificate shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as provided herein.
Section 12.5 Penalty For Violation: Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
Zoning Code, fail to comply with any of the Code’s requirements, or build or alter any building in violation of any
detailed statement of plans submitted and approved shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a
fine of not more than one-hundred (100) dollars. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offence.
The owner or owners of any portion of a building or premises where a violation exists or any architect, builder,
contractor, agent, engineer, person, or corporation employed in connection with a violation shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of no more than one-hundred (100) dollars. This also applies to anyone
which assisted in the commission of a violation.
Section 12.6 Amendments: Two types of amendments to this Zoning Code are recognized, one being a revision
in the textual provisions of the Code and the other being a change of boundary in a zoning district.
12.6.1 Amendment to Text: The Planning Commission may desire to initiate an amendment, in which case, a
public hearing shall be conducted by the Planning Commission on the proposed amendment. Notice of the
public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least one time, at least 15
days prior to the hearing. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit any
recommendation for amendment to the City Council for adoption.
12.6.2 Change in District Boundary: The City Council or an owner of property may initiate a change in district
boundary. If the owner of property desires to revise the boundary line of a zoning district, he or his legally
designated agent shall submit to the Planning Commission a petition for such rezoning. The petition shall
provide the legal description of the property proposed for revision in boundary, a description of the property as
it is generally identified or known by the public (such as a street address; or in the case of a large tract, a
description of its general boundaries), the zoning classification requested for the property, an explanation of the
relationship of the proposed use to land uses surrounding the property, and any other optional information
which the owner feels should be brought to the attention of the Planning Commission. The disposition of the
petition shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 6 and 7 below.
12.6.3 Amendment and Abridgement: After adoption and proper filing of plans, ordinances, and regulations, no
amendment, extension, abridgement or recall of these may be made except in conformance with the procedure
prescribed above, or by a majority vote of the City Council.
Page 73 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
12.6.4: Notice: Before a proposed revision in the boundary of a zoning district may be recommended by the
Planning Commission to the City Council, it must be the subject of a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing
on the rezoning petition shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least one time 15
days prior to the hearing. Additionally, the Building Official shall place a sign in a conspicuous place on the site of
property proposed for rezoning indicating the date and place of the public hearing on the rezoning proposal,
said sign to be placed on-site not fewer than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing.
12.6.5 Hearing and Approval: If all procedural requirements above are satisfied, the Planning Commission and
the City Council shall proceed in the following manner:
1) The Planning Commission shall conduct the public hearing on the proposed amendment to the Code
and/or Official Zoning Map.
2) Following the public hearing, the proposed amendment or change of district boundary may be
approved as presented or in reduced scope by a majority vote of the entire Planning Commission, with
recommendation for adoption by the City Council. Such modification shall not include a
recommendation to a less restrictive zone.
3) If the Planning Commission disapproves a proposed amendment or rezoning petition, the reason for
such disapproval shall be given in writing to the petitioner within 15 days from the date of the hearing.
4) Following disapproval of a proposed amendment by the Planning Commission, the petitioner may
appeal such disapproval to the City Council, provided that the petitioner states specifically in writing to
the City Clerk why he considers the Planning Commission's findings and decisions are in error. Such
appeal to the City Council shall be filed with the City Clerk within 15 days after receipt in writing of the
Planning Commission's denial. No such amendment will be considered by the City Council unless
appealed in accordance with this section.
5) The City Council, by a majority vote, may, by ordinance, adopt a recommended amendment
submitted by the Planning Commission or may return the proposed amendment to the Planning
Commission for further study and recommendation.
6) If the City Council does not concur with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, either as
first submitted or as submitted after re-study, or with regard to an appealed matter, the City Council
may, by majority vote, amend this Code by granting the request for amendment in full or in modified
form.
7) No application for a zoning amendment will be reconsidered by the Planning Commission for a period
of 12 months of elapsed time from the date of final disapproval of the proposed amendment, unless the
Planning Commission determines by 2/3 majority vote that a substantial reason exists for waiving this
mandatory waiting period.
Section 12.7 Fees: Any party or parties proposing a change in the zoning regulations or district boundaries may
make application and pay the appropriate fees at City Hall. Any party proposing the construction,
reconstruction, moving, demolition or major structural alteration of any building or any other action described
herein requiring a permit or fee must make application for such activity by completing the appropriate form at
Clarksville Light and Water Operations, and must pay the required permit fee to Clarksville Light and Water.
Page 74 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 13. DEFINITIONS
Section 13.1 Interpretation: For the purposes of interpreting these regulations, words used in the present tense
shall include the future tenses; words in the singular number shall include the plural, and words in the plural
number include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word
"shall" is mandatory and not directory. The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation as well as
an individual.
Section 13.2 Other Definitions: Specific sections of this Code may contain other definitions as appropriate.
Section 13.3 Definitions: For the purpose of interpreting these regulations, certain terms and words are to be
used and interpreted as defined. Exclusive of headings and titles, any word in this code which is italicized is
defined in this section.
Accessory Buildings and Uses: An accessory building is a subordinate building or a portion of the main building,
the use of which is clearly incidental to, or customarily found in connection with, and (except as otherwise
provided in this Code) located on the same lot as, the use of the main building or principal use of the land. An
accessory use is one which is clearly incidental to, or customarily found in connection with, and on the same lot
as, the main use of the premises. When "accessory" is used in the text, it shall have the same meaning as
accessory use.
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A smaller, secondary site-built dwelling unit on the same lot as an existing single-family
dwelling. The unit includes its own independent living facilities with provisions for sleeping, cooking, and
sanitation, designed for residential occupancy independent of the primary dwelling unit.
Amended: Ord. 2014-732
Adult Daycare Center: An establishment that provides, on a regular basis, assistance or care for five or more
unrelated adults for a period of less than twenty-four hours a day and which receives a payment, fee or grant for
the adults attending the facility, whether or not operated at a profit.
Alley: A public passage or way affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
Apartment: A multiple family dwelling (see "Dwelling, Multiple-Family").
Automobile Junk and Salvage Yard or Scrap Yard: An area outside of a building where motor vehicles are
disassembled, dismantled, junked, or "wrecked", or where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used
parts of motor vehicles are stored, or where scrap metal, cloth, wood, paper, or other materials are stored for
either resale, recycling, or retention.
Bed and Breakfast: An owner-occupied dwelling unit that contains no more than three guest rooms where
lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. The operator of the inn shall live on the premises
or in adjacent premises.
Building: See Structure.
Building Coverage: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building. The building area shall include all
overhanging roofs.
Page 75 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of
the building to the highest point of the structure, exclusive of chimneys, ventilators, or other extensions above
the roof line that are not intended for occupancy or internal usage by persons.
Building Line: The line of that face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors
and covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed but does not include steps.
Building, Main or Principal: A building in which is conducted or intended to be conducted, the main or principal
use of the lot on which said building is located.
Building Official: The individual designated by the Clarksville City Council with the responsibility of administering
the city building and development codes.
Child Care Family-Home: When children are cared for in a caregiver’s own family residence or in some other
suitable family type residence, and when one or more persons care for a minimum of six children but not more
than sixteen children from more than one family at the same time. Subject to all other applicable State
regulations.
Child Care Center (Private): A commercial child care center conducted under private for-profit, auspices
providing direct care and protection for children.
Child Care Center (Public or Non-Profit): A child care center conducted by a church, school, or other non-profit
organization and providing direct care and protection for children excepting that this definition does not apply
to facilities meeting this definition but operating no more than three weeks at a time, specifically including Bible
Schools or Day Camps.
Clinic, Dental or Medical: A facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients;
provided, however, that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions.
Convenience Store: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged or prepared food products, household
items, gasoline and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than
5,000 square feet.
District, Zoning: Any section, sections, or divisions of the City for which the regulations governing the use of
land, density, bulk, building height, and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform.
Drive-in Commercial Uses: Any retail commercial use providing considerable off-street parking and catering
primarily to vehicular trade such as drive-in restaurants, drive-in theaters, and similar uses.
Dwelling: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families,
but not including house trailers, Manufactured Homes, or travel trailers.
Dwelling, Attached: A dwelling having any portion of one or more walls in common with adjoining dwellings.
Dwelling, Detached: A dwelling having open space on all sides.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A dwelling designed to be occupied by one family.
Page 76 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Dwelling, Two-Family: A dwelling designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A dwelling designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of
each other, exclusive of auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels, or motels.
Dwelling, Townhouse or Row House: Two or more dwelling units attached at the side or sides, each unit of which
has a separate outdoor entrance and is designed to be occupied and may be owned by one family.
Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities for
living, sleeping, and cooking.
Façade: The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the
building.
Family: One or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted children, or a group not to exceed
4 persons not all related by blood or marriage, occupying premises and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for
some group use. A family may include domestic servants employed by said family.
Federal Standards: The Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards promulgated by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development under the authority of 42 U.S.C. 5401 et. seq., as
it existed on January 1, 1976.
Fence: A man-made barrier constructed to provide privacy or visual separation between one ownership and
another.
Floor Area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of the floors of a building or buildings measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings.
Free-Standing Vending Machine: A coin operated machine that dispenses merchandise intended as a standalone
business to be accessed by automobile.
Garage, Private: An accessory building or a part of a main building used for storage purposes only for
automobiles, used solely by the occupants and their guests of the building to which it is accessory.
Garage, Public or Repair: A building in which are provided facilities for the care, servicing, repair, or equipping of
automobiles.
Gasoline or Service Station: A building, structure, or land used primarily for the dispensing and sale of fuels, oils,
accessories, or minor maintenance and repair services but not including painting, body work, major repairs, or
automatic washing facilities.
Hard Surface: Concrete or asphalt surfacing installed to adequately support its intended
Load or apparatus. Except that the minimum construction for parking is: four inches of
3000 psi concrete over stable sub grade or two inch asphalt over six inch compacted gravel
Home Occupation: Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants which is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and
which is conducted entirely within the main building.
Page 77 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Hospital: An institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient or medical or surgical care for
the sick or injured, and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities.
Hotel: A building or part thereof occupied as; a more or less temporary abiding place for individuals in which the
rooms are usually occupied singularly for hire and in which rooms no provisions for cooking is made, and in
which building there is usually a kitchen and public dining room for the accommodation of the occupants and
guests. This definition does not include an auto or trailer court or camp, sanatorium, hospital asylum,
orphanage, or building where persons are housed under restraint.
Kennel: Any lot or premises on which 4 or more dogs, more than six months of age are kept for personal use or
boarding.
In-Home Child Care Provider: An individual selected by the family to provide child care to five or less children in
the child(ren)’s home. Subject to all other applicable State regulation.
Illumination, External: Sign illumination which is generated from outside the sign’s internal structure.
Illumination, Internal: Sign illumination which is generated from inside the sign’s internal structure.
Live/Work Unit: A building used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the
building is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work.
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Code including one main
building together with its accessory building, and the open spaces and parking spaces required by this Code, and
having its principal frontage upon a street.
Lot, Area: The total horizontal area included within the lot.
Lot of Record: A lot or parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder
of Johnson County prior to the adoption of this Code.
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot which is an interior lot extending from one street to another and abutting a street on
two ends.
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot Line, Front: In the case of an interior lot, the line separating said lot from that street which is designed as the
front street in the request for a building permit.
Lot Line, Rear: The lot boundary opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a pointed or
irregular lot, it shall be an imaginary line parallel to and farthest from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line as defined herein.
Lot Width: The width of a lot measured at the front building setback line.
Page 78 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Manufactured Home: A dwelling unit constructed in a factory in accordance with the Federal Standards and
meeting the definitions set forth in the Federal Standards and under Arkansas Code Annotated § 20-25-102.
Manufactured Home Park: Land or property containing a minimum of 2 acres which is used or intended to be
used or rented for occupancy by Manufactured Homes or moveable sleeping quarters of any kind.
Mobile Home: A dwelling unit constructed in a factory before the enactment of the Federal Standards.
Modular Home: A residential structure, constructed in a factory and transported to the city in one or more
sections and which meets the Clarksville Building Code.
Motel: A motel or motor court is a business comprised of a building or group of buildings so arranged as to
furnish overnight accommodations for transient guests.
Nonconforming Use: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this Code which
does not conform with the use or area regulations of the district within which it is located.
Nursing Home: Any premises where more than three persons are lodged and furnished with meals and nursing
care.
Open Space: An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with the building and occupied by no
structure or portion of structure whatever.
Parking Lot: An off-street facility including parking spaces and drives and aisles for maneuvering, and providing
access and for entrance and exit, developed in a way to accommodate the parking of automobiles.
Parking Space: An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle and having an area of not less
than 180 square feet exclusive of passageways and driveways, and having direct access to a street or alley. It
shall measure not less than 9 x 20 feet.
Principal Use: The specific primary purpose for which land, building or structure is used or intended to be used.
Public Utility: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or Council, duly authorized to furnish and
furnishing under regulations to the public, electricity, gas, telephone, television cable, telegraph, transportation,
drainage, water, or sanitary sewage.
Registered Child Care Family Home: when five or less children are cared for in the caregiver’s own family
residence or in some other suitable family type residence. Subject to all other applicable State regulations
Relative Child Care Family Home: when five or less children are cared for by a relative of the child(ren). Subject
to all other applicable State regulations.
Residential Drive: That portion of the access component utilized as a vehicle entry point to a one or two family
structure, existing upon the street right of way and in case less than 10 feet from the edge of existing street
surface.
Satellite Television Receiving Dishes, Ground Mounted: A device commonly parabolic in shape, mounted at a
fixed point on the ground for the purpose of capturing television signals transmitted via satellite
Page 79 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
communications facilities and serving the same or similar function as the common television antenna. These
devices are considered accessory buildings.
Service Station: See Gasoline Service Station.
Setback: Distance between the lot line and the building line.
Sexually Oriented Business: Means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult sex shop, adult theater, escort agency, lingerie model studio, nude
model studio, or sexual encounter center.
Sign: Any outdoor device, figure, painting, message, poster, or other structure which is designed or intended to
advertise or inform the public of an establishment, goods, or service.
Sign, Abandoned: A sign relating to or identifying an entity which has ceased operations or existence on the
premises for at least six (6) months.
Sign, Awning: A sign which is a part of a fabric or other non-structural awning. Such signs are considered Wall
Signs.
Sign, Billboard: An off-premise sign. See definition for off-premise sign.
Sign, Electronic Message: A sign which uses artificial light to display changing electronically programmed
messages.
Sign, Governmental or Public: A sign erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post a legal notice,
identify public property, convey public information and direct or regulate pedestrian, bike, or vehicular traffic.
Sign, Ground-Mounted: A freestanding sign that is supported by a solid base (other than poles) such that the
bottom of the sign face is three (3) feet or less above grade, and no air space is visible within or between any
portion of the sign display area and the signs supporting structure.
Sign, Height: The vertical distance from the highest point of the sign or structure to the grade of adjacent street
or surface grade beneath the sign, whichever grade is lower.
Sign, Illuminated: A sign designed to give forth any artificial light or reflect light from an artificial source.
Sign, Nonconforming: Any sign which is not permitted under the terms of this ordinance, within the district in
which it is located.
Sign, Off-premise: A sign, whether leased or owned by the advertising entity, which directs attention to an
entity, activity, business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other
than the premises on which the sign is located.
Sign, Permanent: Signs anchored to the ground or building in a secure, permanent fashion as stipulated in
applicable codes as adopted by the City of Clarksville.
Sign, Projecting: A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building.
Page 80 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
Sign, Sandwich Board: A sign set on the ground, without attachment to the ground, in an “A” frame
configuration consisting of two sign panels hinged at the top.
Sign, Surface Area: The total surface area of a sign as determined in Section 7.2 of this Code.
Sign, Temporary: Any sign which is intended for temporary use and which is not permanently mounted to the
ground or a building.
Sign, Wall: Any sign, other than a projecting sign or a temporary sign, which is permanently attached to or
painted on any façade of any building.
Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and ceiling next
above it. A half story is a partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two
opposite exterior walls are not more than 4 feet above the floor of each story.
Street: Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having
a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, fences, billboards, and poster
panels, but do not include walks and drives.
Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions,
columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
Travel Trailer: The travel trailer unit is a department temporary single-family dwelling unit built on a chassis not
exceeding 8 feet wide and 32 feet long designed for short-term occupancy and frequent travel, requiring park
services for utility and sanitary facilities. Unit may be self-propelled or towed behind a vehicle without a special
permit required.
Travel Trailer Park/ Recreational Vehicle Park: A unified development under private ownership designed
primarily for transient service, on which travel trailers, pick-up coaches, and self-propelled motorized vehicles
are parked or situated for short-term occupancy. The owner shall provide park services for utility and sanitary
facilities.
Wireless Communication Facility: A wireless communication facility is defined as any unstaffed facility covered by
the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 for the transmission and/or reception of wireless
telecommunication services, usually consisting of an Antenna Array, connection cables, an Equipment Facility,
and a Support Structure, also known as an antennae or tower, to achieve the necessary elevation.
Wireless Communication Antenna Array: One or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for the
transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include an omni-directional antenna (rod), a
directional antenna (panel) and a parabolic antenna (disc). The Antenna Array does not include the Support
Structure.
Wireless Communication Equipment Facility: Any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a WCF.
Wireless Communication Support Structure: A structure designed and constructed specifically to support an
Antenna Array, and may include a monopole, guy-wire support tower, or derrick tower. Any device used to
Page 81 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
fasten an Attached WCF to an existing building or structure shall be excluded from the definition of and
regulations applicable to Support Structures.
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building unobstructed from the ground upward and measured as the
minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building.
Yard, Front: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines, and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the
projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, terraces, or uncovered porches. On corner lots the front
yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot lines and measured between the rear
lot line in the rear of the main building or any projection other than steps, unenclosed porches, or entrance
ways.
Yard, Side: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front lot line to
the rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main
building or any projection thereof.
Zoning Lot: A parcel of land that is designated by its owner or authorized agent as a tract, all of which is to be
used, developed, or built upon as a unit under a single ownership. A zoning lot may consist of any standard lot or
a combination of lot and any legally recorded portion of a lot or a combination of lot and any legally recorded
portion of a lot that existed prior to the passage of this Code. When determining the front, rear, and side yard
setbacks for a zoning lot, the required distance shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of said zoning
lot.
Page 82 Zoning Code
City of Clarksville
ARTICLE 14. VALIDITY AND REPEAL
Section 14.1 Validity: This Zoning Code and the various parts, sections subsections, sentences, phrases, and
clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, or paragraph, section or subsection,
phrase or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this Zoning
Code shall not be affected thereby.
The City Council of the City of Clarksville hereby declares that all such remaining parts would have been passed
irrespective of the validity or invalidity of any parts found to be invalid.
Section 14.2 Repeal: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Zoning Code, or inconsistent with
provisions of this Code are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Zoning Code full force and effect
upon its adoption by Ordinance of the City Council of the City of Clarksville, Arkansas. 
 
 




