TITLE 11 
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
11.04 	Building Code 
11.08 	Plumbing Code 
11.12 	Electrical Code 
11.16 	Fire Prevention Code 
11.20 	Housing Code 
11.28 	Mechanical Code 
11.32 	Drilling For Oil and Gas 
11.36 	Demolition of Structures 
11.40 	Energy Code 
CHAPTER 11.04 
BUILDING CODE 
Sections: 
11.04.01 Adopted by reference 
11.04.02 Permit system 
11.04.03 Building permit 
11.04.04 Permit fee 
11.04.05 Water and sewer tie on fees 
11.04.06 Supplemental fees 
11.04.07 Ordinances repealed 
11.04.08 Schedule of fees 
11.04.01 Adopted by reference The city of Greenwood, Arkansas, hereby adopts by reference as though they were copied herein fully, the International Building Code, 2000 Edition, the International Residential Code, 2000 Edition, additions to existing structures, remolding, renovation and repair.  (Ord. No. 2006-11, Sec. 1.) 
A. 	The City of Greenwood, Arkansas hereby adopts by reference as though they were copies herein fully, the most current Arkansas Fire Prevention Code, and 101 Life Safety Code, as may be amended from time to time here often, said codes to govern new construction, additions to existing structures, remodeling, renovation and repairs. 
B. 	This Ordinance adopts any reference to the automatic gate access from the 2012 Fire Prevention Code. 
142 

S-22 
C. 	Any person violating Ordinance No. 09-08 or this Ordinance, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine not exceed $1,000.00, which with each day the violation exists constituting a separate offense, to be assessed by the Fire Code Enforcement officer. (Ord. No. 2016-04, Sec. 1-3.) 
11.04.02 Permit system All work performed pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to the permit system established by the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, and administered through the inspection process and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A. 	Residential dwellings and commercial and industrial structures and additions thereto. Accessory buildings of a permanent nature, i.e. built on a concrete slab or footing thus intended to be permanent and subject to control under the permit system. 
B. 	Accessory buildings of a permanent nature, i.e. built on a concrete slab or footing thus intended to remain at a fixed location on the ground, and portable accessory buildings greater than 100 square feet in size (Ord. No. 2005-1, Sec. 3.i.). In-ground swimming pools and storm cellars are placed at a fixed location on the ground and therefore are classified as permanent and subject to control under the permit system. 
C. 	Remodeling, renovation and repair where structural integrity may become an issue, i.e. load bearing members which together contribute to the overall stability of a structure, or major portion of a structure. Structural alterations are to be included and are defined as any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.  Replacement of individual framing members incidental to a structure is not to be construed, within itself, as remodeling, renovation and repair.  Ordinary minor repairs may be made without a permit, provided that such repairs do not violate any provisions of the technical trade codes. (Ord. No. 2006-11, Sec. 2.) 
11.04.03 Building permit Individuals and contractors shall obtain a building permit issued by the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, prior to commencing any work as outlined in Section 2, to include any work performed to accomplish any and all phases of construction for which the building permit is issued, said building permit to be as follows: 
A. 	Building permit to contain information outlined on a form provided by the city of Greenwood for each project covered under the mandates of this ordinance. 
B. 	An inspection card shall be issued with each building permit, outlining the inspections required.  Permit holder shall be responsible for notifying the city when ready for inspections. 
143 

S-7 

C. 	Any person, firm or corporation obtaining a building permit for any construction within the city limits of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, shall be required to post the inspection card upon the property where the construction is to take place. Said inspection card, as issued by the city offices of the city of Greenwood, shall be posted in such a manner as to be visible from the street and to be sheltered or enclosed so as to be protected from weather and adverse elements.  The inspection card shall further be displayed in such a manner so as to allow access to the permit by any inspector at any time through the period of construction.  The inspection card shall be displayed as set forth hereinabove, from commencement of construction through final inspection by the Greenwood City Building Inspector, who shall pick up and retain the inspection card for the records of the city of Greenwood at that time.  (Ord. No. 2006-11, Sec. 3.) 
11.04.04 Permit fee There shall be charged with the issuance of each building permit a permit fee, the fee being determined by the city of Greenwood Department of Planning and Development's "Consolidated Schedule of Fees." (Ord. No. 2006-11, Sec. 4.) 
11.04.05 Water and sewer tie on fees All permit fees in 11.04.04 shall be paid at the time of issuance of the permit.  Furthermore, prior to the issuance of a building permit, all water and sewer tie on fees as may be required under separate ordinances or regulations shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permits.  (Ord. No. 2006-11, Sec. 5.) 
11.04.06 Supplemental fees The building permit fee and regulations set forth in this ordinance shall be supplemental and in addition to any plumbing inspection/permit fee, any electrical inspection/permit fee, and any HVACR inspection/permit fee which are set forth in separate ordinances.  (Ord. No. 99-07, Sec. 6.) 
11.04.07 Ordinances repealed This ordinance hereby expressly repeals Ord. Nos. 229-A, 247, 283, 297, 298, 314, 447, 449, 451, 458, 481, 493, 532 and 99-07. (Ord. No. 2006-11, Sec. 7.) 
11.04.08  Schedule of fees 
Building permit fee schedule 
0 to 1800 square feet $80.00 a square foot 1801 to 2500 square feet $100.00 a square foot 2501 to 3500 square feet $125.00 a square foot 3501 and larger $180.00 a square foot (Ord. No. 2010-13, Sec. 1.) 
144 

S-7 
Residential construction 
(Single-family and duplex, new construction, remodel, repair, additions, alterations): 
Cost of construction  Fee  
$50.00 to $500.00 $501.00 to $1,000.00 $1,001.00 to $ $1,500.00 $1,501.00 to $2,000.00 $2,001.00 and over (Ord. No. 2010-13, Sec. 1.)  $15.00 $22.50 $30.00 $37.50  plus $1.50 for each additional $1,000.00 valuation or fraction thereof  
Non-residential construction:  

(Multi-family, commercial, industrial, institutional, etc., new construction, remodel, repair, additions, alterations): 
Cost of construction Fee 
$50.00 to $500.00 $15.00 
$501.00 to $1,000.00 $37.50 
$1,001.00 to $ $1,500.00 $52.50 
$1,501.00 to $2,000.00 $67.50 
$2,001.00 to $10,000.00 $67.50  plus $4.50 for each additional $1,000.00 valuation 
$10,001.00 to $50,000.00 $103.50  plus $3.75 for each additional $1,000.00 valuation 
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $253.50 plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000.00 valuation 
$100,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $403.50  plus $2.25 for each additional $1,000.00 valuation 
$1,000,001.00 and over $2,536.50  plus $1.50 for each additional $1,000.00 valuation 
Act 474 construction surcharge There shall be a fifty-cent ($.50) charge per $1,000.00 of construction authorized on any non-residential building permit as mandated by Arkansas Act 474 of 1999. (Ord. No. 2010-13, Sec. 1.) 
144.1 

S-7 
Other fees Blasting permit: $100.00 Special hauling permit: $50.00 Demolition (all): $50.00 for the first 1,000 sq. ft. of structure and $1.00 per 100 sq 
ft. after that, plus $25.00 sewer and water inspection. House moving: $100.00 for the first 1,000 sq. ft. of structure and $1.00 per 100 sq. 
ft. after that, plus $25.00 sewer and water inspection. 
Storage tanks: $450.00 per tank 

Appeals: $50.00 
Permit renewal: $25.00 
144.2 

CHAPTER 11.08 
PLUMBING CODE 

Sections: 
11.08.01 Repeal of ordinances 
11.08.02 Adopted by reference 
11.08.03 Permits 
11.08.04 Mechanical permit 
11.08.05 Fee 
11.08.06 Inspection 
11.08.07 Plumbing permit fees 
11.08.08 New construction 
11.08.09 Protection against back up 
11.08.01 Repeal of ordinances The city of Greenwood, Arkansas, hereby repeals Ord. Nos. 232, 284 and 99-05. (Ord. No. 2006-12, Sec. 1.) 
11.08.02 Adopted by reference The city of Greenwood, Arkansas, hereby adopts by reference as though they were copied herein fully, the Arkansas State Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition, 2003, for all plumbing work performed within the jurisdiction of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, in an attempt to ensure safe and proper plumbing installations, including alterations, repairs, replacements, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto, so as to safeguard the life, health and public welfare of the citizens of the city of Greenwood.  (Ord. No. 2006-12, Sec. 2.) 
11.08.03 Permits All work performed pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to the permit system established by the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, and administered through the inspection process and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A. 	Plumbing work for new residential dwellings and new commercial structures. 
B. 	Plumbing work for additions to existing structures. 
C. 	Plumbing work for remodeling, renovation and repair, wherein any fixtures are replaced or reset, or where piping and fittings are installed. 
D. 	Service lines, i.e. water, sewer and gas, including new, replaced and relocated lines, from servicing main to structure. 
E. 	Plumbing work performed by a property owner in a building owned and occupied by him as his home may be accomplished without a permit provided such work does not violate any provisions of the technical codes.  (Ord. No. 2006-12, Sec. 3.) 
145 

S-7 
11.08.04 Mechanical permit All individuals and contractors, except as outlined in 11.08.03, shall obtain a mechanical permit issued by the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, prior to commencing any work as outlined in 11.08.03, said mechanical permit to be as follows: 
A. 	Said mechanical permit shall contain information on a form provided by the city of Greenwood for each project covered under the mandates of this ordinance. 
B. 	Where plumbing work is performed as a part of work under a building permit, the inspection card issued with said building permit will indicate the required plumbing inspections as construction progresses. 
C. 	Where plumbing work only is performed under a mechanical permit, an inspection card shall be issued and will indicate the required inspections as construction progresses.  (Ord. No. 2006-12, Sec. 4.) 
11.08.05 Fee There shall be charged with the issuance of each mechanical permit a permit fee which must be paid upon issuance of said permit, the fee being determined by the city of Greenwood "Department of Planning and Development Consolidated Schedule of Fees." Any individual or contractor who commences any work for which a mechanical permit is required, before obtaining the necessary permit, shall be subject to a penalty of 100% of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee.  (Ord. No. 2006-12, Sec. 5.) 
11.08.06 Inspection All work performed under this ordinance must be inspected by the local authority having jurisdiction thereof.  Furthermore, all yard service lines must be inspected before covering, and all sewer line taps to the main must also be inspected before covering. (Ord. No. 2006-12, Sec. 6.) 
11.08.07  Plumbing permit fees 
Item Fee-each 
Closets $5.00 
Sink 5.00 
Lavatories 5.00 
Showers 5.00 
Tubs 5.00 
Washing machine 5.00 
Lawn sprinkler 5.00 
Urinals 5.00 
Service sinks 5.00 
Water – new 8.00 
Water – replace 8.00 
Pressure regulator 5.00 
Sewer – new 8.00 

146 

S-12 

Sewer – replace  8.00  Floor drain  5.00  
Gas – new  8.00  Grease trap  5.00  
Gas – replace  8.00  Extra trip  20.00  
Gas furnace  8.00  Rough-in inspection  15.00  
Gas fireplace  8.00  Top-out inspection  15.00  
Dishwasher  5.00  Final inspection  15.00  
Disposal  5.00  Minimum inspection  25.00  
Water heater  8.00  Sewer cleanout/relief valve  5.00  
Drinking fountain  5.00  Other (varies)  
(Ord. No. 2010-13, Sec. 1.)  

11.08.08 New construction All new construction shall require a pressure regulator. The pressure regulator shall be of all brass construction and located at the meter box. The pressure regulator shall be equipped with a full port all brass hand-operated ball valve.  The valve and pressure regulator shall be connected to the meter box with a brass nipple.  The valve shall be upstream of the pressure regulator. Both shut-off valve and pressure regulator shall have an access box to allow maintenance and operation of shut-off valve and regulator. The access box shall be set to finished grade.  (Ord. No. 2012-19, Sec. 2.) 
Section 3 of Ord. No. 2004-10 is hereby amended to read as follows:  Appendix A, “Plumbing permit fees” referred to in Ord. No. 99-5, Section 5 is amended to the extent the 
following item:  
Item  Fee-each  
Pressure regulator  $10.00  
(Ord. No. 2012-19, Sec. 3.)  

11.08.09  Protection against back up All new replacement and repaired building sewers and drains from structures utilized for residential, commercial and industrial purposes shall be appropriately protected against a sanitary sewer back-up into the structure from the city’s sanitary sewer lines by, at a minimum, the installation of a self-operating cleanout and relief valve.  Said clean-out and relief valve shall be installed at a location and elevation such that it shall effectively relieve the back-up condition before it affects the interior of the structure. The clean-out and relief valve shall be set at an elevation not more than one-half (1/2) inch above grade and placed in the center of a concrete collar measuring two (2) feet square by four (4) inches thick.  The owners and occupants of the structure shall be made aware of the location of, and maintenance requirements for, the clean-out and relief valve to that assure proper maintenance may be made.  (Ord. No. 2008-3, Sec. 1.) 
146.1 

S-7 

CHAPTER 11.12 
ELECTRICAL CODE 
Sections: 
11.12.01 Adopted by reference 
11.12.02 Permit system 
11.12.03 Wired structures 
11.12.04 Mechanical permit 
11.12.05 Permit fee 
11.12.06 Inspection 
11.12.07 Repeal of ordinances 
11.12.08 Electrical permit fees 
11.12.01 Adopted by reference The city of Greenwood, Arkansas, hereby adopts by reference as though they were copied herein fully, the National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition of the National Fire Protection Association, for all electrical work performed within the jurisdiction of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, in an attempt to ensure safe and proper electrical installations, including alterations, repairs, replacements equipment, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, fittings and appurtenances thereto so as to safeguard the life, health and the public welfare of the citizens of Greenwood. (Ord. No. 2006-10, Sec. 1.) 
11.12.02 Permit system All work performed pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to the permit system established by the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, and administered through the inspection process and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A. 	All electrical work for new residential dwellings and new commercial structures. 
B. 	All electrical work for additions to existing structures. 
C. 	All electrical work for remodeling, renovation and repair, wherein any work is performed from the Service Point, including the Service Equipment, and all area of work as provided under Section 1. 
D. 	Electrical work performed by an individual, not acting as a contractor, may be accomplished without a permit provided such work does not violate any provisions of the technical codes; however, when the electrical service and/or service equipment is modified a permit is required.  (Ord. No. 2006-10, Sec. 2.) 
147 

S-4 
11.12.03 Wired structures The following types structures may be wired using non­metallic sheathed cable: 
I. 	Single family dwellings, 
II. 	Multi-family dwellings of one and two stories. 
Furthermore, keyless fixtures, i.e. bare incandescent lamps are not permissible under this ordinance and all fluorescent lamps must have a protective covering. (Ord. No. 2006-10, Sec. 3.) 
11.12.04 Mechanical permit All individuals and contractors shall obtain a mechanical permit issued by the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, except as provided under Section 2, prior to commencing any work as outlined in Section 2, to include any work performed to accomplish any and all phases of construction for which the building permit is issued, said mechanical permit to be as follows: 
I. 	Said mechanical permit shall contain information on a form provided by the city of Greenwood for each project covered under the mandates of this ordinance. 
II. 	
Where electrical work is performed as a part of work under a building permit, the inspection card issued with said building permit will indicate the required electrical inspections as construction progresses. 

II. 	
Where electrical work only is performed under a mechanical permit, an inspection card shall be issued and will indicate the required inspections as construction progresses.  (Ord. No. 2006-10, Sec. 4.) 


11.12.05 Permit Fee There shall be charged with the issuance of each mechanical permit a permit fee, the fee being determined by the city of Greenwood Department of Planning and Development's "consolidated Schedule of Fees." Any individual or contractor who commences any work for which a mechanical permit is required, before obtaining the necessary permit, shall be subject to a penalty of 100% of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee. (Ord. No. 2006-10, Sec. 5.) 
148 

S-7 
11.12.06 Inspection All work performed under this ordinance must be inspected by the local authority having jurisdiction thereof. (Ord. No. 2006-10, Sec. 6.) 
11.12.07 Repeal of ordinances This ordinance hereby expressly repeals Ord Nos. 269, 275, 285, 296, 550 and 99-06. (Ord. No. 2006-10, Sec. 7.) 
11.12.08  Electrical permit fees 
Item  Fee-each  
New service  $15.00  
Swimming pool  8.00  
Service change  15.00  
Meter  13.00  
Panel  8.00  
Air conditioner  8.00  
Electric range  8.00  
Circuits< 30 amps  2.00  
Circuits> 30 amps  4.00  
Signs  15.00  
Temp pole  13.00  
Electric dryer  8.00  
Disposal  8.00  
Water heater  8.00  
Electric heater  13.00  
Rough-in inspection  15.00  
Top-out inspection  15.00  
Final inspection  15.00  
Extra trip inspection  20.00  
Minimum inspection  25.00  
Other (varies)  
(Ord. No. 2010-13, Sec. 1.)  

149 

S-4 

CHAPTER 11.16 
FIRE PREVENTION CODE 


Sections:  
11.16.01  Adoption of fire prevention code  
11.16.02  Enforcement  
11.16.03  Establishment of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in  
outside above ground tanks, bulk storage of liquified petroleum  
gases and storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be restricted  
11.16.04  Modifications  
11.16.05  Appeals  
11.16.06  Penalties  

11.16.01 Adoption of fire prevention code. There is hereby adopted by the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Standard Fire Prevention Code, of which code not less than three (3) copies have been and are now filed in the office of the Recorder/Treasurer and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the municipality. 
11.16.02 Enforcement. The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire Department of the municipality. 
150 

11.16.03 Establishment of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks, bulk storage of liquified petroleum gases and storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be restricted. The limits referred to in Section 73 of the code hereby adopted in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited, the limits referred to in Section 103 of the code hereby adopted, in which bulk storage of liquified petroleum gas is restricted, and the limits referred to in Section 53 B of the code hereby adopted, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: 
A. 	The area designated on the "Official Zoning Map" of the municipality as the Central Business District; 
B. 	Within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of any building structure in any built up area within the corporate limits of the municipality. 
With the exception of outside above ground tanks for the storage of flammable liquids or for the bulk storage of liquified petroleum gases having been located in such designated areas prior to the adopting date of this ordinance; provided, however, that the Fire Chief shall inspect such facilities and issue a letter of "Modification" as hereinafter set forth in Section 11.16.04. 
11.16.04 Modifications.  The Chief of the Greenwood Fire Department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application, in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.  The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decisions of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
11.16.05 Appeals.  Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the governing body of the municipality within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. 
11.16.06  Penalties.  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the governing body of the municipality or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not less 
151 

than three (3) days nor more than thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defect within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of 
prohibited conditions.  
CHAPTER 11.20  
HOUSING CODE  
Sections:  
11.20.01  Definitions  
11.20.02  Code Enforcement/Building Inspector; duties and powers  
11.20.03  Owner and occupant responsibility; duties during inspection  
11.20.04  Conflict with other provisions  
11.20.05  Minimum Standards -Fitness of dwellings and dwelling units  
11.20.06  Structural condition  
11.20.07  Basic equipment and facilities  
11.20.08  Ventilation  
11.20.09  Space, use, and location  
11.20.10  Maintenance  
11.20.11  Control of insects, rodents, and infestation  
11.20.12  Apartments, Duplexes, Rooming houses  
11.20.13  Enforcement  

11.20.01 Definitions The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 
Basement means a portion of a building which is located partly underground, having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of the adjoining ground. Building Inspector means the authorized agent of the City of Greenwood to inspect all dwellings to determine if the structure meets the minimum standards. Cellar means a portion of a building which is located partly or wholly underground having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground. 
Code Enforcement Officer means the authorized enforcement agent of the City of Greenwood. 
Deteriorated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this ordinance, at a cost not in excess of 40 percent of its value, as determined by the findings of the Building Inspector. 
152 

Dilapidated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this ordinance at a cost not in excess of 40 percent of its value as determined by the findings of the Building Inspector. 
Dwelling means any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. However, temporary housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
Dwelling Unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Code Enforcement/Building Inspector. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathroom, water closet compartments, laundries, heater room, foyers or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces. 
Infestation means the presence with or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or the general public. 
Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
Occupant means any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
Owner means any person who alone or jointly, or severally with others shall have: 
1) The title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying 
actual Possession thereof; or 
2) Charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or 
agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the 
estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner 
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and 
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he/she were 
the owner. 
153 

Plumbing means and includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units (mechanical sink grinder), waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwasher, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
Public authority means any official of the state or city that is in charge of regulating all health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning dwellings in Greenwood. 
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Rooming house means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the operator. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste material except garbage and ashes, and the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metal, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust. 
Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of the operator or owner. 
Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, or other structures used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 14 days. 
Unfit for human habitation means conditions exist in a dwelling which violate or do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or more of the requirements established by this ordinance. 
Valuation or value means, as applied to a structure, the assessed tax value of the structure determined by the Sebastian County Tax department or the fair market value as determined by a qualified real estate appraiser with proper credentials to determine fair market value. 
(Note) Whenever the term “Dwelling,” “Dwelling Unit,” “Rooming Unit,” or “Premises” are   used in this ordinance they shall be construed as though they were followed by the phrase, “or any part thereof.” 
11.20.02 Code Enforcement/Building Inspector; duties and powers 
A) The Building Inspector will serve as the minimum housing inspector and along with the Code Enforcement Officer will enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Duties are as follows: 1) The Building Inspector will investigate any complaints filed on the condition of 
dwelling, or dwelling units, located in the city in order to determine which 
154 

dwelling and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and the purpose of carrying out the objectives of the ordinance with respect to such dwellings and dwelling units. 
2) 	To take such action, together with other appropriate departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated. 
3) 	To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this ordinance and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum standards of fitness herein prescribed; and 
4) 	To perform such other duties as may be herein prescribed. 
B) Code enforcement is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this ordinance, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted; 1) To investigate the dwelling conditions in Greenwood in order to determine which 
dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation. 2) To administer oaths and affirmation, examine witnesses and receive evidence; 3) To enter on premises for the purpose of making examinations and inspections, as 
long as such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; and 4) To appoint and fix duties of such officers, agents, and employees as deemed necessary to carry out the purpose of this ordinance. 5) To perform such other duties as may be herein prescribed. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 
11.20.03: Owner and occupant responsibility; duties during inspection 
A) Responsibilities -Owners and Occupants are responsible for the following: 
1) 	Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 

11.20.04 Conflict with other provisions 
In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of this ordinance is found to be in 
conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of Greenwood, the provision which 
establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of 
the health and safety of the residents of Greenwood shall prevail. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 

11.20.05 Minimum Standards -Fitness of dwellings and dwelling units 
A) Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum standard of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of sections 2 through section 7. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 
154.1 


11.20.06 Structural condition 
A) Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joist, rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean, or buckle, and shall not be rotted, deteriorated, or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks which might admit rodents. 
B) Roofs or floors shall have adequate supporting members and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
C) Foundations, foundation wall, piers, or other foundation supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged. 
D) Steps, stairs, landings, porches, or other parts or appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or collapse. 
E) Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be provided. 
F) Interior Walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways shall be finished of suitable materials, which will, by reasonable household methods promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between various spaces. 
G) The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls and floors, and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so as to be weather tight, and watertight. 
H) There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective, deteriorated, or in danger of falling, or in such condition or location as to constitute a fire hazard. 
I) 	There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors on the ground. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 

11.20.07 Basic equipment and facilities 
A) Plumbing System. 1) Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and to the Public Sewer or other approved sewage system. 2) Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and adequate supply of both cold and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. 3) All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the state plumbing code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working order. 4) All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user. 
B) Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have facilities for providing heat in accordance with this subsection. 1) Central and electric. Every central or electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartment in every dwelling unit to which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 
154.2 

2) Primary heating source. Primary heating equipment consisting of a vented gas wall unit, electric type baseboard unit, or space vented heater shall be provided (preferably in a central location) capable of heating at least one room in a unit 1,000 square feet or less in size to 70 degrees Fahrenheit, measured three feet above the floor and two feet from exterior walls, during the months of October through April. For each additional 1,000 square feet of floor area or portion thereof, an additional primary heating source shall be provided capable of also heating at least one additional room. 
3) Fireplaces, chimneys, flues and stovepipes. 
a) 	A fireplace used for an open fire shall be considered only as a secondary heating source. An insert shall not be considered a primary heating source 
b) 	Other applicable safety standards. 
1) There shall be no loose bricks in chimney. 
2) There shall be no holes in flues. 
3) There shall be no hanging masonry chimney. 
4) A fireplace hearth shall be at least 16 inches deep and 8 inches beyond 

each side of the fireplace opening. 5) No combustible materials shall be within seven inches of the top and seven inches either side of the fireplace opening. 6) Fireplaces shall be closed with masonry when the chimney is used as a 
flue for a stove. 7) Thimbles shall be grouted-in tightly. 8) Thimbles shall not be broken or cracked. 9) Thimbles shall be high enough for the stovepipe to rise one-quarter inch 
per foot, minimum. 10) A stove shall be within six feet of a thimble serving it. 11) No stovepipe shall extend through combustible walls. 12) No combustible material shall be within 12 inches of a stovepipe. 13) Unused flue vents shall be covered with an approved flue vent cover. 14) All heating equipment shall be listed, labeled, and installed according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions. 
4) Installation. All electric, gas and oil eating equipment installed on the premises shall be listed by a third party testing agent accredited by the NCBCC to label electrical and mechanical equipment, a copy of which is on file with the Greenwood Building Department, and installed in accordance with the provisions of the appropriate State Building Code. 
5) Prohibited equipment. Unvented gas heaters shall not be allowed as a primary heating source and shall not be used in bedrooms (unvented gas heaters may be used as a secondary heating source provided the previous prohibitions are adhered to). All unvented kerosene is prohibited in dwelling units. Bathrooms are allowed unvented gas heating as long as they are fewer than 6,000 BTU’s. 
6) Insulation. 
a) 	Where there is no insulation, or the existing insulation does not cover the entire area, insulation of R-30 shall be required, Where it is infeasible to install 
154.3 

insulation and fully meet this requirement, including the R-30 rating, adjustments or modifications to this requirement on a case to case basis by the building inspector (example: flat roof). Exception: Knob and tube wiring shall not be covered with insulation. 
b) 	Attic spaces shall be provided with an access area [reference state building code] and the [state mechanical code.] Where required, insulation in the attic shall be installed in accordance with the State Building Code. 
C) Electrical System. 1) Where there is electric service available to the dwelling or residential structure, every habitable room or space shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. In the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable rooms, then each such habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall type electrical convenience receptacles. Bedrooms shall have, in addition, at least one wall switch controlled lighting outlet, unless there is a ceiling or wall mounted lighting fixture. In any habitable room where there are ceiling or wall mounted lighting fixtures, the lighting fixture shall be controlled by a wall mounted light switch. In kitchens, two separate and remote receptacle outlets shall be provided (receptacles rendered inaccessible by appliances fastened in place or by appliances occupying dedicated space shall not be considered as thee required outlets) and a wall or ceiling lighting outlet controlled by a wall switch shall be provided. Any existing receptacle that is located at or above counter top level along any counter that contains a sink shall be changed to have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one ceiling mounted or wall-mounted lighting outlet. In bathrooms, the lighting outlet shall be controlled by a wall switch. In addition to the lighting outlet in every bathroom, there shall be provided at least one receptacle in each bathroom and that receptacle shall be of the grounding type. Any non-grounded existing receptacle shall not be considered at the required outlet. A receptacle that is attached to an existing light fixture shall only be considered as this required outlet provided it is of the grounding type. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall be of the wall-mounted duplex type and have ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protection. 2) Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural daylight is not sufficient. 3) All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in accordance with the National Electrical Code. 4) Every dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved “hard wired” listed smoke detector, installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation and listing. When activated, the detector shall provide and audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in accordance with and meet the requirements of UL217(1989), single and multiple station smoke detectors. 5) Provide a minimum of one operable carbon monoxide detector per rental unit per level, either battery operated or electrical, that is listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory that is OSHA approved to test and certify to American National 
154.4 

Standards Institute/Underwriters Laboratories Standards ANSI/UL2034 or ANSI/UL2075, and install the carbon monoxide detector in accordance with the standards of the National Fire Protection Association or the minimum protection designated in the manufacturer’s instruction. This subdivision applies only to dwelling units having a fossil fuel burning heater, appliance, or fireplace, and in any dwelling unit having an attached garage. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 

11.20.08 Ventilation 
A) General requirements. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the floor area of the room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and the light obstruction structures are located less than five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, the window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of the room, the total window area of the skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor area of the room. B) Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be easily opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation. 
C) Bathroom and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an approved ventilations system. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 

11.20.09 Space, use, and location 
A) Room Sizes. 
1) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the state residential building code. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant and at least100 square feet of additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant. 
2) In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor space for each occupant under 12 years of 
154.5 

age. 
B) Ceiling Height. 
1) A ceiling height of not less than seven feet and six inches. 
C) Floor Area Calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling unit may count for not more than ten percent of the required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than four and one-half feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area computing the total area of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy. 
D) Cellar. 
1) No cellar shall be used for living purposes. 
E) Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless: 1) The floor and walls are substantially water tight; 2) The total window area, total openable window area, and ceiling height are equal 
to those required for habitable rooms; 
3) The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the window faces a stairwell, window well, or access way. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 

11.20.10 Maintenance 
A) Exterior foundation, walls, and roofs. 
1) 	Every foundation wall, exterior wall, and exterior roof shall be substantially weather tight and rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be capable of affording privacy, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
2) 	Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather. 
3) 	Every residential structure shall have foundation skirting; and all skirting shall be maintained free from broken or missing sections, pieces or cross members. Skirting shall be securely attached and sized from the ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure. Replacement or new skirting shall be constructed of materials intended for exterior use and properly sized and mounted to prevent free access to the crawl space of the structure. 
B) Interior Floor, Walls, and Ceilings. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may caused to be placed thereon. 
C) Windows and Doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weather tight, watertight, and rodent proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
D) Stairs, Porches, and Appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and 
154.6 

good repair. 
E) Bathroom Floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit the floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
F) Supplied Facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this division shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition. 
G) Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain thorough drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water. 
H) Noxious Weeds. Every yard and all exterior property area shall be kept free of species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to health. Ord. 03­40 Section 4. 
I) Weeds and grasses. Rank weeds is any vegetation at any stage of maturity which: 
Exceeds six inches in height except healthy trees, shrubs or produce for human 
consumption grown in a tended and cultivated garden. Ord. 03-40, Section 4, 3a. 
J) Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of egress as required by 
the state residential code. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 

11.20.11 Control of insects, rodents, and infestation 
A) Screens. Every window or other device with openings to outdoor spaces, used or intended to be used for ventilation shall likewise be supplied with screens installed. 
B) Rodent Control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents or other varmints, shall be supplied with screens installed of such other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
C) Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever their dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonable insect proof condition, extermination shall be responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
D) Rubbish storage and disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling and every dwelling unit shall provide approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as required by city ordinances, and be responsible for the removal of rubbish. Ord. 03-40, Section 
5. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 

11.20.12 Apartments, Duplexes, Rooming houses 
All of the provisions of the article and all of the minimum standards and requirements of this 
154.7 

division, shall be applicable to rooming houses, and to every person who operates a rooming 
house, or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit and any rooming 
house, except as provided in this section. 1) Water closet, hand lavatory, and bath facilities. At least one water closet, lavatory basin, and bathroom or shower, properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house wherever the facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located within the residence building served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar. 2) Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age. 3) Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming house. Operator shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator. 4) Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required by subsection (1) of this section shall be located within the rooming house and within a room which affords privacy and is separate from the habitable rooms, and which is accessible from a common hall and without going outside the rooming house or through any other room therein. (Ord. No. 2016-01.) 

11.20.13 Enforcement 
Subsection 1: Investigation, notice, and hearing. 
a) Whenever a petition is filed with the minimum housing inspector by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the inspector, upon inspection, that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, shall, if preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served on the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice for public hearing will be held before the inspector at a place therein fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint. 
b) The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise; and give testimony at the place 
154.8 

and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of the hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition relating to the dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend the hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. 
c) The roles of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the inspector. 
d) After giving notice and conducting a hearing, the inspector shall stat in writing his determination whether the dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, and, if so, whether it is deteriorated or dilapidated. 
(1) 	
If the inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is deteriorated, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of the determination, and shall issue and cause to be served on the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to repair, alter, and improve the dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by the ordinance within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days. The order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and close the dwelling or dwelling unit until repairs, alterations, and improvements have been made. 

(2) 	
If the inspector determines the dwelling is dilapidated, he shall state in writings his findings of fact to support the determination, and shall issue and cause to be served on the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to vacate and close the dwelling, and to remove or demolish it with a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days. 







Sub-Section 2: Failure to comply with order. 
a) In Personam Remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the minimum housing inspector to repair, alter or improve the same within the time specified therein, or if the owner of a dilapidated dwelling shall fail to comply with an order of the inspector to vacate and close, and remove or demolish the same within the time specified therein, the inspector shall summit to the City Council at its next regular meeting a resolution directing the City Attorney to petition the court for an order directing such owner to comply with the order of the inspector. 
b) Order to Repair, Posting, etc. After failure of an owner of a deteriorated dwelling or dwelling unit, or of a dilapidated dwelling, to comply with an order of the inspector within the time specified therein, if injunctive relief has not been sought or has not been granted as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the inspector shall submit to the city council an ordinance ordering the inspector to cause the dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered, improved, or vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of the inspector, and pending such removal or demolition, to placard the dwelling provided in Ord. 03-40. 
154.9 

Subsection 3: Appeals. 
a) 	An appeal from any decision or order of the minimum housing inspector may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Any appeal from the inspector shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and shall be taken by filing with the inspector and with the City Council a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds on which the appeal is based. 
b) 	Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record on which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the inspector refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the City Council, unless the inspector certifies to the City Council, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate(a copy of which shall be furnished by the appellant), a suspension of his requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order which may be granted for due cause shown on not less than one day’s written notice to the inspector, by the City Council, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to Section 9 Subsection 2 ( Failure to Comply with Order). 
c) 	The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals, shall give due notice to all parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney, The City Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision and order as in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the inspector, be the concurring of four members of the City Council shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the inspector. The City Council shall have the power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where there practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance, to adapt the application of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
d) 	Every decision of the City Council shall be subject to review by proceeding in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the City Council but not otherwise. 
e) 	All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the inspector pursuant to this section shall be heard and determined by the City Council. As the appeals body, the Council shall have the power to fix the times and places of its meetings to adopt necessary rules of procedure and any other rules and regulations which may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties. The Council shall perform the duties prescribed by the section and shall keep an accurate journal of all its 
154.10 

proceedings. 
Subsection 4: Petition to Circuit Court 
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the minimum housing inspector/code enforcement officer or a decision rendered by the City Council shall have the right, within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision, to petition the Court of Record for a temporary injunction restraining the inspector pending a final disposition of the cause. 
Subsection 5: Method of service of complaints and orders. 
a) Complaints or orders issued by the minimum housing inspector/code enforcement officer shall be served on persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. However, if the whereabouts of such person are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of such complaint or order on such person may be made by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper circulation in the town. 
b) Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. 
Subsection 6: In rem action by inspector; placarding. a) After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with an order of the inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, and upon adoption by the City Council this ordinance authorizing and directing him to do so as provided by Subsection 2, the inspector shall proceed to cause such dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by the ordinance, or to be vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as directed by this ordinance of the Greenwood City Council. He shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling or dwelling unit a placard with the following words: 
THIS BUILDING IS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION; THE USE OR OCCUPATION OF 
THIS BUILDING FOR HUMAN HABITATION IS PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL. b) Each such ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the property is located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the granter index. 
Subsection 7: Costs as lien on premises. 
a) The amount of the cost of any repairs, alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, caused to be made or done by the minimum housing inspector pursuant to Section 9, Subsection 2 shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. 
154.11 

b) Such lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be enforced and the costs collected. 
c) If the dwelling is removed or demolished be the inspector, he shall sell the material of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the court by the inspector, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Greenwood to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise. 
Subsection 8: Enforcement of order. 
If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling or dwelling unit, the inspector may file a civil action in the name of the City of Greenwood to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying such dwelling. The circuit clerk shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in Arkansas State Statutes. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the inspector produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the Greenwood City Council pursuant to Section 9, Subsection 1 authorizing the inspector to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall make judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under Arkansas State Statute. An appeal from any judgment entered hereunder the magistrate may be taken as provided in Arkansas State Statute, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as provided in Arkansas State Statute. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this paragraph unless such occupant was served with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding the  Greenwood City Council has ordered the public officer to proceed to exercise his duties under Subsection 2 to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling. 
Subsection 9: Alternative remedies. 
a) Neither this ordinance nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Greenwood to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce the ordinance by criminal process as authorized by Arkansas State Statutes. 
154.12 

b) The enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the 
enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other 
ordinances or laws. 
Subsection 10: Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the same or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the minimum housing inspector duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order, Each day that any such failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with the order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to Section 9 through Subsection 4, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration, or improvement or its vacation and closing, and each that such occupancy continues after the prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
Subsection 11: Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor, and by ordinance subject the offender to a civil penalty, upon the issuance of a citation for said violation. The procedure for issuance of a citation with escalating fines is as follows: 
1) First offense: Issue warning citation and hold hearing. 
2) If offense is determined to be in violation and violations continue with 
escalating fines, such fines shall be issued as follows: 
a) Per day for each ten days in violation……………………..$  25.00 
b) Per day for each of the next ten days of violation….$  50.00 
c) Per day for each day of violation thereafter…………….$100.00 
(Ord. No. 2016-01.) 
154.13 

CHAPTER 11.28 
MECHANICAL CODE 

Sections: 
11.28.01 Code adopted by reference 
11.28.02 Amendments 
11.28.03 Permit system 
11.28.04 Mechanical permits 
11.28.05 Permit fee 
11.28.01 Code adopted by reference That the City of Greenwood hereby adopts by reference as though they were copied herein fully, the Arkansas Mechanical Code, 1997 Edition, subject to local amendments herein set forth, the same being more stringent, hereinafter referred to as the “Code,” and is adopted in an attempt to ensure safe and proper mechanical installations including new systems, alterations, repairs, replacements, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto, so as to safeguard life, health and the public welfare.  (Ord. No. 00-02, Sec. 2.) 
11.28.02 Amendments Local amendments to the Code hereinabove referred to shall supersede the Arkansas Mechanical Code, 1997 Edition, where said local amendments equal or exceed the minimum standards of the Arkansas Mechanical Code, 1997 Edition, and are hereby adopted as a part of the Code.  Local amendments are as follows: 


Gas Vents 
All gas vents off gas fired equipment shall be Type B Vents factory made double wall as defined under Chapter 2, Section 202 of the Arkansas Mechanical Code, 1997 Edition, and shall be continuous from the gas appliance to the termination, except as may be approved by the authority having jurisdiction.  Cutting of Type B vent pipe is not allowed. 

Clothes Dryer Vents 
A. 	Clothes dryer vents are a part of the ventilating system and shall be independent of all other systems. 
B. 	Vents shall be metal or a type plastic designed to convey heat with no adverse effect on the vent piping or the appliance. 
C. 	Vents shall terminate to the atmosphere and be equipped with a backdraft damper. Vents shall not pass through or terminate above the roof. 
155 

D. 	Vent piping shall be sloped down towards the discharge at 1/8 inch per foot where possible and shall terminate a minimum of 12 inches above finish grade or as approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
E. 	Vent termination shall be a minimum of 10 feet from air conditioning condensing unit. 

H.V.A.C. Ductwork and Plenums 
All ductwork shall be galvanized sheet metal having a minimum thickness as shown in Table 604.3 of the Code. Except as follows: 
A. 	Ductwork constructed in accordance with Chapter 6, Section 604, specifically 604.2.2,3, of the Code. 
B. 	Ductwork above suspended ceilings may include six feet of flexible duct from ceiling difuser to trunk line. 
C. 	Ductwork installed in attic space shall be held a minimum of 12” above top of ceiling joists. 
C. 	Ductwork shall be suspended by galvanized metal straps, minimum 2 inches wide, or other type hangers with suitable saddle, as approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
D. 	All return air plenums must be sealed air tight. 
E. 	No wiring shall be installed in the duct system, except as allowed under 300.22 of the National Electrical Code, 1996 Edition. 

Condensate Drain 
The primary drain piping shall have a trap as close to its connection to the coil as practical, with a vent on the downstream side. 

Fuel Gas Piping 
All fuel gas piping shall conform to the Arkansas Mechanical Code, 1997 Edition, except as follows: 
A. 	Rigid steel piping must be used inside the metal cabinet housing all gas fired heating units, said piping to extend through the cabinet a sufficient length, minimum 2 inches for make up, where a flexible connector may be used for final connection to the gas piping serving the unit. 
156 

S-4 

B. 	No fuel gas piping shall be allowed within the duct system, plenum or any portion of the air conveyance system. 

Bathroom Exhaust Systems 
Bathroom exhaust fans shall have a rigid pipe extended a minimum of two feet above attic insulation or extended to the outside.  (Ord. No. 2000-02, Sec. 3.) 
11.28.03 Permit system All work performed pursuant to the Code shall be subject to the permit system established by the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, and administered through the inspection process and shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A. 	All heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems for new residential dwellings and new commercial structures. 
B. 	All heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems for additions to existing structures. 
C. 	All work for remodeling, renovation and repair wherein any major component of a system is replaced, such as, central heater-blower-coil, condensing unit, special fuel-burning equipment, boiler/water heaters, incinerators. (Ord. No. 00-02, Sec. 4.) 
11.28.04 Mechanical permit All individuals and contractors shall obtain a mechanical permit issued by the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, prior to commencing any work as outlined in Section 4, said mechanical permit to be as follows: 
A. 	Said mechanical permit shall contain information on a form provided by the city of Greenwood for each project covered under the mandates of this ordinance. 
B. 	Where heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and refrigeration work is performed as a part of work under a building permit, the inspection card issued with said building permit will indicate the required heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and refrigeration inspections as construction progresses. 
C. 	Where heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and refrigeration work only is performed under a mechanical permit an inspection card will be issued and will indicate the required inspections as construction progresses. (Ord. No. 00-02, Sec. 5.) 
11.28.05  Permit fee There shall be charged with the issuance of each mechanical permit a permit fee which must be paid upon issuance of said permit, the fee being determined by the city of Greenwood "Department of Planning and Development Consolidated Schedule of Fees." 
157 

S-8 Any individual or contractor who commences any work for which a mechanical permit is required, before obtaining the necessary permit, shall be subject to a penalty of 100% of the usual permit fee, in addition to the required permit fee.  (Ord. No. 2006-5, Sec. 7.) 
Heating, Ventilating, Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Permit Fees 
Item  Fee -each  
Heating unit  $13.00  
Air-conditioning unit  13.00  
Duct rough-in openings  4.00  
Return air vent  4.00  
Heating unit vent  8.00  
Fireplace vents  8.00  
Heating unit change out  8.00  
Condensing unit change out  8.00  
Commercial refrigeration unit  18.00  
Commercial kitchen exhaust  23.00  
Exhaust fan  4.00  
Bathroom exhaust  4.00  
Attic installation  8.00  
Crawl space installation  8.00  
Rough-in inspection  15.00  
Top-out inspection  15.00  
Final inspection  15.00  
Extra trip inspection  20.00  
Minimum inspection  25.00  
Other (varies)  
(Ord. No. 2010-13, Sec. 1.)  

CHAPTER 11.32 
DRILLING FOR OIL AND GAS 
Sections: 
11.32.01 Purpose; required 
11.32.02 Special use permit application 
11.32.03 Contents; due date 
11.32.04 Conditions and restrictions upon permit 
11.32.05 Compliance with fire code; related safety precautions 
158 

S-8 


11.32.06 Damages to public property; binding agreement of responsibility; bond 
11.32.07 Time limit on commencement of drilling operations 
11.32.08 Appeal of Mayor’s decision to City Council 
11.32.01 Purpose; required 
A. 	This article is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions for the drilling of oil and gas wells. 
B. 	A special use permit is hereby established to set standards used in approving oil and gas well operations and to establish procedures for processing the special use permits.  Certain uses are defined as special uses because of the potential harmful effects the use can cause to nearby property and public streets, and because the requirements needed to eliminate those harmful effects vary from site to site. Thus, the Mayor, or his designated agent, in considering each special use request, will review the overall compatibility of the planned use with surrounding property as well as such specific items as street standards, traffic patterns, compliance with the adopted Fire Prevention Code of the city, amount of dust or spillage created by the operation, traffic control, etc., to make sure no harmful effects occur to nearby property or existing public property.  However, nothing herein shall be interpreted and/or applied so as to effectively prevent or eliminate oil and/or gas drilling within the city.  (Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 1.) 

11.32.02  Special use permit application 
A. 	The application for a special use permit shall be made to the office of the Mayor, or his designated agent, by the owner or agent of the oil and gas well operations. The application shall include four (4) copies of the required site plan.  The fee for processing a special use application shall be One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00). 
B. 	The required survey and site plan shall be submitted on paper no larger than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and no smaller than twelve (12) inches by twenty-four (24) inches.  The site plan shall be drawn to scale of no less than one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet unless the Mayor, or his designated agent, approves a different scale. 
C. 	The survey and site plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
1. 	
The land to be included in the proposed use along with a written legal description of the land. 

2. 	
The location and dimensions of all public rights-of-way on or abutting the planned area. 

3. 	
Existing and proposed finished grade on the site, with particular attention to drainage. 

4. 	
Location of all points of vehicular entrance and exit to the site. The location and dimensions of all existing easements and public improvements within the site. 

5. 	
The location of permanent or temporary structures or proposed structures to be located on the site. 

6. 	
The location of any reserve pit. 

7. 	
Location of closest available water to the site. 

8. 	
Exact location of the proposed drilling rig. 

9. 	
Location of any all-weather roadway (shale, SB-2, etc.) capable of supporting fire apparatus on the site. 

10. 	
Location of all security fencing around the site (if applicable). (Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 2.) 


158.1 

S-8 

11.32.03 Contents; due date The complete application, including all supportive information, must be received by the Mayor at least seven (7) working days before the date that work is to commence.  The special use application shall contain the following information: 
A. 	A survey and site plan of the property prepared by a certified land surveyor or registered civil engineer. 
B. 	The street address or addresses of the entire property. 
C. 	The present zoning classification of the property, using such words as "residential," "industrial," and "commercial" along with the numeral and letters in lieu of letter such as "R-2-MF." 
D. 	A description of the proposed special use, including the description of any construction of temporary structures to be erected on the property. 
158.2 

S-8 

E. 	The projected route of truck traffic to and from the operation site including the projected number of trips.  The number of trips and route may be regulated by the Mayor, or his designated agent. 
F. 	The name of subcontractor responsible for site preparation (a separate special use permit is required.) 
G. 	Evidence that the applicant has given written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owners of all property situated within four hundred (400) feet of the well bore and all contiguous land owners to the drill site, setting forth the location of the well site and the anticipated date of commencement of operations on the well site.  (Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 3.) 
11.32.04 Conditions and restrictions upon permit The Planning Department may impose reasonable conditions and restrictions upon the application under consideration with the intent of minimizing the impact of the special use permit operation upon nearby property or public property.  The limitations placed upon a special use permit may include but are not limited to: 
A. 	The method for cleaning materials used in the operations that are dropped, shifted, leaked, or otherwise escape onto a roadway from the vehicles transporting such materials, and such material shall be removed as necessary each day; 
B. 	The method of controlling traffic (flagman or traffic control devices may be required at the contractor's expense); 
C. 	Weight limits may be placed on all haulers to minimize damage to public facilities (reasonable weight limits to be determined by the Mayor or his designated agent); 
D. 	The number of hours that site preparation work can be conducted on the premises may be regulated by the Public Works Department to minimize harmful effects on nearby property owners.  (Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 4.) 
11.32.05  Compliance with fire code; related safety precautions The applicant must be in compliance with the Fire Prevention Code of the city and must also meet the following conditions: 
A. 	The reserve pit shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any structure. 
B. 	All standing brush or trees shall be cleared for a radius of fifty (50) feet from a reserve pit. Such steps shall be taken as are necessary to preserve vegetation and natural areas on the remainder of the well site. 
158.3 

S-8 

C. 	The reserve pit shall be diked or otherwise constructed to protect property and the environment.  
D. 	Water must be available at the site (within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet) by either fire hydrant or hoses which will fit Fire Department connections. 
E. 	The drilling platform shall be a minimum twenty-five (25) feet from any roadway. 
F. 	An all-weather roadway capable of supporting fire apparatus shall be available at the site. 
G. 	When surface blasting is required, the following precautions shall be taken: 
1. 	
Blasting shall be conducted by federally licensed technicians; 

2. 	
Authorities having jurisdiction shall monitor blasting (Fire Department). 

3. 	
Blasting shall be limited to the daylight hours, between the hours of 8:00 


a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
H. 	The drilling site shall have security fencing around the entire site or personnel on the site twenty-four (24) hours during the operations to prohibit unauthorized access. 
I. 	A list of trained personnel to be called in case of a blow-out shall be furnished to the Fire Department. 
J. 	Temporary repairs to the city streets may be required by the Mayor or his designated agent. 
K. 	The drilling operations on the well site shall not create any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise in accordance with prudent drilling operations. 
L. 	All necessary steps shall be taken in the operation of the well site to protect the health, safety and welfare of all persons and property.  (Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 5.) 
11.32.06 Damages to public property; binding agreement of responsibility; bond All reasonable conditions required for a special use must be met before any operations may begin. The owner or applicant filing for a special use permit shall sign a binding agreement with the city that all damages to public property related to this operation, for which the owner or applicant is legally responsible, shall be repaired at the expense of the applicant. The Mayor, or his designated agent, shall determine the condition of public facilities (including photos and documentation) prior to the initiation of the operation. 
158.4 

S-8 
A bond, for a reasonable amount, shall be required for the amount determined by the Mayor, or his designated agent. Immediately after completion of the drilling of the well site, repairs will commence on the damage that has been done to the public property.  Failure of the applicant to correctly repair all damaged public facilities, for which it has been determined responsible, may result in the revocation of all existing or future permits for said company, as well as the city’s entitlement to exercise all other rights available at law to ensure that the public facilities are repaired.  (Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 6.) 
11.32.07 Time limit on commencement of drilling operations The drilling operation must begin within six (6) months of the authorization unless a special time limit (less than six (6) months) has been imposed by the Mayor, or his designated agent. (Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 7.) 
11.32.08  Appeal of Mayor’s decision to the City Council The decision of the Mayor, or his designated agent, concerning a special use, may be appealed to the City Council.  Any interested party may file an appeal, provided that the appeal is filed with the City Clerk by 5:00 
p.m. on the tenth (10th ) calendar day following the date of the decision of the Mayor, or his designated agent. (Ord. No. 2010-16, Sec. 8.) 
158.5 

S-4 

CHAPTER 11.36 
DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES 


Sections:  
11.36.01  Purpose and scope  
11.36.02  Definitions  
11.36.03  Applicability  
11.36.04  Permit required  
11.36.05  Time limit  
11.36.06  Standards  
11.36.07  Inspections  
11.36.08  Permit fees  
11.36.09  Bond requirement  
11.36.10  Penalty  

11.36.01  Purpose and scope The standards set forth in this ordinance shall apply to the demolition of buildings or structures for which a permit is required under 104 of the Standard Building Code, 1999 Edition.  This ordinance shall apply to all structures within the jurisdiction of the City of Greenwood Building Department. The enforcement and administration of this ordinance shall be by the Building Official and Building Department. (Ord. No. 2001-18, Sec. 1.) 
159 

11.36.02  Definitions 
Demolition. The act of razing, dismantling or removal of a building or structure, or portion thereof to the ground level.  (Ord. No. 01-18, Sec. 2.) 
11.36.03  Applicability The provisions of these regulations shall apply to the removal or demolition of any buildings or structures and any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures located within the city limits of the City of Greenwood, Arkansas.  (Ord. No. 01-18, Sec. 3.) 
11.36.04  Permit required Any owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to remove and/or demolish any buildings or structures which is regulated by this ordinance shall first make application to the Building Official along with the required fees and bonds to obtain the required permit for the work. (Ord. No. 01-18, Sec. 4.) 
11.36.05  Time limit A time limit of thirty days from the date of issue, shall be a condition of the permit for completion of demolition work, provided that for cause one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding thirty days each, may be allowed in writing by the Building Official.  (Ord. No. 01-18, Sec. 5.) 

11.36.06  Standards 
A. 	Demolition work having commenced shall be pursued diligently and without unreasonable interruption with due regard to safety. It is the intent of this section to limit the existence of an unsafe condition or nuisance on the premises during the period of demolition operations. 
B. 	Any surface holes or irregularities, wells, septic tanks, basements, cellars, sidewalk vaults, or coal chutes remaining after demolition of any building or structure shall be filled with material as approved by the Building Official, and shall be graded as level as possible and still provide effective surface drainage. Such grading shall be completed in such a manner as to not leave piles of dirt or debris. 
C. 	All debris and accumulation of material resulting from demolition of any building or structure shall be removed from the premises. 
D. 	All building sewers shall be effectively plugged with concrete at the property line, or as may be required by the Building Official, and inspected by the Building Official before covering. 
E. 	Except where there is adequate space, or approval has been granted by the Building Official, the demolition of a multi-story building by other than explosive means shall proceed with the complete removal of one story at a time.  In the 
160 

demolition of any building other than by explosive means, story after story shall be removed and shall be properly wet to alleviate any dust. 
F. 	No wall, chimney or other construction shall be allowed to fall in mass on an upped floor. Bulky material, such as beams and columns, shall be lowered and not allowed to fall.  When any building over one story in height is demolished, precautions for protecting the public shall be taken as prescribed in Chapter 33, Standard Building Code, 1999 Edition. 
G. 	Provisions shall be made to contain all debris on site during demolition. 
H. 	The Building Official may require a site plan with details showing the method used to control storm water runoff that may carry silt, rubbish, or other debris onto adjoining property and into drainage structures.  (Ord. No. 01-18, Sec. 6.) 
11.36.07  Inspections The Building Department shall make the following inspections upon notification from the permit holder or agent: 
A. 	Initial inspection.  When the sewer line has been uncovered and capped, after all utility connections have been disconnected and secured in such a manner that no unsafe or unsanitary conditions shall exist during or remain after demolition operations. 
B. 	When silt screens, hay bales, safety barriers, or other safety structures are in place to protect the public. 
C. 	Final inspections.  To be made after all demolition work, grading and final clean­up has been completed. (Ord. No. 01-18, Sec. 7.) 
11.36.08  Permit fees A permit fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be paid at the time of issuance of the demolition permit. 
Exception: 	A home owner demolishing a structure at his principal place of residence less than 500 square feet and not connected to any utilities shall pay a permit fee of Twenty Dollars ($20.00). (Ord. No. 01-18, Sec. 8.) 

11.36.09  Bond requirement 
A. 	Before a permit shall be issued by the Building Official, and as a condition to the issuance of such permit to demolish a building or structure, the person, firm, or corporation shall file with the Building Department a bond. Such bond shall be made payable to the City of Greenwood, Arkansas, in the amount of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned that upon completion of said demolishing of said building or structure that said lot will be cleaned and debris disposed of in a lawful manner. 
161 

S-18 

B. 	Said bond shall indemnify the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, against any damage caused by the removal of such building or structure to streets, curbs, sidewalks, shade trees, highways and any other property which may be affected by the demolition and removal. 
C. 	When the lot or lots are cleaned to where it is not unsightly, unsanitary, unsafe and timely completed, complying with all requirements of this ordinance, the bond shall be returned; otherwise the bond will be used to clean the lot so it is not unsightly, unsanitary, or unsafe. 
Exception:  A home owner demolishing a structure at his principal place of residence said structure being demolished being less than 500 square feet and not connected to any utilities shall not be required to post a bond. (Ord. No. 2001-18, Sec. 9.) 
11.36.10  Penalty Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00), together with the costs of such prosecution.  Each day during which violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. No. 2001-18, Sec. 10.) 
CHAPTER 11.40 
ENERGY CODE 
Sections: 
11.40.01 Adoption 
11.40.01  Adoption There is hereby adopted by the City Council of Greenwood, Arkansas, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for energy efficient standards for new building construction, this code known as the 2014 Arkansas Energy Code, being particularly the 2014 Arkansas Energy Code edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which not less than three (3) copies of this ordinance have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk or Recorder of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, and the same ordinance is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this ordinance shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and structures therein contained within the corporate limits of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas. (Ord. No. 2014-21, Sec. 1.) 
162 





S-11 
TITLE 13 
PLANNING 

Chapters: 
13.04 Planning Commission 
13.08 Metropolitan Planning Organization 
CHAPTER 13.04 
PLANNING COMMISSION 


Sections:  
13.04.01 13.04.02 13.04.03 13.04.04 13.04.05 13.04.06 13.04.07  Commission created Duties Members Terms Territorial jurisdiction Description Filing  

13.04.01 Commission created There is hereby created a commission of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, to be known as the City Planning Commission, which said commission shall consist of six (6) members of whom not more than one-third may hold any other municipal office or appointment.  Members who actually attend Planning Commission meetings shall receive a stipend of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) per meeting. (Ord. No. 183, Sec. 1, amended by Ord. No. 2012-17, Sec. 1.) 
13.04.02 Duties The City Planning Commission shall have all the duties and functions as pertaining to Planning Commission as conferred upon the city for planning as provided by Act 186 of the Acts of Arkansas 1957. (Ord. No. 183, Sec. 2.) 
13.04.03 Members The members of the City Planning Commission shall be named and appointed by the Mayor and his appointments will be valid and effective upon confirmation by the City Council.  (Ord. No. 183, Sec. 3.) 
13.04.04 Terms The terms of the members of the City Planning Commission shall be for three years.  However, the initial appointments to the Commission shall be two (2) 
164 

S-8 
commissioners of one (1) year, two (2) commissioners for two (2) years, two (2) commissioners for three (3) years. The Mayor shall designate the terms of the initial appointments. Thereafter as vacancies occur in said Commission, for whatever case, said vacancies shall be filled in the manner provided and said appointees shall hold office until expiration of the term which they were appointed to fill. All members of the Commission whose terms may expire shall serve until their successors in office have been appointed and confirmed.  (Ord. No. 183, Sec. 4STATE LAW REFERENCE -See A.C.A.  14-56-402, 404 and 410. 
13.04.05  Territorial jurisdiction The Planning Area Boundary of the city of Greenwood shall consist of all lands as reflected on the attached Exhibit “A,” specifically, to wit: 
Sections 1 through 24 of Township 6 North, Range 31 West, Sections 1 through 24 of Township 6 North, Range 30 West, Sections 31 through 36 of Township 7 North, Range 30 West, Sections 35 and 36 of Township 7 North, Range 31 West. (Ord. No. 2010-24, Sec. 1.) 
13.04.06  Description The Planning Commission is directed to file a description of the boundaries of the area with the City Clerk and the County Recorder. (Ord. No. 2010-24, Sec. 2.) 
13.04.07  Filing The Planning Commission shall communicate to the County Recorder in accordance with A.C.A. 14-56-417 (c), as concerns the area indicated on the planning area map. The County Recorder shall not accept any plat for record without the approval of the Planning Commission of Greenwood, Arkansas.  (Ord. No. 2010-24, Sec. 3.) 
CHAPTER 13.08 
METROPOLITAN PLANNING ORGANIZATION 
Sections:  
13.08.01  Formation  
13.08.02  Authorization  
13.08.03  Execution and delivery of Agreement  
13.08.04  Instruments of execution  
13.08.05  File  

13.08.01  Formation 
A. 	The City Council hereby finds and determines that it is in the best interest of the city to join with the entities named above in the formation of a Metropolitan Planning Organization. 
164.1 

S-8 
1. 	
For the purpose of banding together the territory under the jurisdiction of the signatory parties the geographical area specified below; 

2. 	
To create greater eligibility for grants, loans, and other consideration under federal legislation including, but not limited to, 23 U.S.C. 134, et seq., as amended, that can be used for the expenses of planning, research and technical assistance to help the organization determine feasible actions that will improve the existing, as well as the future economic and social environment of the territory under the jurisdiction of the signatory parties, and 

3. 	
To provide other services and benefits, for which such functions may in many instances be discharged or performed by a common entity to the mutual advantage of all, including the citizens of the planning area. 


B. 	The Agreement for the formation of the Metropolitan Planning Organization establishes a planning area to be comprised of the area within the geographical boundaries of the following: 
Crawford County, Arkansas Sebastian County, Arkansas District 1 of Leflore County, Oklahoma District 1 of Sequoyah County, Oklahoma (Ord. No. 2011-3, Sec. 1.) 
13.08.02  Authorization The formation of a Metropolitan Planning Organization pursuant to the Acts mentioned above, to be known as the “Frontier Metropolitan Planning Organization,” and the city’s participation in the same, are hereby authorized.  Upon the dissolution of the existing “Bi-State Metropolitan Planning Organization” and the formation of the new Metropolitan Planning Organization, all assets, if any, and all contractual rights and obligations, as well as any liabilities of the existing Metropolitan Planning Organization shall be transferred to, received by, and assumed by the new Metropolitan Planning Organization.  (Ord. No. 2011-3, Sec. 2.) 
13.08.03  Execution and delivery of Agreement There is hereby authorized the execution and delivery of an Agreement by and between the city and the other governmental subdivisions of the state of Arkansas and Oklahoma mentioned above, and the Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized to execute and deliver the Agreement for and on behalf of the city.  The Agreement is hereby approved in substantially the form submitted to this meeting, and the Mayor is hereby authorized to confer with the other parties thereto in order to complete the Agreement in substantially the form submitted to this meeting with such changes as shall be proposed by such persons executing the document, their execution to constitute conclusive evidence of such approval. 
164.2 

S-8 
Further, and specifically, if any member entity named herein or in the Agreement form attached should choose to not be a member of the Metropolitan Planning Organization, then the exclusion of that member entity or entities shall have no effect on the authorization established by this ordinance to enter into the Agreement. (Ord. No. 2011-3, Sec. 3.) 
13.08.04  Instruments of execution The Mayor and City Clerk, for and on behalf of the city, are hereby authorized to execute and directed to do any and all things necessary to effect the execution and delivery of the Agreement, and the performance of all acts of whatever nature necessary to effect and carry out the authority conferred by this ordinance.  The Mayor and City Clerk are hereby further authorized and directed, for and on behalf of the city, to execute all papers, documents, certificates and other instruments that may be required for the carrying out of such authority or to evidence the exercise thereof.  (Ord. No. 2011-3, Sec. 4.) 
13.08.05  File The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file in the office of the City Clerk as a part of the minutes of the meeting at which this ordinance is adopted for inspection by any interested person a copy of this Agreement, and such document shall be on file for inspection by any interested person. (Ord. No. 2011-3, Sec. 5.) 
164.3 

S-9 
TITLE 14 
ZONING 
Chapters: 
14.04 Zoning Ordinance 
14.08 Mobile Homes 
14.12 Flood Damage Prevention Program 
14.16 Annexing, Vacating and Rezoning Property 
CHAPTER 14.04 
ZONING ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
14.04.01 Zoning ordinance 
14.04.02 Fine 
14.04.03 Zoning Map 
14.04.04 Amendments 
14.04.01 Zoning ordinance Under the authority of Act 186 of 1957 as amended, there is hereby established a zoning ordinance with associated District Regulations for the city of Greenwood, Arkansas.  (Ord. No. 316, Sec. 1.) 
14.04.02 Fine The Zoning Ordinance and District Regulations of the city of Greenwood, shall be administered through the issuance and/or denial of building permits, Any firm or corporation violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00 dollars.  (Ord. No. 316, Sec. 2.) 
14.04.03  Zoning Map There is hereby adopted by the City Council of Greenwood, Arkansas, the “Official Zoning Boundary Map” prepared by Mickle Wagner Coleman, on a scale of 1 inch to 1000 feet, and dated October 23, 2001, attached as “Exhibit A.”  (Ord. No. 2001-22, Sec. 1.) 
165 

S-9 

14.04.04 Amendments 
Ord. No. 581 
A. 	Ordinance No. 316, specifically Article V, Section (1) (3) (c) is hereby modified to provide that an R-1 zoning areas involving corner lots, side yards facing the streets setoffs shall not be closer than fifteen feet from the property line.  This modifies the original provision which allowed the same to be twenty-five feet from the property line.  Likewise, the subdivision regulations, specifically, Ord. No. 486, Section III (F) (2) is likewise amended to provide that side buildings set back lines on corner lots shall not be less than fifteen feet from the property line on the side of said lot facing the street. All other provisions of the aforementioned ordinances shall remain in full force and effect except as modified herein.  This ordinance shall not have any effect on any non-conforming uses which existed at the time of the adoption of this ordinance. 
Ord. No. 437 
That Article V, Section 3 of said Ord. No. 316 shall hereinafter be amended to read as follows: Section 3: C-1 Central Commercial District 
1. 	Permitted Uses 
a. 	
Retail establishments providing goods and services such as grocery, drug, hardware, variety stores and similar uses, and hotels, motor hotels, restaurants. 

b. 	
Office and bank buildings and uses. 

c. 	
Processing and manufacturing that by reason of operation are not a nuisance in respect to noise, odor, dust, vibrations, etc. 

d. 	
Wholesaling and warehousing 

e. 	
Bulk storage of non-combustible materials. 

f. 	
Automotive service, repair and storage, provided that wrecked or salvage vehicles are stored inside a building or are enclosed by a solid fence and are not visible to the public from the street or sidewalk. 

g. 	
Signs -all must be on private property. 


2. 	
Height Maximum height of a structure shall be three stories and not to exceed 48 feet. 

3. 	
Rear Yard Minimum: 10 feet from property line or center of alley where one exists. 

4. 	
Loading and Unloading Loading and unloading facilities shall be provided so as not to block any public way. 

5. 	
Side Yard Minimum: 7 ½ feet from property line or center of alley where one exists to a roof line. 


166 

S-9 That Article V, Section 4 of said Ord. No. 316 shall hereinafter be amended to read as follows: 
1. 	Permitted Uses 
a. 	
Retail establishments providing goods or services for the motoring public 

b. 	
Office buildings and uses. 

c. 	
Automotive service, repair and storage provided that wrecked or salvage vehicles are stored inside a building or are enclosed by a solid fence and are not visible to the public from the street or sidewalk. 

d. 	
Motels, tourist courts, mobile home parks, etc. 

e. 	
Veterinarian clinics. 

f. 	
Signs -advertising signs not over 300 square feet in area. 


2. 	Street Yard Requirements Minimum of 25 feet from all street property lines or 50 feet from centerline of existing right-of-way, whichever is greater. Height Maximum height of a structure shall be three stories and not to exceed 40 feet. On Lot Parking Space 
a. 	
On-lot paring facilities shall be provided all employees 

b. 	
Provisions shall be made for on-lot and customer parking to handle normal anticipated demand. 

c. 	
Motels, tourist courts, mobile home parks, shall provide one on-lot parking space for each sleeping unit or mobile home space. 


3. 	
Side Yard Minimum: 7 ½ feet from property line or center of alley where one exists to a roof line. 

4. 	
Rear Yard Minimum: 10 feet from property line or center of alley where one exists. 

5. 	
Loading and Unloading Loading and Unloading facilities shall be provided so as not to block any public way. 


Ord. No. 2001-22 
D. 	Article III, Section 2, Item 1 shall be replaced with the following: 
1. 	The boundaries of the zoning districts are on the official Zoning/Boundary Map dated October 23, 2001, approved and adopted by the City Council on December 3, 2001, which is a part of these regulations. 
167 

S-2 

Ord. No. 2003-9 
Page 9, Ord. No. 316 shall be modified as follows: 
2. Lot Area 	(b) Two-family:  Minimum 10,000 square feet. 
4. 	Width Minimum width of a lot at the front yard line or building line shall be 75 feet for one-family dwelling, and 85 feet for two-family dwelling. 
Ord. No. 2004-2 
Article IV, Section 8, subsection (g) is replaced with the following language: 
It shall be unlawful for residents of residential zones to commence or engage in occupations, operate businesses and offer professional services in their homes, until the Building Inspector has issued a "Home Occupations Permit."  The procedure in general for requesting a "Home Occupation Permit" will be as outlined in Article VIII of this ordinance.  Additionally, the applicant will be instructed to present a parking site plan to the Planning Commission for approval at the next regularly scheduled meeting.  Upon approval of the zoning classification by the Planning Commission, the Building Inspector will inspect the residence for compliance with other requirements of this section within five (5) days of the approval of the parking site plan.  If the applicant conforms with all provisions, the Department of Planning and Development will issue a home occupation permit.  If a home occupation permit is refused, the Building Inspector will state such refusal in writing with cause. 
Ord. No. 2004-3 
Article VIII, Section 1, subsection 3 would include the following additional language: 
C. 	Notification by mail of property owners within a 300 ft. radius of the property in question, setting forth the time and place of such hearing and the amendment proposed. It will be the responsibility of the city of Greenwood Planning Department to generate a list of property owners within a three-hundred (300) foot radius of the property in question. 
a. 	
The list of shall contain the following information for each property owner: 

I. 	Name 
II. 	Mailing address 
III. City 
IV. 
State 

V. 
Zip Code 



b. 	
Fee-the applicant shall pay a one-time fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) to cover costs of postage and data management. (Ord. No. 04-3, Sec. 1.) 


167.1 

S-3 
Ord. No. 2005-1 
Article IV, Section 3, item 2 of Ord. No. 316 shall be replaced with the following language: 
2. 	Accessory Buildings – Definitions 
a. 	
Accessory Building:  A structure, attached or detached, which is subordinate to the main or principal structure, on the same lot, and is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main structure. 

b. 	
Portable Building:  An accessory building which can be moved and which does not require a footing or slab. 

c. 	
Accessory building not used as a garage: Any accessory building that is not a garage, storage building, pool storage building, pump house or gazebo. 


3. 	Accessory Building – General requirements 
a. 	
Accessory uses and buildings are permitted only in connection with, incidental to and on the same lot with the principal use of building which is permitted in the particular residential zoning district. 

b. 	
No accessory use shall be occupied or utilized unless the principal structure to which it is accessory is occupied or utilized. 

c. 	
In any zoning district an accessory building may be erected detached from the permitted principal building or as an integral part of the permitted principal building.  When erected as an integral part of the permitted principal building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this ordinance applicable to the permitted principal building. The architectural character of all attached and detached accessory building, with the exception of portable buildings less than one hundred 

(100) square feet in area, shall be compatible and similar to the principal building. 

d. 	
An accessory building shall be considered as attached to a principal building when the distance between two (2) buildings is ten (10) feet or less than covered by a roof that is similarly constructed as the roof of the principal building and accessory building. 

e. 	
The distance between a detached accessory building and any other building or structure shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 

f. 	
Any structure requiring plumbing shall come before the Greenwood Planning Commission for approval.  In considering authorization, the Greenwood Board of Adjustment shall consider the following standards: The intended use of the building. 

g. 	
An accessory building which will not be used as a garage shall not be erected or used without first being authorized by the Greenwood Board of Adjustment as a variance.  In considering authorization, the Greenwood Board of Adjustment shall consider the following standard: 

i. 	The intended use of the building 
ii. 	The size, proposed location, type and kind of construction and general architectural character of the building. 
iii. 	The type and kind of principal and accessory buildings and structer located on properties which are adjoining and in the same neighborhood. 
iv. 	The extent to which the building absorbs required yards and other open spaces. 

h. 	
An accessory building not used as a garage may, nevertheless, be used to house a vehicle.  However, the fact that an accessory building not used as a garage will be used to house a vehicle shall not be a basis or reason for the accessory building to exceed the area and/or height limitations provided for accessory buildings not used as a garage in this Section 4. 

i. 	
With the exception of portable buildings less than 100 sq. ft. in area, all accessory buildings shall require the purchase of a building permit. 


167.2 

S-3 
4. 	Area and Height Limitations 
a. 	
In residential zones, attached or detached garages are counted as n accessory building for purposes of this limitation.  An accessory building not used as a garage is permitted as long as there is compliance with all of the following requirements: 

i. 	The total area of a single detached accessory building or the total combined area of two detached accessory buildings shall at no time exceed ten (10%) of the required rear yard area (rear yard depth required for the zoning district within which the accessory building or buildings are located multiplied times the width of the lot measured at the rear wall of the principal building; 
ii. 	Any single dimension of a detached accessory building, either length and/or width, shall not be more than one-half of the average rear yard depth (the average distance between the rear lot line and a line running parallel with the rear wall of the principal building to the side lot lines); 
iii. 	The total square footage of all structures on the lot shall not exceed thirty (30%) percent of the total area of the lot. 
iv. 	The accessory building shall have an architectural character and design including, but not limited to, color, siding, roofing, roof pitch, overhead doors, that is the same as to the principal building. 

b. 	
In residential zones, attached to detached garages are counted as an accessory building for purposes of this limitation.  Accessory buildings not used as garages shall not exceed one (1) story in height. The total height of an accessory building not used as a garage shall not exceed 180% of the sidewall height of the accessory building, which for purposes of this subsection shall be measured from the bottom of the rafters or trusses.  Accessory buildings not used as garages shall be subject to height limitations contained in the following chart: 


167.3 

S-3 

Height Limitations for Non-Garage Accessory Buildings 
Building size  Max Height of Building  Max Height of Sidewall  
Less than 240 sq. ft More than 240-350 sq. ft More than 350-700 sq. ft. More than 700-1050 sq. ft. More than 1050-1400 sq. ft. More than 1400 sq. ft.  14 ft. 16 ft. 18 ft 20 ft. 22 ft. 24 ft.  10 ft. 12 ft. 14 ft. 14 ft. 14 ft. 14 ft.  

c. 	
Accessory buildings used as garages in Residential Zoning districts for the storage of vehicles shall not exceed one (1) story in height and shall be subject to the following area and height limitations: 

i. 	A two car garage that is no greater than 484 sq. ft. in size is permitted in any residential zoning district, subject to the setback requirements of the particular zoning district. 
ii. 	A larger garage, up to 864 sq. ft. in size is permitted in any residential zoning district, provided that the garage does not exceed 75% of the footprint of the usable floor area of the main floor of the house or the main and upper floor of a tri-level of similar design. 
iii. 	No garage may exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height or fourteen 
(14) feet of sidewall height. 

d. 	
All accessory buildings shall meet the following roof pitch requirements: 

i. 	The roof pitch on any dormers shall not be less than the roof pitch on the rest of the accessory building. 
ii. 	The roof shall have a maximum pitch of no greater than 10/12 and shall not otherwise exceed the predominant roof pitch of the principal building and 
iii. 	Except for an accessory building that is less than three hundred twenty (320) sq. ft. in area, all areas of the roof of an accessory building shall have a minimum pitch of 3/12. 

e. 	
The Board of Adjustment may authorize accessory buildings, including those used as a garage, of a greater area, and may authorize accessory buildings not used as a garage, of a greater height, as a variance.  In granting such authorization, the following standards shall be considered: 


167.4 

i. 	The area and/or height of the accessory building in relation to the size of the lot on which it is to be placed. 
ii. 	The area and/or height of the accessory building in relation to the principal building on the lot on which it is to be placed. 
iii. 	The location of the accessory building in relation to other buildings on the lot or adjoining lots and in relation to the principal building, and 
iv. 	Whether or not the accessory building will affect light and air circulation of the adjoining property. 
5. 	Location Requirements.  With the exception of lots abutting bodies of water, the minimum yard requirements for all accessory buildings, including garages, accessory building not used as a garage, storage buildings, pool storage buildings pump houses, gazebos, and horse shelters/riding areas, shall be as set forth in the following table: 
Minimum Yard Requirements for Accessory Buildings 
Lot Size Min. Front Yard  Min. Side Yard  Min. Rear Yard  
Less than ½ acre  40 ft.  7.5 ft.  20 ft.  
½ acre to less than 1 acre  75 ft.  10 ft.  25 ft.  
1 acre to less than 1 ½ acres  100 ft.  10 ft.  25 ft.  
1 ½ acres to less than 2 acres  125 ft.  25 ft.  35 ft.  
Is more than 2 acres  150 ft.  25 ft.  50 ft.  

a. 	
Accessory buildings may be erected only in rear or side yards. 

b. 	
Accessory buildings may not be erected on easements or rights-of-way. 

c. 	
Accessory buildings may not be erected on setbacks without first obtaining a variance from the Greenwood Board of Adjustments. 

d. 	
When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard setback line required on the lot in the rear of such corner lot. 

e. 	
No withstanding the foregoing table, accessory buildings constructed on lots abutting a body of water shall maintain a rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet, measured from the high water mark. IN the event the Planning Official is uncertain of the high water mark, the Planning Official may, in his discretion, have a certified engineer determine the high water mark at the applicant's sole expense, and the certified engineer's determination shall be final. 

f. 	
Notwithstanding the foregoing table, all accessory buildings placed on lots abutting a body of water shall have all front, side and rear yard requirements established by the Board of Adjustment, as a matter for Board of Adjustment decision; provided, however, that a forty (40) foot minimum rear yard shall be maintained in any event except in the case of pump houses which do not exceed three (3) feet in height. In establishing such yard requirements, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the following standards: 


167.5 

S-3 

i. 	The location of buildings on the lot or adjoining properties. 
ii. 	The locations of the principal building on the lot where the accessory building is to be located. 
iii. 	The effect of construction of the accessory building on the lot in question on the view from adjoining properties, 
iv. 	
The potential effect of erosion and flooding from height water on the lot in question, 

v. 	
The effect, if any, on the location of the accessory building in question on the existing flood control or erosion devises located on adjoining properties, 


vi. 	The relative proximity of the proposed accessory building to adjoining property specifically including proximity to occupied dwellings, and the effect of the proposed accessory building on adjoining properties and the surrounding neighborhood. 
6. 	Limitation on Number and Location of Accessory Buildings. 
a. 	
In residential zones, there shall be no more than two (2) accessory buildings on any lot. 

b. 	
No more than one (1) garage shall be located on any lot. 

c. 	
Only one (1) accessory building not used as a garage shall be located on any lot, except that: 


i. 	On lots equal to or greater than two (2) acres, if the principal garage is attached to the house, allowable accessory building square footage may be split into two accessory buildings. 
ii. 	One additional accessory building, to be used exclusively to house equipment and supplies necessary to operate and maintain an onsite swimming pool and for a toilet and/or shower, is permitted, 
167.6 
S-3 
provided the pool storage building has a maximum height of sixteen (16) square feet for lots equal to one (1) acre in size; and 
iii. 	One additional accessory building, to be used exclusively as a decorative gazebo, is permitted, provided the gazebo has a maximum area of one hundred forty-four (144) square feet and a maximum height of twelve (12) feet.  For purposes of this subsection, an accessory building will be deemed a gazebo only if a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of each sidewall is left open, and/or is covered only with either a screen or transparent glass. 
iv. 	
The location of any additional accessory building authorized by this subsection, "6.c" shall be subject to all location restrictions contained in subsection "Number 5." 

v. 	
On lots less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, the total area of a pool storage building, pump house, and/or gazebo located on the lot shall be subtracted from the maximum permitted area of an accessory building not used as a garage provided for in "Number4." 


Ord. No. 2005-18 
Section 9:  Local Building Inspection 
1. 	Building inspection of residential, commercial and industrial construction shall be performed onsite by a qualified and competent local inspector in the following zoning districts: 
a. 	
R-1  Single Family Residential 

b. 	
R-2  General Family Residential 

c. 	
R-3  Multi-Family Residential 

d. 	
C-1  Central Commercial 

e. 	
C-2  Highway Commercial 

f. 	
C-3  Entertainment Commercial 

g. 	
I-1  Restricted Industrial 


2. 	Structures which are not designed or constructed to meet the local inspection requirements of this ordinance shall be restricted to the following zoning classifications: 
a. 	
R-4 Mobile Home Park 

b. 	
R-5  Single Family Manufactured Home 


3. 	Structures restricted to R-4, Mobile Home Park and R-5, Single Family Manufactured Home must meet all other requirements of the particular zoning classification. 
167.7 

S-8 
Ord. No. 2006-2 
Article V, "Provisions Governing Zoning District", 2. "Lot Area" is replaced with: 
2. 	Lot Area 
a. 	
One-family dwelling:  Minimum 9,000 square feet subdivision. 

b. 	
Where a lot abuts a platted subdivision with minimum lot widths at the front yard line or building line consistently exceeding 199 feet, the minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet. 


4. 	Width 
a. 	
Minimum width of a lot at the front yard line or building line shall be 75 feet for one-family dwellings. 

b. 	
Where a lot abuts a platted subdivision with minimum lot widths at the front yard line or building line consistently exceeding 199 feet, the minimum width of a lot at the front yard line or building line shall be 125 feet for One-family dwellings. 


Ord. No. 2010-30 
Ordinance No. 316 is hereby clarified by means of this curity ordinance to more accurately depict and clarify the zoning of the areas around South Coker. The original land use plan and city boundaries as set forth as an attachment to Ord. No. 316 appear to conflict in regards to whether or not certain tracts of property along South Coker Street are within the city limits, and the exact zoning classification if in the city limits. The City Council specifically finds that these two tracts were within the city limits of the city of Greenwood when Ord. No. 316 was adopted, and that the property along South Coker as highlighted on Exhibit “A” remains classified as C-1 under the city’s zoning regulations. 
Ord. No. 2010-37 
Section 5  Zoning of Annexed Territory 
1. 	
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be governed by and subject to the requirements of R-1 Single Family Residential District until time as the Zoning District shall have been amended to authorize other use or uses for the newly annexed territory. 

2. 	
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of an ordinance of annexation, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold an administrative hearing to consider the appropriate zoning for the annexed area.  Within thirty (30) days of such hearing, the Commission shall transmit its recommendation to the Greenwood City Council, which shall within ninety (90) days after effective date of the ordinance of annexation adoption and ordinance zoning the annexed property. 


167.8 

S-9 

Ord. No. 2011-18 
Article IV, Section 3, Item 2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
2. 	Accessory Buildings – Definitions 
a. 	
Accessory Building:  A detached, above ground structure, which is subordinate to the main or principal structure, on the same lot, and is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main residential structure. Accessory buildings may be either portable or built on foundations. Accessory buildings most commonly include detached garages, carports and garden utility sheds, but may also include detached decks, detached gazebos, children playhouses and detached buildings associated with swimming pools. 

b. 	
Any small, compact structure mounted on skids or otherwise constructed so that it can be readily moved from one location to another without change in structure or design. 


3. 	Accessory Building:  General Requirements 
a. 	
Accessory buildings are permitted only in connection with, incidental to, and on the same lot as a residential structure. 

b. 	
No accessory building shall be utilized unless the principal structure to which it is an accessory is occupied. 

c. 	
More than one accessory building is permitted on a lot. The limitations in Paragraph 4 below apply. 

d. 	
The distance between an accessory building and any other building shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 

e. 	
With the exception of portable buildings less than 200 sq. ft. in area, all accessory buildings shall require a building permit. 


4. 	Design Limitations 
a. An Accessory must comply with each of the following requirements: 
I. 	The architectural character of all accessory buildings, with the exception of portable buildings less than two hundred (200) square 
167.9 

S-9 
feet in area, shall have an architectural character and design (including but not limited to, color, siding, roofing, roof pitch, overhead doors) that is the same as or similar to the principal building. 
II. 	The total area of an accessory building or the total combined area of two or more accessory buildings (including portable buildings) shall not exceed ten (10%) of the real yard area (as measured from the rear wall of the principal structure). 
III. 	The total square footage of all structures (principle structure and accessory buildings) on the lot shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total area of the lot. 
b. 	Accessory buildings shall not exceed one (1) story in height. The total height of an accessory building shall not exceed 180% of the sidewall height of the accessory building, which for purposes of this subsection shall be measured from the bottom of the rafters or trusses.  Accessory buildings shall be subject to the height limitations contained in the following chart: 
Height Limitations for Accessory Buildings 
Building size Max. Height Max. Height (sq. ft.) of Building (ft) of Sidewall (ft) 
<240 14 10 
240-350 16 12 
350-700 18 14 
700-1050 20 14 
1050-1400 22 14 
>1400 24 14 

c. 	The Board of Adjustment may authorize accessory buildings of a greater area and/or height, or of a dissimilar design as a variance.  In granting such authorization, the following standards shall be considered: 
I. 	The area and/or height of the accessory building in relation to the size of the lot on which it is to be placed. 
II. 	The area and/or height of the accessory building in relation to the principal building on the lot on which it is to be placed. 
III. 	The location of the accessory building in relation to other buildings on the lot or adjoining lots and in relation to the principal building, and 
167.10 
S-15 
IV. 	Whether or not the accessory building will affect light and air circulation of the adjoining property. 
5. 	Location Requirements 
a. 	
Accessory buildings may be erected only in rear yards. 

b. 	
Accessory buildings built on foundations may not be erected on easements or right-of-ways. 

c. 	
Accessory buildings, both portable and permanent, must comply with any setback restrictions. 


Ord. No. 2013-8 
Section 2, R-2 General Residential District, paragraph 4, Ord. No. 316 shall be replaced with the following language: 
Width – Minimum width of a lot at the front yard line or building line shall be 75 feet for one-family dwelling and 85 feet for two family dwelling. 
Ord. No. 2013-11 
Section 1, R-1, #3B, Section 2, R-2, 3-B, Section 2-A, R-3 3-B, of the General Residential District Ord. No. 316 shall be replaced with the following language. 
Side yard – Minimum 7 ½ feet measured from property line to outside vertical siding. 
167.11 

S-2 

CHAPTER 14.08 
MOBILE HOME PARKS 


Sections:  
14.08.01  Definitions  
14.08.02  Parking, installation and maintenance  
14.08.03  Exceptions  
14.08.04  Development plan for mobile home park required  
14.08.05  Water supply  
14.08.06  Sanitation facilities  
14.08.07  Service building  
14.08.08  Sewage and refuse disposal  
14.08.09  Garbage receptacles  
14.08.10  Fire protection  
14.08.11  Animals and pets  
14.08.12  Supervision  
14.08.13  Penalty  
14.08.14  Requirements and limitations  
14.08.15  Restricted from C-1 and C-2 zoning areas  
14.08.16  Classification of Districts  
14.08.17  Amended sections  
14.08.18  R-5 Single-Family Manufactured Residential District  

14.08.01 Definitions 
Licensee means any persons licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park within the city limits of Greenwood, Arkansas. 
Mobile home means a dwelling unit constructed in a factory before enactment of the federal standards.  Any mobile home shall meet all the specifications and standards as required for such mobile home parks and each individual mobile home must be anchored in compliance with the design load requirements of the Building Code of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas. (Ord. No. 04-14, Sec. 3.) 
Manufactured home means a dwelling unit constructed in a factory in accordance with the federal standards and meeting the definitions set forth in the federal standards and under 
A.C.A. 20-25-102. (Ord. No. 04-14, Sec. 2.) 
168 

Mobile home park means a planned development of not less than three (3)* acres designed exclusively for the accommodation of mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
*Three acres is recommended as a minimum, different cities may wish to increase or decrease this minimum. 
Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home. 
Travel trailer for the purpose of this ordinance shall mean any vehicle, whether towed or self-propelled, equipped and intended for cross-country travel, camping, outings and the like, but which is being used or intended for use for an extended period for dwelling or sleeping purposes. (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 1.) 
14.08.02 Parking, installation and maintenance From and after the date of adoption of this ordinance, the parking, installation or maintenance of mobile homes or travel trailers on private property within the city limits of Greenwood, Arkansas, other than within the boundaries of a licensed mobile home park is hereby prohibited.  All mobile home units that exist presently are not affected by this ordinance as long as they remain in their present location.  (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 2.) 
14.08.03 Exceptions The City Clerk, after prior approval by the City Council*, may issue a permit authorizing the temporary location and occupancy of a mobile home or travel trailer on private property outside a licensed mobile home park for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. After expiration of the period covered by the permit the applicant may apply for an extension of said permit and the extension may be granted or denied after a hearing before the City Council. Travel trailers if used for the purpose intended; that is, occasional cross-country travel, camping, outing, and the like and which is ordinarily unoccupied can be parked on the rear of any residential lot on which a residence is occupied by the owner of such travel trailer.  (The City may wish to establish a permit fee of $5.00 to assist in defraying the processing and investigative cost. A sample permit application and permit form is included in the appendix.)  (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 3.) 
*Planning Commission may be substituted for City Council 
14.08.04 Development plan for mobile home park required Prior to commencing construction the owner or developer of a mobile home park shall submit a detailed site plan of the proposed development to the City Council (or the Planning Commission, if the city has a Planning Commission) of the city of Greenwood for review and approval.  The site plan shall show the location of all proposed improvements. All mobile home parks shall conform to the following requirements: 
169 

A. 	Where any boundary of a mobile home park directly abuts property which is improved with a permanent residential building or directly abuts unimproved property which may, under existing laws and regulations, be used for permanent residential construction, a wall or solid fence with a minimum height above finished grade of five (5) feet shall be erected along such boundary. 
B. 	The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and free from stagnant pools of water. The city may require cross section drawings of elevations showing finished grades within the park. 
C. 	Each mobile home park shall provide mobile home spaces, and each such space shall be clearly defined or delineated. Each space shall have an area of not less than 3,500 square feet and a width of not less than 40 feet. 
D. 	Mobile homes shall be so located on each space that there shall be at least a 15­foot clearance between mobile homes.  No mobile home shall be located closer than 10 feet to any building within the park or any property line of the park which does not abut upon a public street or highway.  No mobile home shall be located closer to any property line of the park abutting upon a public street or highway than 25 feet or such other distance as may be established by ordinance or regulation as front yard or set back requirements with respect to conventional buildings in the zone in which the mobile home park is located. 
E. 	All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 26 feet in width, which driveway shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway.  At least two (2) interior streets of the mobile home park shall connect with exterior public streets at two (2) separate points except that if the property on which the mobile home park is so located and the design of the park does not permit two (2) separate connections to exterior public streets, only one (1) street may be connected to an exterior street provided such single street is of sufficient width and load-bearing ability to allow free access of municipal police, fire, and other service vehicles and shall provide a turn-around for such vehicles. 
F. 	All mobile home spaces shall be provided with two (2) off-street parking spaces on or within 300 feet of the mobile home space.  In addition, one (1) guest parking space for each four (4) mobile home spaces shall be provided in the park at locations approved by the city. 
G. 	Walkways of not less than four (4) feet in width shall be provided between all mobile home spaces and the service and recreation areas provided. 
H. 	All driveways and walkways within the park shall be hard-surfaced and adequately lighted at night. 
170 

I. 	Each park shall provide service buildings to house toilet, bathing, and other sanitation facilities as are hereinafter more particularly described. 
J. 	An electrical outlet supplying at least 100 to 115/220-250 volt, 60 amperes service shall be provided for each mobile home space.  (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 4.) 
14.08.05 Water supply Pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home space within the park in sufficient quantity to meet the requirements of the park. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a cold-water tap at least four inches above the ground.  An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for all bathing, washing, and cleansing facilities. (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 5.) 
14.08.06 Sanitation facilities 
A. 	Each park shall be provided, for emergency purposes, with the following sanitation facilities: 
1. 	
One flush toilet and one urinal for males, one flush toilet for females, one lavatory for each sex, and one shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for each sex, for the first 50 mobile home spaces or less numbered thereof; and 

2. 	
One additional flush toilet and one additional urinal for males, one additional flush toilet for females, one additional lavatory for each sex and one additional shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for each sex, for each additional 50 mobile home spaces. 


B. 	Each park which accommodates mobile homes or travel trailers of the type which do not have a flush toilet and a bath or shower shall, in addition to the emergency facilities required by subsection A of this section, be provided with the following sanitation facilities: 
1. 	
One flush toilet and one urinal for males, and flush toilet for females, one lavatory for each sex, and one shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for each sex, for the first 10 mobile homes of such type or less numbered thereof so accommodated; and 

2. 	
One additional flush toilet and one additional urinal for males, one additional flush toilet for females, one additional lavatory for each sex, and one additional shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for each sex, for each 10 mobiles of such type or fractional number thereof in excess of 10 mobile homes of such type so accommodated. 


171 

C. 	Each toilet and each shower bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for which provisions is made in Subsection A and B shall be in a private compartment or stall. 
D. 	The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall be in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall.  The sanitation facilities for males and females shall be distinctly marked to denote the sex for which they are intended.  (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 6.) 
14.08.07 Service building 
A. 	Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings, electrical installations, and plumbing and sanitation systems. 
B. 	The service building shall be well-lighted at all times of the day and night, shall be well-ventilated with screened openings.  Walls shall be constructed of moisture-proof materials, which may be painted woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and the interior shall be maintained at a temperature of at lest 68 degrees Fahrenheit during the period from October 1 to May 1.  The floors of the service building shall be a water impervious material. 
C. 	All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any conditions that will menace and health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance. (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 7.) 
14.08.08 Sewage and refuse disposal 
A. 	Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, and slop sinks in service and other building within the park shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant system of such construction and in such manner as will present no health hazard. 
B. 	Each mobile home space shall be provided with a sewer at least four inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive the waste from the shower, bathtub, flush toilet, lavatory, and kitchen sink of the mobile home harbored in such space and having any or all of such facilities.  The sewer in each space shall be connected to discharge the mobile home waste into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant system of such construction and in such manner as will present no health hazard. Plans for construction of sewage disposal and/or treatment facilities shall be approved by the State Board of Health and the city of Greenwood, Arkansas. (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 8.) 
172 

14.08.09 Garbage receptacles Metal garbage cans with tight-fitting covers shall be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish.  The number and location of individual cans or larger central-use containers shall be approved by the city. Garbage cans shall be located not further than 300 feet from any mobile home space.  The cans shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times.  Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to insure that the garbage cans shall not overflow. All garbage cans or receptacles shall be located in a designated are with appropriate screen fencing or walls acceptable to the city of Greenwood. (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 9.) 
14.08.10 Fire protection All parks shall be equipped at all times with operable fire extinguishing equipment and city approved fire hydrants in good working order.  Hydrants shall be so spaced and painted as to be easily seen and accessible at all times.  Hydrants shall be spaced so that all mobile home spaces are within 300 feet of at least one hydrant unless such condition is waived by the city.  No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may endanger life and property.  No fire shall be left unattended at any time.  (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 10.) 
14.08.11 Animals and pets No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat, or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home park in the city.  (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 11.) 
14.08.12 Supervision The licensee or permitee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee or permitee, for the violation of any provision of this ordinance to which the licensee or permitee is subject. (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 12.) 
14.08.13 Penalty for violation Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). Each and every day such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.  The owner or owners of a mobile home park who shall cause or allow to be placed improvement or anything within the park in violation of these regulations or who shall cause or allow any condition to exist in violation thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense; and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person, or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as herein before provided. (Ord. No. 200, Sec. 14.) 
14.08.14 Requirements and limitations The establishment, location, and use of manufactured homes as scattered-site single-family residences, when located in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, shall be subject to all requirements and limitation applying generally to such residential use in each of the respective districts, and provided such homes shall meet all of the following requirements and limitations: 
173 

S-1 

A. 	The home must be a double section or larger multi-section unit of a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and shall meet all requirements as defined in Section 1 as amended and must possess all necessary building and occupancy permits and other certifications required by the city for a dwelling unit. 
B. 	The home must be appropriately sited on the lot with the front door or entry of the home oriented to the front of the lot, and all required setbacks (front, side and rear) of the zoning district in which the home is located must be met without exception or variances. 
C. 	The home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent foundation with manufacturer’s installation specifications and in compliance with any rules and regulations adopted by the state of Arkansas or state agency or regulatory bodies thereunder. 
D. 	The home shall be covered with an exterior material customarily used on site-built residential dwellings, and such material shall extend over the top of the foundation unless said foundation is constructed of solid brick, stone or masonry material; 
E. 	The home shall have a roof composed of a material customarily used on site-built residential dwellings, such as asbestos, fiberglass, shake, asphalt or title, which shall be installed onto a surface appropriately pitched for the materials used. (Ord. No. 406, Sec. 2.) 
14.08.15  Restricted from C-1 and C-2 zoning areas Page 15 of Ord. No. 316 is hereby amended to reflect that mobile home parks are hereby removed therefrom, and shall not be permitted uses in C-1 and C-2 designated zoning areas.  The Planning Commission and City Council of the city of Greenwood finds that mobile home parks are in the nature of residential and not commercial, and for planning purposes, hereby removes such permitted uses from C-1 and C-2 designated areas. (Ord. No. 2003-21, Sec. 1.) 
14.08.16  Classification of Districts For the purposes of these regulations, there are nine 
(9) zoning districts designated as follows: 
R-1 Single family residential district 
R-2 General residential district 
R-3 Multi-family residential district 
R-4 Mobile home park district 
R-5 Single-family and manufactured residential district 
C-1 Central commercial district 

174 

S-2 C-2 Highway commercial district C-3 Entertainment Commercial district I-1 Restricted industrial district 
(Ord. No. 2004-14, Sec. 4.) 
14.08.17  Amended sections 
A. 	The following language shall be removed from Art. V, Sec. 1, 1. Permitted Uses: 
b. 	Detached one-family dwellings manufactured homes (Ord. No. 406) 
B. 	The following language shall be removed from Art. V, Sec. 2, 1 Permitted Uses: 
b. 	Detached one-family dwellings manufactured homes (Ord. No. 406.) 
C. 	The following language shall be removed from Art. V, Sec. 2-A, 1 Permitted Uses 
b. Detached one-family dwellings manufactured homes (Ord. No. 406) (Ord. No.20 04-14, Sec. 4.) 
14.08.18  R-5 Single-Family Manufactured Residential District The following section will be amended to Ord. No. 316: 
Section 2-C  R-5 Single-Family Manufactured Residential District 
1. 	Permitted Uses 
a. 	
One-family dwellings 

b. 	
Detached one-family dwellings manufactured homes. 

c. 	
Churches 

d. 	
parks, playgrounds, etc. 

e. 	
Schools offering a general education course 

f. 	
Kindergarten (public or private) 

g. 	
Hospitals, nursing homes, doctors and dental clinics 

h. 	
Accessory structures and uses pertinent to the principle structures and use. 

i. 	
Signs – Same as R-1 


2. 	The establishment, location, and use of manufactured homes when located in the R-5 zoning district shall be subject to all requirements and limitations applying generally to such residential use, and such homes shall meet all of the following requirements and limitations: 
174.1 

S-2 
a. 	
The home must be a double section or larger multi-section unit of a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and shall meet all requirements as defined in Section 2 of this ordinance, and must possess all necessary building and occupancy permits and other certifications required by the city for a dwelling unit. 

b. 	
The home must be appropriately sited on the lot with the front door or entry of the home oriented to the front of the lot. 

c. 	
The home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent foundation with manufacturer's installation specifications and in compliance with any rules and regulations adopted by the state of Arkansas or state agency or regulatory bodies hereunder. 

d. 	
The home shall be covered with an exterior material customarily used on site-build residential dwellings, and such material shall extend over the top of the foundation unless said foundation is constructed of solid brick, stone or masonry material; 

e. 	
The home shall have a roof composed of a material customarily used on site-build residential dwellings, which shall be installed onto a surface in accordance with the International Residential code, Section R905, "Requirements for Roof Coverings." 


3. 	Lot areas 
a. 	One family: 9,000 sq. ft. 
4. 	Yard requirements 
a. 	
Maximum area: in no case may the total area of all buildings exceed 60% of the lot area. 

b. 	
Front yard: 25 ft. from the property line or fifty feet from the centerline of the existing right-of-way, whichever is greater. 

c. 	
Side yard: Minimum seven and one-half (7 ½ ) ft. measured from roof line to property line. 

d. 	
Side yard 
facing street: Fifteen (15) ft. (Ord. No. 581) 


174.2 

e. 	
Rear yard: Minimum of twenty (20) ft. measured from roof line to property line. 

f. 	
Height: No building shall be more than 35 ft. in height or contain more than two and one-half stories, whichever is greater. 

g. 	
Minimum space: Minimum space between unconnected buildings on the same lot shall be ten (10) feet. 

h. 	
On lot parking: One on-lot parking space shall be provided for each family unit. 

i. 	
Places of Public 
Assembly: Same requirement as R-2. 



S-2 
5. 	Locations:  It shall be unlawful to park any mobile home to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes within the city limits of Greenwood, as the same now exists or may be hereafter designated, outside a licensed mobile home park. (Ord. No. 2004-14, Sec. 5.) 
174.3 

S-9 
CHAPTER 14.12 
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION CODE 
Sections: 
14.12.01 Statutory authority 
14.12.02 Findings of fact 
14.12.03 Statement of purpose 
14.12.04 Lands to which this ordinance applies 
14.12.05 Methods of reducing flood losses 
14.12.06 Flood Damage Prevention Code adopted by reference 
14.12.07 Abrogation and greater restrictions 
14.12.08 Interpretation 
14.12.09 Warning and disclaimer of liability 
14.12.10 Compliance 
14.12.11 Penalty for non-compliance 
14.12.01  Statutory authority The legislature of the state of Arkansas has in A.C.A. 14­268-101 et seq., delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations to minimize flood losses.  Therefore, the City Council of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, does hereby ordain as follows:  (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 1.) 
14.12.02 Findings of fact 
A. 	The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has identified Special Flood Hazard Area of Greenwood, Arkansas, in the current Scientific Engineering Report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Sebastian County dated March 2, 2012 with an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated March 2, 2012. 
B. 	These Special Flood Hazard Areas are subject to periodic flooding events that result in loss of life and property, pose health and safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental services, and cause extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
C. 	These periodic flooding events are exacerbated by the cumulative effect of floodplain developments which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the placement of inadequately elevated, inadequately floodproofed or otherwise unprotected structures or uses vulnerable to floods into Special Flood 
175 

S-9 
Hazard Areas.  Such structures or uses are inherently hazardous to other lands because of their adverse impact on flooding events. (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 2.) 
14.12.03 Statement of purpose It is the purpose of this ordinance is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, to prevent adverse impacts from any floodplain development activities, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in indentified Special Flood Hazard Areas.  This ordinance advances the stated purpose through provisions designed to: 
A. 	Protect human life and health; 
B. 	Protect natural floodplains against unwise development; 
C. 	Eliminate adverse impacts of necessary floodplain development; 
D. 	Minimize expenditure of public monies on flood control projects; 
E. 	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
F. 	Minimize prolonged business interruptions due to flooding events; 
G. 	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in Special Flood Hazard Areas; 
H. 	Minimize future flood blight areas to help maintain a stable tax base; and 
I. 	Provide for notice to potential buyers when property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area.  (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 3.) 
14.12.04  Lands to which this ordinance applies The ordinance shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the jurisdiction of the city of Greenwood. (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 4.) 
14.12.05  Methods of reducing flood losses This ordinance uses the following methods to accomplish the stated purpose: 
A. 	This ordinance restricts or prohibits structures or uses in Special Flood Hazard Areas that adversely impact health, safety or property during flooding events; 
176 

S-9 

B. 	This ordinance requires protection against flood damage for structures or uses vulnerable to floods at the time of initial construction, or after substantial improvement of the structure, or after substantial damage has occurred; 
C. 	This ordinance controls the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation and transport of flood waters; 
D. 	This ordinance controls floodplain development (structural development, placement of manufactured structures, clearing, grading, mining, drilling, dredging, placement of fill, excavating, watercourse alteration, drainage improvements, roadway or bridge construction, individual water or sewer installations and other activities) which may increase flood damage by increasing flood elevations, flood water velocities, or flood discharge patterns; 
E. 	This ordinance regulates the construction of flood barriers which unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may adversely impact other lands.  (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 5.) 
14.12.06  Flood Damage Prevention Code adopted by reference There is hereby adopted by reference a Flood Damage Prevention Code for the city of Greenwood, Arkansas, dated March 2, 2012. The code shall include: 
Article 1 Definitions Article 2 Administration Article 3 Provisions for Flood Hazard reduction 
A copy of the referenced code shall be filed in the office of the Mayor, and shall be available for inspection and copying by any person during normal office hours. (Ord. No. 2012­1, Sec. 6.) 
14.12.07  Abrogation and greater restrictions This ordinance does not repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  Whenever there is a conflict or overlap between this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction, the instrument with the more stringent restrictions applies.  (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 7.) 
14.12.08  Interpretation In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions must: 
A. 	Be considered as minimum requirements; 
B. 	Be liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
177 

S-9 
C. 	Be deemed to neither limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 8.) 
14.12.09  Warning and disclaimer of liability The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. Documented scientific and engineering data form the basis for these requirements.  On rare occasions, flooding events greater than those considered for this ordinance will occur. In addition, flood heights may increase over time due to man-made or natural causes.  This ordinance does not imply that land outside Special Flood Hazard Areas will be free from flooding, nor that strict adherence to this ordinance protects uses permitted within Special Flood Hazard Areas from all flood damages. This ordinance specifically does not create liability on the part of the community, nor any official or employee of the community, for any flood damages that result while strictly following this ordinance, or from any lawful administrative decision made under the provisions of this ordinance.  (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 9.) 
14.12.10  Compliance Constructing, locating, substantially altering or changing the use of any structure or land after the effective date of this ordinance requires full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable regulations.  (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 10.) 
14.12.11  Penalty for non-compliance Flood hazards are reduced by compliance with the provisions of this code.  Accordingly, enforcement of this ordinance discourages non-compliance and is a recognized mechanism for flood hazard reduction. 
The Floodplain Administrator must enforce the provisions of this ordinance and is authorized to: 
A. 	Issue cease and desist orders on non-compliant floodplain development projects; 
B. 	Issue citations for non-compliance; 
C. 	Request that FEMA file a 1316 Action (Denial of Flood Insurance) against non-compliant properties; and 
D. 	Take any other lawful action necessary to prevent or remedy any instance of non­compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
1. 	
It is a misdemeanor to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this ordinance. 

2. 	
Any person found in a court of competent jurisdiction, guilty of violating this ordinance is subject to fines of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per day for each violation; in addition the defendant is subject to payment of all associated court costs and costs involved in the case. (Ord. No. 2012-1, Sec. 11.) 


177.1 

CHAPTER 14.16 
ANNEXING, VACATING AND REZONING PROPERTY 
Sections; 



14.16.01 Annexing 
14.16.02 Vacating 
14.16.03 Rezoning 
14.16.01 Annexing 
Ord. No. 108 SW ¼ of Sec. 1, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West Ord. No. 145 E ½ of NW ¼ of Sec. 13, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West Ord. No. 146 SW 1/4, Sec 1, N. boundary line of city Ord. No. 148 Walnut S of Lots 11 thru 18, Block 10 Ord. No. 197 Part of Sec. 12, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West Ord. No. 01-21 Amending legal description of Ord. No. 197 Ord. No. 206 Lot 8, N Fractional ½ , Sec 1, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 210 SW 1/4, Sec. 11, Twp 6 No, Range 31 West Ord. No. 211 Lot 7 & 8, Sec 2, Twp 6 No, Range 31 West Ord. No. 215 Part of Lot 10, Sec 1, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 218 SW 1/4, Sec 11, Twp 6 No, Range 31 West Ord. No. 226 Part of Gov. lot 7, Sec 1, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 229 Hwy #96 form city limits to boundary of Fort Chaffee Ord. No. 237 SW 1/4, Sec 11, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 248 SE 1/4 of Sec 11, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 270 Part of NE 1/4, Sec 2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 273 NE corner of SW 1/4, Sec 12, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 310 N ½ of NW 1/4 of Sec 1, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 332 Part of SW 1/4 of Sec 2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 334 NE corner Lot 7, Sec. 3, Twp 6 N., Range 30 West Ord. No. 351 Part of NW 1/4 of Sec.2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 352 50' wide public road right of way crossing Gov lot 3 of Sec 1 Ord. No. 359 Part of SE 1/4, Sec 11, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 369 Lot 1, 2 and 3, Rolling Meadow Acres Ord. No. 388 Part of W ½ of Lot 7 in Sec 7, Twp 6 N., Range 30 West Ord. No. 389 Part of E ½ of SW 1/4 of Sec 3, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 409 Part of Gov lot 8 of SW 1/4, Sec 7, Twp 6 N., Range 30 West Ord. No. 444 Part of SE 1/4 of Sec 10, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 456 Part of E ½ of Sec 10, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 457 Part of NW 1/4 of Sec 10, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 482 Part of E ½ of SW 1/4 of Sec 2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West 
177.2 

S-22 
Ord. No. 496 	Part of S ½ of SE 1/4 of Sec 7, Twp 6 N, Range 30 West 
Ord. No. 497 	Part of SE 1/4 of Sec 7 & Sec 8, Twp 6 N., Range 30 West 
Ord. No. 517 	Part of Lots 1,2,3,4,5,& 9 of Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 528 	Part of NE 1/4 of Sec 3, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 542A 	Part of SW 1/4 of Sec 8, Twp. 6 N. Range 30 West 
Ord. No. 548 	SW 1/4 of Sec 1, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 551 	Gov Lots 5 & 6 of SW 1/4 of Sec. 7, Twp. 6 N., Range 30 West 
Ord. No. 552 	Part of E ½ of SE 1/4 of Sec 3, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 579 	Gov lots 4, 5 and 9, Sec. 2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West S ½ of lot No. 11, Rolling Meadow Acres Gov. lot 10 of Sec 2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West S ½ of Gov. lot 9, Sec 2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 584 	Part of Gov lots 4, 5 and 9, Sec 2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 593 	Lot 9, N½ SW Sec. 1 
Ord. No. 606A 	Part of Lot 11, Rolling Meadow Acres 
Ord. No. 99-28 	Part of SE ¼ of Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2000-12 	16.0 acres in SW ¼, Sec. 3, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2000-27 	Part of NW ¼ of Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2001-15 	Part of SE ¼, Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2001-16 	NE ¼ of Sec. 7, Twp 6 N, Range 30 West 
Ord. No. 2002-16 	Part of Lots 7 & 8, Sec. 7, Twp. 6 N, Range 30 West 
Ord. No. 2002-17 	Lot 3 of Stuart Place, Sec. 3, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2002-27 	Part of U.S. Hwy. 71, to AR St. Hwy 10. 
Ord. No. 2002-40 	Part of Gov. Lot 10, Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2003-06 	Part of SW ¼ of Sec. 10, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2003-07 	Part of NE ¼ of Sec. 7, Twp 6 N, Range 30 West 
Ord. No. 2006-9 	Gov. Lots 3 & 4 in NW ¼ of Sec. 1, Twp 6 N, Range 3 West 
Ord. No. 2006-22 	Part of E ½ of Sec. 13, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2010-17 	Part of SW ¼ of Sec. 10, Twp 6 N, Range 30 West 
Ord. No. 2010-18 	Part of Gov. Lots 4, 7 & 8 of SW ¼ of Sec. 7, Twp 6 N, Range 30 West 
Ord. No. 2010-19 	Part of SW ¼ of Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2010-20 	Part of Gov. Lot 10, NW ¼ of Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2010-32 	Amending legal description of Ord. No. 2010-20 
Ord. No. 2010-21 	Lots 1 & 2 of Stuart Place 
Ord. No. 2010-22 	Part of SE ¼ of Sec. 11, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2010-33 	Amending legal description of Ord. No. 2010-22 
Ord. No. 2010-23 	Part of SE ¼ of Sec. 3, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2011-17 	Part of S ½ of Sec. 4, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
Ord. No. 2013-19 	1404 Thistle in Rolling Meadow Acres 
Ord. No. 2016-03 	Lot 2 Maner Acres, being a part of Government Lots 3&4 Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
177.3 

S-22 
14.16.02 Vacating Ord. No. 172 Hickory St in Owsley’s Addition Ord. No. 173 Platted streets and alleys, original plat of Dawson’s Addition Ord. No. 175 Street and alleys, original plat of Dawson’s Addition Ord. No. 180 College Street Ord. No. 199A 20' alley, Block 3, Green Street W., Williamson St, Little’s Addition Ord. No. 203 Part of Green St., Wood St., & alley in Block Six, Green’s Addition Ord. No. 207 Alley, Block 1, Forrester’s Addition Ord. No. 216 Alley between Lots 6 & 7, Block 3, original town Ord. No. 217 Alley of Lots 1,2,3,& 4 of Block 2, Powells’ Addition Ord. No. 231 Part of Dawson Street, Johnson’s Addition Ord. No. 240 Mitchell Street in McFarlane’s Addition Ord. No. 252 Alley in Block 3, Cokers Addition Ord. No. 258 Alley in Block 9, Bell Addition Ord. No. 263 College Street Ord. No. 266 Alley in Block 9 of Oak Hills Addition Ord. No. 267 Alley thru Block G, Lots 7,8,& 9 of Johnson’s Addition Ord. No. 289 Alley in Lots 4 & 5 from Lots 8 & 9, Block G, Johnson Addition Ord. No. 291 Street separating Lots 1,2 & 3, Block J in Johnson’s Addition Ord. No. 293 Alley of Lots 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,and 9, Block E, Johnson’s Addition Ord. No. 319 Summit St., Sunset St., Division St., Bass Little St. Ord. No. 328 300' W of SE corner of Lot, Block 8, Green’s Addition Ord. No. 343 Alley in Block 16 of Bells Addition Ord. No. 364 No. Dawson Circle between N 110' of Lot 8 in Block H, Johnson’s Add. Ord. No. 365 Alley within Block 13, Bells Addition Ord. No. 372 Alley in block 7 of Green’s Addition Ord. No. 381 Bryan, Little Sts. In McFarlane’s Addition Ord. No. 383 Comstock St. and alley in Bell’s Addition Ord. No. 387 Hickory St. in Owsley Addition Ord. No. 392 Alley between Block 3 of Home Addition Ord. No. 393 Alley within block 5, original town Ord. No. 469 Platted alley and Grand Avenue Ord. No. 479 Part of Dawson St. to Block G of Johnsons Addition Ord. No. 510 15' platted alley between lost 1,2,3,10,11 and 12 of Block 2, original plat Ord. No. 520 Part of 20 foot alleyway, Block 2, lots 1-7 and 9-15, Hodgens Add. Ord. No. 99-10 Terrace Circle Ord. No. 2001-08 First Freewill Baptist Church/ Hazel Martin Ord. No. 2002-04 Alley in Block 7 & 10 
Walnut Street known as Adair Street 
Ord. No. 2003-08 Streets & alleys within Powell's Addition 
Ord. No. 2003-53 Lots 1-12, Block 2, Coker's Addition 
Ord. No. 2003-54 Pedestrian easement between Lots 80-81, Forrest Hills Sub. 
Ord. No. 2016-11 The alley located between Lots 1,2,3 and Lots 9, 10, 11,and 12 within the 
Greens addition. 
177.4 

S-22 Ord. No. 2016-06 East Gary Street between Parcels 66349-0198-00000-00 and 66349-0055­00000-00 both owned by the Greenwood School District. 
14.16.03 Rezoning Ord. No. 335 R-1 to I-1 SW 1/4 Sec 8, Twp 6 N., Range 30 West Ord. No. 333 R-1 to C-1 Part of Lot 3, NW 1/4, Sec. 6, Twp. 6 N Ord. No. 349 R-1 to C-2 Part of W ½ of Sec 11, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 350 R-1 to R-3 Lots 4, 5 and 6 of Lucinda Tatum Addition Ord. No. 355 R-1 to C-1 Part of NE 1/4, Sec 11, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 356 R-1 to R-2 Part of Se 1/4 of Sec 2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 West Ord. No. 371 Open to R-1 Part of SW 1/4 of Sec 8, Twp 6 N., Range 30 West Ord. No. 375 R-1 to R-3 Lot 10 Glenmoore Addition Ord. No. 379 R-1 to C-2 SW corner of Sec 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West Ord. No. 390 R-1 to R-2 Part of NW 1/4 of Sec 12, Twp 6 N., Range 31 W Ord. No. 395 R-1 to C-1 421 E. Gary Street Ord. No. 400 R-1 to R-3 Lots 19, 20, and 21 of Sunny Acres Ord. No. 426 From R-1 to C-2 Lot 3, Glenmore Addition Ord. No. 476 From R-1 to C-3 Lots 14 thru 23 of Sunny Acres Addition Ord. No. 477 From R-1 to I-1 Part of NE 1/4 of Sec 12, Twp 6 N., Range 31 W Ord. No. 490 From R-1 to C-1 Part of NE 1/4 of Sec. 11, Twp 6 N. Range 31 W Ord. No. 494 From R-1 to C-1 Part of N ½ of Sec. 3, Twp 6 N., Range 31 W Ord. No. 495 From R-1 t C-1 Lots 11 & 12 in Owlsey Addition Ord. No. 499 From R-1 to C-1 Lots 11 & 12, Block 7 in Owlsey Addition Ord. No. 509 From R-1 to C-1 Lots 1,2,3,4,5 and 6 of Block 4, Greens Addition Ord. No. 511 From R-1 to C-2 1832 West Center Ord. No. 524 From R-1 to R-3 1205 West Center Ord. No. 527 From R-1 to C-2 944 W. Center Ord. No. 529 From R-1 to C-2 Part of SW 1/4 of Sec. 2, Twp 6 N., Range 31 W. Ord. No. 536 From R-1 to R-2 Lots 98 -114, Lakehills Addition Ord. No. 547 From R-1 to C-2 1405 W. Center Ord. No. 577 From R-1 to C-2 Tracts A, B and C of Forrest Hills Addition Ord. No. 578 From R-1 to R-2 Gov lots 6 & 10 of Sec 7, Twp 6 N., Range 30 W Ord. No. 580 From R-1 to C-2 Part of lot 9 of Sec 7, Twp 6 N., Range 30 West Ord. No. 600 From R-1 to C-2 Part of SW ¼, Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West Ord. No. 609 From R-1 to C-2 Part of SW ¼ of Sec. 8, , Twp 6 N, Range 30 West Ord. No. 628 From R-3 to C-2 Part of NE 1/4 of Sec 12, Twp 6 N. Range 31 West Ord. No. 2000-23 From R-1 to C-2 Part of SW ¼ of Sec. 3, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West Ord. No. 2001-01 From C-1 to C-3 SW corner, Sec. 18, Twp 6, Range 30 West Ord. No. 2002-02 From R-3 to C-1 Lots 7,8,9,10, Block 7, original town of Greenwood Ord. No. 2002-12 From R-1 to R-2 Lots 4, 5 & 6, Block C, 306-310 West Gary St. Ord. No. 2002-31 From R-1 to R-2 Part of NE ¼ of Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West Ord. No. 2003-18 From R-1 to C-1 Lots 9 & 10, block 7 Owsley's Addition Ord. No. 2003-19 From C-1 to R-3 Lots 1,2,3,4,5 & 6 of Block 4, Green's Addition Ord. No. 2004-42 From R-1 to C-2 Part of SW ¼ of Sec. 2, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West 
177.5 

S-14  
Ord. No. 2005-4  From R-1 to C-1  Block 7, Lots 1, 16, 17, 18  and Block 10  
Ord. No. 2005-9  From R-1 to C-1  Part of NE ¼ of Sec. 12, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West  
Ord. No. 2005-10  From I-1, C-3 to C-1 Lots 2-7, Lot 19, Lots 20-21 Sunny Acres  
Ord. No. 2007-2  From R-1 to R-3  N ½ of Lots 7 – 12, Block 4, Green's Addition  
Ord. No. 2007-8  From R-1 to C-2  Part of NW ¼ of Sec. 12, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West  
Ord. No. 2007-9  From R-1 to C-1  Part of SE ¼ of Sec. 12, Two 6 N, Range 31 West  
Ord. No. 2007-17  From C-2 to R-2  Lots 14 – 18, 20A & 21A of Clinic Addition  
Ord. No. 2007-25  From R-1 to C-2  Part of SW ¼ of Sec. 7, Twp 6 N, Range 30 West  
Ord. No. 2008-2  From R-1 to R-2  Part of NE ¼ of Sec. 11, Twp 6 N, Range 31 West  
Ord. No. 2010-31  From C-2 to R-3  Lots 7, 8, 10, 11 & 12 of Clinic Addition  
Ord. No. 2012-2  From C-2 to R-3  Lots 4-6, Lots 3, 7, 8, 9 & 10, Block 2, Green’s Add  
Ord. No. 2013-3  From R-1 to R-2  415 South Fowler  
Ord. No. 2013-6  From R-1 to C-2  Northeast corner of Hwy 10 and Hwy 71  
Ord. No. 2013-7  From C-2 to R-1  222 South Coker  

177.6 

S-14 

TITLE 15 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Chapters: 
15.04 	Subdivision Regulations Adopted By Reference 
15.08 	Land Use Plan 
15.12 	Amendments to Subdivision Regulations 
15.16 	Commercial Development Guidelines 
CHAPTER 15.04 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE 
Sections: 
15.04.01 Adopted by reference 
15.04.02 Conflicting ordinances 
15.04.01 Adopted by reference The Land Subdivision Regulations and Development Code attached hereto and incorporated herein as if set forth word for word, are hereby adopted by the City Council of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas.  (Ord. No. 2005-14, Sec. 1.) 

15.04.02 Conflicting ordinances 
A. 	All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with, or in conflict with this code are hereby repealed. 
B. 	Should any clause or provision of this ordinance, or the attached code, be declared invalid by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.  (Ord. No. 2005-14, Secs. 2-3.) 
178 

CHAPTER 15.08 
LAND USE PLAN 

Sections: 



15.08.01 Land Use Plan adopted 
15.08.02 Policies 
15.08.03 Enforcement 
15.08.04 Amendments 
15.08.01  Land Use Plan adopted 
A. 	The Greenwood Planning Commission has prepared and presented a Land Use Plan for the city of Greenwood, such Land Use Plan being herein attached and made a part of this ordinance. 
B. 	This Land Use Plan has been presented before the City Council for approval and upon deliberation the City Council has voted to accept this Land Use Plan. (Ord. No. 575, Secs. 1-2.) 
15.08.02 Policies The Land Use Plan establishes policies for various land uses within the city limits of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas. (Ord. No. 324, Sec. 2.) 
15.08.03 Enforcement The Land Use Plan for the City of Greenwood, Arkansas, shall be implemented through the enforcement of the Subdivision Regulations of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas.  (Ord. No. 324, Sec. 3.) 

15.08.04  Amendments 
Article II 
Definitions added 
Private Drive – A privately constructed and maintained roadway serving more than one lot or that crosses one or more lots to provide access to one or more lots. 
Driveway – A privately constructed and maintained roadway serving only one lot and which crosses no other lots. 
Definition changed 
179 

Lot – Land occupied or to be occupied by a structure or use and its accessory structures and uses, and including such open spaces as are required under these regulations and having its principle frontage upon a public street or officially approved place.  (Ord. No. 00-06, Sec. 1-2.) 
Article 1, (Purpose, Authority, and Jurisdiction) 
These regulations and development standards shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision: 
Outside of the boundaries of the City of Greenwood but within its Planning Area Jurisdiction:  The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites, or parcels, any part of which, when subdivided shall contain less than five acres in area or which will require the installation of public improvements to include streets, waterlines, sewer lines, and public drainage systems; or 
Within the boundaries of the City of Greenwood:  Any division of land into any two or more tract, lots, sites, or parcels regardless of acreage; of 
The subdivision of land, previously subdivided or platted into tracts, lots, sites or parcels. 
This amendment does not apply to any current platted subdivision.  (Ord. No. 00-07, Secs. 1-2.) 
In order to ensure that the above objectives can be achieved, it is necessary for the city of Greenwood to exercise some degree of control over growth occurring outside of the current city boundaries.  The state of Arkansas has granted any city having a Planning Commission exclusive jurisdiction over all land lying within five (5) miles of its corporate limits.  The state has further granted the Planning Commission the authority to designate the area within the territorial jurisdiction for which it will prepare plans, ordinances, and regulations. 
In accordance with the authority granted the city of Greenwood by the state of Arkansas, the below-described lands within Sebastian County constitute the Planning Jurisdiction Area for the city of Greenwood: 
Sections 1 through 24 of Township 6 North, Range 31 West 
Section 1 through 24 of Township 6 North, Range 30 West 
Sections 31 through 36 of Township 7 North, Range 30 West 
Sections 35 and 36 of Township 7 North, Range 31 West 
Within this area the Planning Commission of the city of Greenwood shall exercise such authority as granted it by the state of Arkansas and the city of Greenwood.  In particular, the Planning Commission will seek to ensure that the city’s Land Use Plan (Ord. No. 575), the 
180 

S-4 
Master Street Plan (Ord. No. 576), and the Land Subdivision Regulations and Development Code (Ord. No. 590) are enforced within the city’s Planning Jurisdiction Area.  (Ord. No. 2000-15, Sec. 1.) 
CHAPTER 15.12 
AMENDMENTS TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
15.12.01 Amendments 
15.12.01  Amendments 
Ord. No. 2006-3 
Section 1:  Definitions 
Caliper A standard measuring term for young trees.  The caliper is the diameter of the cross section of the trunk.  For trees up to and including 4" caliper, the measurement is taken 6" above ground line.  For trees larger than 4" caliper, the measurement is taken 12" above ground line. 
Developer A person, firm or corporation undertaking to develop a subdivision or large-scale development as set forth in the Greenwood Land Subdivision and Development Regulations. 
Greenspace Greenwood's interconnected network of waterways, wetlands, woodlands, wildlife habitats, an other natural areas:  greenways, parks and other conservation lands; forests; wilderness and other open spaces that support native species, maintain natural ecological processes, sustain air and water resources and contribute to the health and quality of life for Greenwood communities. 
Greenwood recommended tree list (attachment) Those tree species and cultivars that are currently recommended for planting within the city in an effort to promote diversity and health of the urban forest. 
181 S-4 
Large-scale development The development of a lot or parcel larger than one acre.  The term "development" shall include, but shall not be limited to, the construction of a new improvement, the construction of an addition to an existing improvement, or a parceling which results in the need for access and utilities. 
Passive recreation Generally an undeveloped space or environmentally sensitive area that requires minimal development.  Entities such as a Parks Department may maintain passive recreation areas for the health and well-being of the public and for the preservation of wildlife and the environment.  The quality of the environment and "naturalness" of an area is the focus of the recreational experience in a passive recreation area. 
Subdivision The subdividing of land into lots and blocks, the parceling of land resulting in the need for access or utilities, or the dividing of an existing lot or parcel into two or more lots or parcels. 
Section 2:  Subdivision or Large-Scale Development 
A. 	Process In addition to the procedure provided herein and other requirements found in the city of Greenwood Land Subdivision and Development Code and the city of Greenwood Zoning Regulations, a developer of a subdivision or large-scale development shall include on his/her concept plan, preliminary plat and final plat proposed greenspace for the development. 
B. 	Planning Commission Along with the concept plan, or prior to the submittal of a preliminary plat, the developer shall submit to the city of Greenwood Department of Planning and Development, a concept plat or plan for greenspace. 
C. 	The Planning Department shall review the submitted plans and make recommendations to the Planning Commission. 
D. 	Decision The Planning Commission shall determine if the developer will dedicate land or contribute money in lieu of greenspace.  No land dedication will be accepted as a public greenspace unless it is determined by the Planning Commission, after consultation with the Planning and Development Department, that the physical characteristics of the site and its surroundings make the site suitable for greenspace purposes. 
E. 	Approval The Planning Commission's decision must be incorporated into the developer's preliminary plat prior to plat or plan approval. 
182 S-4 Section 3:  Dedication ratios 
A. 	Land shall be dedicated at a ratio of .017 acre of land for each single-family dwelling unit and .017 acre of land for each multi-family dwelling unit. 
Section 4:  Greenspace requirements 
A. 	The Planning and Development Department shall ensure that dedicated greenspace meets the following requirements. 
1. 	
The physical characteristics of the designated land are suitable for greenspace purposes, including passive recreation and/or trails development. 

2. 	
The proposed greenspace areas are sufficient to adequately serve the residents of the development/neighborhood. 

3. 	
Adequate sidewalks, trails, and/or bikeways shall provide access for all residents of the subdivision/neighborhood to adjacent neighborhoods or other connecting sidewalks, trails or bikeways. 


Section 5:  Greenspace eligibility 
A. 	The Planning and Development Department shall ensure that one-third of dedicated greenspace meets these requirements: 
1. 	
Be usable land for passive recreation purposes. 

2. 	
May not lie within the 100 year floodplain. 

3. 	
May not be located in any wetland areas as defined by the federal government. 

4. 	
May not be located in areas with slopes greater than 25%, except where approved by the Greenwood Planning Commission. 

5. 	
No include any rights-of-way or utility easements. 

6. 	
Not include any retention, detention or similar holding basins, except where approved by the Greenwood Planning Commission (see Section 5, (C) 


B. 	The remaining two-thirds of dedicated greenspace are not subject to the eligibility requirements of Section 5, (A), (2), (3), (4) and (6). 
C. 	Retention/detention or similar holding basins may be counted as greenspace for purposes of Section 5. (A) if either of the following criteria are met: 
183 S-4 1. Retention/detention or similar holding basins will be tree-lined, with one tree planted for every 1,000 square feet of detention area. 
a. 	
Developers shall select trees from the city of Greenwood "Recommended Tree List" to ensure an appropriate mix of native trees. 

b. 	
Trees planted around retention/detention or similar holding basins shall have a minimum caliper of 2". 

c. 	
Trees planted around retention/detention or similar holding basins shall be warranted by the developer of builder for one year. 


(1) 	Voluntary, recommended tree protection guidelines are available through the city of Greenwood Planning Department. 
2. 	
Wet basins must be landscaped or considered sufficiently landscaped in its natural state. 

3. 	
Dry basins must serve more than one purpose, (i.e., park space, playground, ball fields), except where approved by the Greenwood Planning Commission. 

a. 	
Where multiple uses are proposed, the basin must be determined to be of sufficient size to accommodate such uses. 

b. 	
The developer shall not be responsible for providing equipment or facilities for such additional uses. 




D. 	All eligible greenspace shall conform to the following design requirements: 
1. 	
Maximize public exposure and public access to greenspace. 

2. 	
Contiguous greenspace land may be bisected by local streets sidewalks, and pedestrian paths. 

3. 	
Greenspace shall not be located adjacent to an arterial street. 

4. 	
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as lakes, ponds, water courses, historic sites and other similar features which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property. 


184 S-4 
E. 	Residential lots 
1. 	
Where possible, healthy, mature trees (6" caliper or greater) shall be preserved.  Where a mature tree is able to be preserved on a lot, no planting of new trees will be required. 

2. 	
Healthy, mature trees that have been selected to be preserved shall be warranted by the developer or builder for one year, regardless of property ownership. 

a. 	Voluntary, recommended tree protection guidelines are available through the city of Greenwood Planning Department. 

3. 	
If no trees meeting the criteria in Section 5 (E) (1) can be preserved, or if no trees exist on a lot, the developer shall plant a minimum of two trees in each residential lot. 

4. 	
Developers shall select trees from the city of Greenwood "Recommended Tree List" to ensure an appropriate mix of native trees. 

5. 	
Trees planted in residential lots shall have a minimum caliper of 2". 

6. 	
Trees planted in residential lots shall be warranted by the developer or builder for one year or until the property is purchased by the homeowner, whichever occurs first. 


Section 6:  Fee-in-lieu 
A. 	Fee-in-lieu The Developer alone does not have the discretion to pay a cash contribution in lieu of land for the establishment of greenspace. 
B. 	If the Planning and Development Department determines that greenspace is neither feasible nor advisable, it may recommend to the Planning Commission that a cash contribution be accepted in lieu of land dedication. 
C. 	The Planning Commission will either accept the recommendation for a cash contribution or return the subdivision plat the Planning and Development Department with instruction or for further study. 
Section 7:  Procedure for dedication or fee-in-lieu 
185 S-4 
A. 	Dedication or fee-in-lieu If the Planning Commission agrees with the Planning and Development Department that a proposed subdivision does not provide a suitable area or areas for a public greenspace, the developer shall be required to make a reasonable dedication of land for greenspace, or to make a reasonable equivalent contribution in lieu of dedication of land for greenspace. 
1. 	
The city of Greenwood will make every effort to provide acquisition and development of greenspace that serves the subdivision or development. 

2. 	
When suitable land for greenspace acquisition serving the development cannot be identified, the city will look for other available acquisition of greenspace within the city. 


B. 	Fee-in-lieu formulas A contribution in lieu of land dedication shall be made according to the following formula: 
1. 	
$275 for each single-family unit. 

2. 	
$300 for each multi-family unit. 

3. 	
The Planning Department shall review the contribution formula every two 


(2) years and make recommendations to the Planning Commission following such review. 
C. 	Less than maximum density If the developer legally restricts the number of dwelling units to be constructed to less than the maximum density permitted by zoning, required land dedication or cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be based upon actual density. 
Section 8:  Timing of dedication and/or contribution 
A. 	All dedications of land must be made before final plat approval or large-scale development approval.  A final plat shall not be released for recordation until the deed for a land dedication is received. 
B. 	Deeded land is dedicated public greenspace and not subject to any right of reversion or refund. 
C. 	A cash contribution in lieu of required land development shall be payable within 30 days of final plat approval or large-scale development approval.  With the approval of the Planning Commission a developer may pay such contribution in three equal installments to be paid in full within one year of final plat approval. 
186 S-4 
D. 	If a developer makes a cash contribution in lieu of land dedication, the developer shall be entitled to a prorate refund, together with the accrued interest there from, in the event actual density is less than the density used as the basis for the developer's contribution; provided, no refund shall be made unless application therefore is made in writing to the Department of Planning and Development within one yea from the date of final plat approval. 
E. 	In the event actual density is more than the density used as the basis for a dedication of land or case contribution the developer must make an additional land dedication or contribution in lieu of dedication. 
Section 9:  Applicability 
A. 	The requirements of this ordinance shall apply to lot splits, subdivisions and replats of subdivisions, large-scale developments and applications for the construction of parking lots with five or more spaces; provided, said requirements shall not apply to a lot split or replat which does not create one or more vacant lots on which a structure could be erected under the city's zoning regulations. 
Section 10:  Zoning requirements 
A. 	Lots created for the purpose of greenspace dedication shall not be required to meet the standards for lot size, bulk and are within any zoning district. 
Section 11:  Fee-in-lieu allocation 
A. 	All money received under this subsection shall be deposited in the Greenspace Fund bank account. 
Section 12:  Exemption 
A. 	The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to any development where the subdivision plat was filed of record before the date of passage of this ordinance. 
Ord. No. 2006-4 
Section 1:  Sidewalks 
A. 	The Planning Commission shall consider the need for sidewalks in conjunction with residential and commercial subdivision approvals.  Sidewalks shall be required as follows: 
187 
1. 	
On both sides of principal and minor arterials. 

2. 	
Collectors: 

a. 	On both sides of collectors unless only one side of the collector is to be developed. 

3. 	
Local streets: 

a. 	
On one side of local streets as identified and recommended by the Planning Department and Technical Review Committee, keeping in mind that selection of streets for sidewalks should advance the following goals: 

(1) 	
Encourage pedestrian and bicycle circulation within the subdivision; 

(2) 	
Provide access to neighborhoods, existing sidewalks, greenways or trail systems, recreational land uses, schools, shopping, restaurants and other amenities within the city of Greenwood and its planning jurisdiction. 



b. 	
Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of any local streets of any size serving single-family residential if the road is adjacent to, or connects to schools. 

c. 	
On both sides of residential streets platted for multi-family development. 




Section 2:  Internalized pedestrian circulation systems 
A. 	An internalized pedestrian circulation system in the form of paved pathways may be substituted for sidewalks along streets upon the request of the applicant and the approval of the Planning Commission.  Where possible, pedestrian circulation systems shall allow for connectivity with pedestrian circulation systems or sidewalks in adjacent developments. 
Section 3:  Location of sidewalks 
A. 	Every effort will be made to locate sidewalks on the side of the street with street lighting. 
188 S-4 
B. 	On local and collector streets, a 4 foot landscape buffer between the curb and sidewalk shall be provided.  On minor and major arterials, the developer shall provide for a 6 foot landscape buffer between the curb and sidewalk. 
Section 4:  Obstructions 
A. 	The distance to the bottom of a sign placed in or immediately adjacent to a sidewalk should be at least eight feet above the street surface, and sufficiently high enough to avoid injury to pedestrians. 
B. 	Guy wires and utility tie downs should not be located in or across sidewalks at heights below seven feet. 
C. 	All valve boxes, manhole covers, and other castings in the sidewalk area shall be adjusted to the grade of the sidewalk. 
Section 5:  Sidewalk specifications 
A. 	Sidewalk width Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide for all streets, and shall be installed within the dedicated right-of-way, except where the land is topographically unsuited for the construction of sidewalks. 
B. 	Sidewalk depth Concrete sidewalks should be built to a minimum depth of 4 inches. 
C. 	All sidewalks shall receive a broom finish. 
D. 	Sidewalks slope 
1. 	
The maximum desirable grade is 1:12 (8.3%). 

2. 	
The maximum rise for any run on a slope greater than 1:20 (5%) shall be 30 inches. 

3. 	
A flat landing of at least 60 inches should be built between ramped sections of 5% or more. 

4. 	
Maximum cross slope should be no greater than 1:50 (2%) to provide drainage. 

5. 	
At least 30 inches of flat sidewalk area is required at the top of a sloped driveway to accommodate wheelchair use. 

189 S-4 

6. 	
Tooled control joints will be required for every 5 linear feet of sidewalk and expansion joints at every 60 linear feet of sidewalk. 


Section 6:  Curb ramp specifications 
A. 	Curb ramps must be provided at all mid-block crosswalks, sidewalk crossings at intersections and any other locations where sidewalks intersect with streets, for wheelchair access, strollers, carts, bicyclists and elderly pedestrians with mobility limitations. 
B. 	Curb ramps should be as flat as possible, but must have a slope that is no greater than 1:12 (8.3%). 
C. 	Ramps must be free from any abrupt changes in elevation. 
D. 	The minimum curb ramp must be at least 60 inches, exclusive of flared sides. 
E. 	If a curb ramp is located where pedestrians must walk across the ramp, the ramp must have flared sides of no more than 1:10 (10%) slope. 
F. Curb ramps also require a 60 inch landing at the top. Section 7:  Protection from elements/vandalism 
A. 	Concrete damaged by adverse weather conditions, including, but not limited to frost and rain, shall be removed and replaced at the contractor's expense. 
B. 	Concrete damaged by vandalism during curing shall be removed and replaced at the contractor's expense. 
Section 8:  Procedure 
A. 	Prior to submission of the preliminary plat, the developer will submit a sidewalk plan to the Greenwood Planning Department.  The Planning Department will review the plan with the Technical Review Committee and make recommendations to the plan to be included on the preliminary plat. 
B. 	Easements for sidewalks, curb ramps and crosswalks shall be indicated on the preliminary plat, or on the preliminary plat for each individual phase of the development. 
190 S-4 C. Where sidewalks are indicated a 10' utility easement shall be indicated adjacent to the sidewalk easement between the house and the sidewalk. 
D. 	The sidewalk is considered an improvement along with roads, drainage and utilities and is the responsibility of the developer. 
E. 	At the final plat, a bond covering 100% of the cost of sidewalk improvements shall be provided by the developer for the development or particular phase of the development. 
F. 	At the point where 80% of the development or phase of development is built out, or at the end of two years from the date of final plat approval, which ever occurs first, the developer will complete installation of required sidewalks in the current phase of development. 
1. 	Following installation of sidewalks by the developer, responsibility for damage to sidewalks on lots that have not built out will be the responsibility of the builder. 
Section 9:  Inspection 
A. 	The contractor shall contact the City Building Inspector to inspect the following: 
1. 	
All forming before the sidewalk is poured 

2. 	
Concrete after pouring to ensure quality and compliance with specifications. 


Section 10:  Payment in lieu.  In a subdivision, where the developer can demonstrate that the land is topographically unsuitable for the construction of sidewalks, a payment in lieu of that portion of sidewalk may be proposed by the developer. 
A. 	The payment in lieu shall be based on local standard costs per square foot of installed sidewalks.  This Greenwood Street Department will review this figure semi-annually and will submit a proposed change to the City Council for final approval. 
B. 	All payments in lieu of sidewalks shall be deposited in the city of Greenwood Sidewalk Fund bank account. 
191 S-4 Section 11:  Sidewalk fee 
A. 	There shall be a fee collected to be deposited in to the Sidewalk Fund on all residential structures based upon the value of the dwelling or structure only as follows: 
$1 -$80,000 $50.00 $80,000 and over $100.00 (Ord. No. 2006-7, Sec. 1.) 
Ord. No. 2007-7 
Article IV:  Improvements 
Section I.  Introduction/purpose – grading and erosion control regulations 
A. 	During construction and excavation processes, drainage patterns are often altered and soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by wind and water.  Improper grading or excavation can concentrate or redirect drainage flow, negatively impacting neighborhoods and increasing soil erosion.  Eroded soil endangers water resources by receding water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species.  Eroded soil also necessitates repair and cleaning of sewers, ditches, streams and ponds.  In addition, clearing and grading during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat. 
B. 	As a result, the purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the environment within the city of Greenwood. This ordinance will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil, results in the movement of earth or impacts drainage flow on land in city of Greenwood. 
Section II.  Definitions 
Clearing Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
Department of Planning and Development The Department of Planning and Development for the city of Greenwood or its designated representative. 
Drainage way Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site. 
Erosion control A measure that prevents erosion. 192 S-4 
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan A set of plans indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after construction. 
Grading Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
Perimeter control A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
Phasing Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
Sediment control Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
Site A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
Site development A permit issued by the municipality for the construction or alteration of permit ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and grading. 
Stabilization The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
Start of construction The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footing, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory building such as garages. 
Watercourse Any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers, streams and bodies of water delineated by the city of Greenwood. 
Waterway A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
Section III.  Permits 
A. 	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove any coal, mineral, stone, fill dirt, top soil, or other commercial product from within the corporate limits of the city.  Any coal, mineral, fill dirt, top soil, or other commercial product removed from on location within the corporate limits of the city of Greenwood must be utilized at the same site it was removed from or at another site within the corporate limits of the city. 
193 S-4 
B. 	No person shall conduct clearing or grading activity that would require the uncovering of one (1) acre or more without first obtaining a site development permit from the city of Greenwood. 
C. 	No site development permit is required for the following activities: 
1. 	
Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 

2. 	
Existing nursery and agricultural operations. 


D. 	Each application for a site development permit shall bear the name(s) and address of the owner or developer of the site, and the name and contract information of the applicant's authorized representative. 
E. 	Each application for a site development permit shall include an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
F. 	A site development permit is required in association with all building permits for new construction.  No person shall conduct clearing or grading activity until both the building permit and associated site development permit have been issued by the city of Greenwood.  There shall be a Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan review fee. 
Section IV.  Review and approval 
A. 	The Department of Planning and Development will receive and review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation.  Within seven working days after receiving an application, Department of Planning and Development shall, in writing: 
1. 	
Approve the permit application; 

2. 	
Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 

3. 	
Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 


194 S-4 
B. 	Failure of the Department of Planning and Development to act on an original or revised application within 30 days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and Department of Planning and Development. 
Section V.  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan 
A. 	The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include the following: 
1. 	
A site map at a scale no smaller than 1" = 100' showing erosion and sediment control proposed for the site. 

2. 	
A sequence of clearing and grading activities anticipated for construction of the development site.  Sequencing shall include the anticipated dates for the start of construction, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 

3. 	
Erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this ordinance that will remain installed and functioning throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site until soil stabilization with permanent vegetation. 

4. 	
Proposed seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary erosion control and permanent vegetative stabilization. 

5. 	
Provisions for maintenance of control facilities until the site soils are stabilized with permanent vegetation. 


B. 	Modifications to the plan shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as Section IV of this ordinance. 
Section VI.  Design requirements 
A. 	Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the Best Management Practices (BMP) identified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of Department of Planning and Development.  Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 2:1, except as approved by Department of Planning and Development to meet other community or environmental objectives. 
195 S-4 
B. 	Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and wetlands, shall not 
be permitted, except when in compliance with this ordinance, state and federal law. Site grading must meet the following requirements: 
1. 	
The site must drain away from all buildings and toward the city's street or a dedicated drainage ditch. 

2. 	
The site should be graded to provide a minimum of 6" of fall in 10 feet away from building foundations. 

3. 	
Drainage should be directed away from adjacent lots to the maximum extent possible. 


C. 	Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control measures have been installed in accordance with the requirements of the site development permit. 
D. 	Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 30 acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by Department of Planning and Development. 
E. 	Erosion control requirements shall include the following: 
1. 	
Soil stabilization shall be completed within one week of clearing or inactivity in construction. 

2. 	
If seeding or other vegetative erosion control method is used, it shall become established within two weeks or the Department of Planning and Development may require that the site to be reseeded and/or mulch to stabilize the site. 

3. 	
Special techniques that meet the BMP on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure stabilization. 

4. 	
Soil stockpiles must be stabilized when inactive for periods longer than two weeks. 

5. 	
The entire site must be stabilized by seeding and mulching when site grading is complete.  The Department of Planning and Development may require stabilization of any part of the site that will remain inactive for longer than two weeks or when an erosion problem is identified. 

6. 	
Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 


196 S-4 
F. 	Sediment controls requirements shall include: 
1. 	
Setting basins, sediment traps, and perimeter controls. 

2. 	
Setting basins that are designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long-term storm water management, if required by Department of Planning and Development. 

3. 	
Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls. 


G. 	Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include: 
1. 	
A temporary stream crossing if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction. 

2. 	
Stabilization of the watercourse channel after any in-channel work. 

3. 	
All on-site storm water conveyance channels must be designed in accordance with the Greenwood Minimum Drainage Standards. 

4. 	
Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 


H. 	Construction site access requirements shall include: 
1. 	
A temporary access road provided at all site. 

2. 	
Other measures required by Department of Planning and Development in order to ensure that sediment is not washed into storm drains and construction vehicles do not track sediment onto public streets. 


Section VII.  Inspection 
A. 	Department of Planning and Development shall have full access to the site for inspections to insure compliance with the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
197 S-4 
B. 	A copy of the site development permit and approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
C. 	The permit holder or his/her representative shall make regular inspections of all control measures to insure compliance with the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan(s).  The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measures.  All inspections and inspection dates shall be documented in written form and available on site for review by the Department of Planning and Development. 
Section VIII.  Enforcement 
A. 	Stop-work order; revocation of permit In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this ordinance violates the terms of the permit or this ordinance, the Department of Planning and Development may suspend or revoke the site development permit and any associated building or development permits. 
B. 	Violation and penalties No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this ordinance.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense.  Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for each offense.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. 
198 
S-14 
CHAPTER 15.16 
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES 

Sections: 
15.16.01 General 
15.16.02 Site planning 
15.16.03 Parking and circulation 
15.16.04 Landscaping 
15.16.05 Walls and fences 
15.16.06 Screening 
15.16.07 Architectural design guidelines 
15.16.08 Roofs 
15.16.09 Windows 
15.16.10 Awnings 
15.16.11 Signs 
15.16.12 Lighting 
15.16.01  General The following design guidelines are intended to provide a reference framework to assist an applicant in understanding the city’s goals and objectives for high quality development within the commercial land use districts.  The guidelines complement the mandatory site development regulations contained in the zoning ordinance by providing good examples of appropriate design solutions and by providing design interpretations of the various mandatory regulations. 
These guidelines are intended to result in the enhancement of Greenwood’s character and image, as well as further the establishment of sense of place by the following: 
A. 	Specifying the use of high quality building materials. 
B. 	Identification and consistent use of design elements which contribute to quality and good design in site planning, architecture, landscaping, signage and other site amenities. 
C. 	Creating a consistent, cohesive character within a development that is also compatible to its surroundings. 
D. 	Encouraging both vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 
199 S-14 
The design guidelines are general and may be interpreted with some flexibility in their application to specific projects.  The guidelines will be utilized during the city’s design review process to encourage the highest level of design quality while at the same time providing the flexibility necessary to encourage creativity on the part of project designers. 
Applicability The provision of this section shall apply to all commercial development within the city.  Any addition, remodeling, renovating, relocation, or construction requiring a building permit within any commercial land use district, and where any conditional use permit, site plan review or re-zoning is required shall adhere to these guidelines where applicable.  Non­compliance to these guidelines may be grounds for denial of a project. 
Where an existing building is purchased or is to be remodeled or renovated, and where the property does not meet the landscaping criteria of these guidelines, 50% of the perimeter parking area must conform to theses landscaping guidelines as a part of the project. 
General design principles 
A. 	Desirable elements of project design The qualities and design elements for commercial structures that are most desirable include: 
1. 	
Richness of surface and texture 

2. 	
Significant wall articulation (insets, canopies, wing walls, trellises) 

3. 	
Multi-planed, pitched roofs 

4. 	
Roof overhangs, arcades 

5. 	
Regular or traditional window rhythm 

6. 	
Articulated mass and bulk 

7. 	
Significant landscape and hardscape elements 

8. 	
Prominent access driveways 

9. 	
Landscaped and screened parking 

10. 	
Comprehensive sign program 

11. 	
Safe integration of vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic 


B. 	Undesirable elements The elements to avoid or minimize include: 
1. 	
Large, blank, unarticulated stucco wall surfaces 

2. 	
Unpainted concrete precision block walls 

3. 	
Highly reflective surfaces 

4. 	
Metal siding on the main façade 

5. 	
Plastic siding 

6. 	
Square “boxlike” structures 

7. 	
Mix of unrelated styles (i.e., rustic wood shingles and polished chrome) 

8. 	
Large, out-of-scale signs with flashy colors 

9. 	
Visible outdoor storage, loading, and equipment areas 

10. 	
Disjointed parking areas and confusing circulation patterns (Ord. No. 2013-10, Sec. 1.) 


200 S-18 
15.16.02  Site planning Placement of structure should consider the existing built context of the commercial are, the location of incompatible lands uses, the location of major traffic generators, vehicular and pedestrian access, circulation and parking, preservation and buffering of views, as well as an analysis of a site’s characteristics and particular influences. 
A. 	Handicap access Handicap access is required per the International Code Council, International Building Code and the American Disabilities Act guidelines.  The CABO-ANSI standards for handicap accessibility shall be followed. 
B. 	Fire Department/emergency access Site planning must provide for the Fire Department/emergency access and comply with all adopted local and state Fire Prevention Code standards.  When parking control is necessary along required access, such access shall be labeled on plans as “Fire Lane,” and fire lane signs stating “No Parking” must be installed at the time of development. Under commercial guidelines no fire hydrants shall be located greater than every three hundred (300) feet so as to adequately protect each structure in development. (Ord. No. 2014-22, Sec. 1.) 
C. 	Compatibility Structures should be sited in a manner that will complement the adjacent structure.  Sites should be developed in a coordinated manner to provide order and diversity and avoid a jumbled, confused development. 
D. 	Clustering Whenever possible, new structures should be clustered.  This creates plazas or pedestrian malls and prevents long “barracks-like” rows of structures. Linear “strip” development is discouraged.  This type of development is characterized by uses that are only one store deep and buildings are arranged in a linear fashion rather than clustered.  This type of design also does not promote interaction between people and places.  If this approach is used, the development must incorporate variation in building height, building mass, roof forms and changes in wall planes in the architectural design to mitigate the linear effect. 
E. 	Pedestrian considerations The quality of the pedestrian environment should be considered as a central defining aspect of the site layout and design theme for all types of commercial centers. 
1. 	
Pedestrian circulation must be provided from the perimeter of the site to all buildings. 

201 S-14 

2. 	
Primary pedestrian or bicycle connections must be not less than 8 feet in width.  Secondary interior sidewalks must be no less than 5 feet in width. 

3. 	
Parking stall overhang into any sidewalk or landscape area will require an increase in the minimum sidewalk or landscape area by the depth of the overhand (2 foot for each overhang). 

4. 	
Sidewalk areas in front of buildings shall be designated to accommodate pedestrian activity.  Sidewalks in front of or directly adjacent to singular, freestanding buildings less than 20,000 square feet should not be less than 7 feet in width (exclusive of auto overhand).  Sidewalks in front of buildings in excess of 20,000 square feet should be no less than 10 feet in width. 

5. 	
Locate structures and on-site circulation systems to minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflicts where possible.  Link structures to the public sidewalk where possible with textured paving, landscaping, and trellises. 


F. 	Traffic calming The use of traffic calming techniques is encouraged with commercial developments.  These design features are intended to slow traffic and divert any cut through traffic so as to provide a safer and more attractive environment for people.  Such techniques should be considered as part of comprehensive, integrated transportation and site layout strategy. 
1. 	
Traffic calming techniques include such features as wide speed-bumps, raised crosswalks, raised intersections, traffic circles and roundabouts, landscaped medians and diverters, and travel land narrow points also known as traffic chokers and curb bulb-outs. 

2. 	
Narrow speed bumps are the least desirable type of traffic calming device and should be avoided since speed bumps can cause loss of control of the vehicle at higher speeds. 


G. 	Sense of entry A sense of entry or arrival must be created at primary entryways into the development.  Building placement, landscaping, gates, entry monuments, specialty lighting and other design elements can be used to create this design effect.  The architectural details of primary entries should be integrated with the overall design of the development in terms of materials, scale, proportion, and design elements. 
202 S-14 
H. 	Orientation of structures Freestanding, singular commercial structures should be oriented with their major entry toward the street where access is provided as well as having their major façade parallel to the street. 
I. 	Setbacks Building and parking lot setbacks are measured from property lines after dedication of all required future right-of-way.  Building setbacks are based on a maximum building height of 25 feet.  Buildings in excess of 25 feet may require additional setback. 
1. 	
Landscaping is required in parking lot setback areas. 

2. 	
Parking setbacks apply to all parking, access drives, loading and trash areas. 

3. 	
Where any of these setbacks conflict, the more stringent will generally apply. 


Setback 	Setback 
Arterial and collector streets 	Bldg. :  35 ft. Parking:  10 ft. or Bldg.:  40 ft. with 100% landscaping between property line and building (no parking or pavement in this area) 
Local streets 	Bldg.:  30 ft. Parking:  10 ft. 

Interior property within the Commercial 
Development Bldg.:  20 ft. Parking:  10 ft. 

Other property line adjacent 
to non-residential property Bldg.:  20 ft. Parking:  10 ft. 

Other property line adjacent to 
residential property or public property Bldg.:  50 ft. Parking: 25 ft. 

These setbacks may vary depending on the overall site plan.  Setbacks are measured from property lines. 
J. 	Phased development Construction phasing must be indicated on the development plan.  The timing of construction of pad sites of individual lots may be subject to further restrictions. 
203 S-14 
K. 	Grading/slope 
1. 	
Pavement grades should not exceed 5% (5% agrees with sidewalk ordinance) longitudinal slope within a parking area and 8% longitudinal slope in drive aisles that do not have parking stalls along the aisles. 

2. 	
Site entry/exit aisles shall not exceed 12% longitudinal slope from the public street to 50 feet into the site.  The 50 feet shall be measured from the property line.  (Standard specifications for design and construction of public improvements). 

3. 	
Sidewalk cross slopes shall not exceed 2% (2% agrees with sidewalk ordinance).  Sidewalk longitudinal slopes shall comply with the American Disability Association requirements. 


L. 	Utility lines Existing and new utility lines and services be placed underground both within and adjacent to the development, including adjacent right-of-way. 
M. 	Open space 
1. 	
Development of a project greater than 5 acres must include a publicly accessible outdoor space such as a pedestrian plaza, park, pavilion or courtyard.  A water feature, fountain, sculpture, or other feature may be considered in lieu of a larger outdoor space.  Amenities such as specialty paving, specialty lighting and street furniture are required throughout the development. 

2. 	
Recognize the importance of spaces between structures as “outdoor rooms” on the site.  Outdoor spaces should have clear, recognizable shapes that reflect careful planning and are not simply “left over” area between structures.  Such spaces should provide pedestrian amenities such as shade, benches, fountains, etc. 

3. 	
Public open space should be located in proximity to areas of activity, such as primary circulation routes and building entrances.  Building entrances, major site connectors and other focal points are preferred for locating useable open space, such as plazas, courtyards and landscaped seating areas. 

4. 	
Open space area should be clustered into larger, predominant landscape areas rather than equally distributing them into areas of low impact such as 


204 S-14 
at building peripheries, behind a structure or areas of little impact to the public view, where they are not required as a land use buffer or as a required yard setback. 
N. 	Bikeway facilities Bikeway facilities, including wide travel lanes, striped bicycle lanes, off-road pathways, and bicycle parking facilities should be considered within commercial developments where appropriate to the scale of the development. Where vehicular traffic moves slower it can be expected that bicycles can safely mix with the flow of automobiles in the traffic lane.  In larger commercial developments and where heavier bicycle traffic is expected it may appropriate to consider various options, including wider drive aisles, designated bicycle lanes and/or a system of separate pathways for bicycles. 
O. 	Loading facilities Loading facilities should not be located at the front of structures where it is difficult to adequately screen them from view.  Such facilities are more appropriate at the rear of the site where special screening may not be required. (Ord. No. 2013-10, Sec. 2.) 
15.16.03  Parking and circulation Parking lot design can be a critical factor in the success or failure of a commercial use.  In considering the possibilities for developing a new parking area, a developer should analyze the following factors:  ingress and egress with consideration to possible conflicts with street traffic; pedestrian and vehicular conflicts; on-site circulation and service vehicle zones; and the overall configuration and appearance of the parking area. 
A. 	Drive-throughs Drive-through lanes for restaurants, banks, pharmacies and other uses should be integrated with the overall site layout so as to provide safe, efficient, integrated vehicular and pedestrian circulation. Adequate vehicular stacking or queuing space should be provided to avoid waiting vehicles from blocking drive aisles. 
B. 	Separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems Separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems are encouraged.  Pedestrian linkages between uses in commercial developments should be emphasized, including distinct pedestrian access from parking areas in large commercial developments, such as shopping centers. 
C. 	Parking circulation design considerations 
1. 	
Parking aisles should be separated from vehicle circulation routes whenever possible. 

2. 	
Parking areas shall be landscaped, receiving interior as well as perimeter 

treatment in accordance with the landscaping section of these guidelines. 

3. 	
Parking areas should be separated from structures by either a raised concrete walkway or landscaped strip, preferably both.  Situations where parking spaces directly abut the structures should be avoided. 

4. 	
Common driveways which provide vehicular access to more than one site are encouraged. 

5. 	
Shared parking between adjacent businesses and/or developments is highly encourage whenever practical. 

6. 	
Where parking areas are connected, interior circulation should allow for a similar direction of travel and parking bays in all areas to reduce conflict at points of connection. 

7. 	
Whenever possible, locate site entries on side streets in order to minimize pedestrian/vehicular conflicts.  When this is not possible, design the front site entry with appropriately patterned concrete or pavers to differentiate it from the sidewalks. 

8. 	
Design parking areas so that pedestrians walk parallel to moving cars. Minimize the need for the pedestrian to cross parking aisles and landscape areas. 

9. 	
Parking areas and pedestrian walkways should be visible from structures to the greatest degree possible. 

10. 	
The parking area should be designed in a manner which links the structures to the street sidewalk system as an extension of the pedestrian environment.  This can be accomplished by using design features such as walkways with enhanced paving, trellis structures, or a special landscaping treatment. 

11. 	
Parking area which accommodates a significant number of vehicles should be divided into a series of connected smaller lots.  Landscaping and offsetting portions of the lot are effective in reducing the visual impact of large parking areas. 


205 S-14 
206 S-14 
D. 	Drop-off areas Areas to safely drop off and pick up passengers and to load goods into vehicles are an important features for many commercial uses, such as grocery stores, drugstores, movie theaters, and home improvement centers.  Drop-off zones should be integrated into the design of the commercial centers with attractive paving, adequate separation of vehicles and pedestrians, and convenient location near building entrances.  Using attractive paving material for the drop-off zone, such as paving blocks or colored concrete, can help to define the drop-off zone.  The vehicle stopping area for the drop-off zone should not block traffic in the drive aisle. 
E. 	Access to parking areas Parking access points, whether located on front or side streets should be located as far as possible from street intersections so that adequate stacking room is provided.  The number of access points should be limited to the minimum amount necessary to provide adequate circulation. 
F. 	Bicycle facilities The provision of adequate, safe and convenient bicycle parking facilities is an important component of a comprehensive program to encourage the use of bicycles as a viable transportation option. 
1. 	
The location should be close to building entrances, easily identifiable, visible to those passing by and separate from pedestrian circulation areas. 

2. 	
Long-term bicycle parking facilities are attractive for employment centers, schools, transit nodes and other such uses where people will leave the bicycle for all or part of a day.  Long-term bicycle parking should provide a high degree of security and safety through the use of bicycle lockers, designated areas within buildings or outside areas with constant visual monitoring. 

3. 	
Short-term bicycle parking should be located in highly visible locations near the building entrance with inverted “U” shaped loop racks or similar design instead of ribbon or wave-type racks, which are less effective for locking the bicycle. 


G. 	The first parking stall which is perpendicular to a driveway or first aisle juncture should be at least 30 feet back from the curb.  With larger centers, significantly more setback area may be required. 
H. 	Utilize a 36 inch high opaque wall or landscaping to screen any parking at the street periphery.  A combination of walls, berms, and landscape material is highly recommended.  Where practical, lowering the grade of the parking lot from 
207 S-14 existing street elevations may aid in obscuring views of automobiles while promoting views of architectural elements of the structures beyond. (Ord. No. 2013-10, Sec. 3.) 
15.16.04  Landscaping The city of Greenwood recognizes that landscaping is an important component of quality development and that enhancing the appearance of the city with landscaping increases the desirability of living and working in Greenwood.  Landscaping serves multiple purposes both aesthetic and functional.  Landscaping in commercial development is intended, but not limited to making the environment physically more comfortable to the user, buffering or enhancing views, reducing noise, creating seasonal interest, assisting in water quality efforts and storm management, enhancing the public street appearance and enhancing the commercial development. 
A. 	Landscaping considerations 
1. 	
Landscaping for commercial uses should be used to define specific areas by helping to focus on entrances to buildings and parking lots, provide shade, define the edges of various land uses, provide transition between neighboring properties (buffering), define on-site circulation, break up expanses of paving or wall and provide screening for loading and equipment areas. 

2. 	
Landscaping should be in scale with adjacent structures and be of appropriate size at maturity to accomplish its intended purpose. 

3. 	
Landscaping around the entire base of structures is recommended to soften the edge between the parking lot and the structure.  This should be accented at entrances to provide focus. 

4. 	
Landscaping should be protected from vehicular and pedestrian encroachment by raised planting surfaces, depressed walks, or the use of curbs. 

5. 	
Use boxed and tubbed plants in clay or wood containers, especially for enhancement of sidewalk slopes, piazas and courtyards. 


B. 	Trees 
1. 	
Trees should be located throughout the parking lot and not simply at the ends of parking aisles. 

2. 	
In general, formal, stand-alone trees are encouraged along major streets 

and in medians, with less formal, clustered tree type design at the intersections and entrances. 

3. 	
At maturity, trees should be able to be trimmed 10 feet above ground and shrubs should be maintained at a height of approximately 3 feet to provide adequate visibility. 


208 S-14 
C. 	Detention ponds 
1. 	
Where detention is required, detention ponds should be contained within a lot or parcel that includes a building site.  One detention area may be required to serve several lots versus individual detention ponds for each lot. 

2. 	
Detention ponds should be landscaped with native grasses.  These ponds must be maintained by the owner or business association.  Trickle channels should be designed to look natural such as using cobble or boulders with an underdrain. 


D. 	Reclaimed water The use of reclaimed water for landscape areas is encouraged, when available. 
E. 	Responsibility of maintenance The developers or property owner is responsible for the installation and maintenance of landscaping in the right-of-way of all streets. (Ord. No. 2013-10, Sec. 4.) 
15.16.05  Walls and fences 
A. 	If not required for a specific screening or security purpose, walls should not be utilized within commercial areas.  The intent is to keep the walls as low as possible while performing their screening and security functions. 
B. 	Where walls are used at property frontages, or screen walls are used to conceal storage and equipment areas, they should be designed to blend with the site’s architecture.  Both sides of all perimeter walls or fences should be architecturally treated.  Landscaping should be used in combination with such walls whenever possible.  Chain link fencing is not allowed within commercial areas. 
C. 	When security fencing is required, it should be a combination of solid walls with pillars and decorative view ports, or short solid wall segments and wrought iron grill work. 
209 S-14 
D. 	Long expanses of fence or wall surfaces should be offset and architecturally designed to prevent monotony.  Landscape pockets should be provided.  (Ord. No. 
2013-10, Sec. 5.) 
15.16.06  Screening 
A. 	Screening for outdoor storage should be a minimum of 6 feet and a maximum of 10 feet high.  The height should be determined by the height of the material of equipment being screened.  Vinyl or wood fencing is an acceptable screening material for areas of any lot not visible from the street.  Exterior storage should be confined to portions of the site least visible to public view. 
B. 	Where screening is required and will be visible from the public right-of-way, a combination of elements should be used including solid masonry walls, berms, and landscaping. 
C. 	All mechanical equipment such as compressors, air-conditioners, antennas, pumps, heating and ventilating equipment, emergency generators, chiller, elevator penthouses, water tanks stand pipes, solar collectors, satellite dishes and communications equipment, and any other type of mechanical equipment for the building must be indicated on the architectural drawings. 
1. 	
All rooftop mechanical equipment must be screened on all sides to full height by building parapet walls or other building elements that appear as integral elements of the overall building design, unless approved otherwise by the city. 

2. 	
Mechanical equipment should not be located on the roof of a structure unless the equipment can be screened. 


D. 	Mechanical equipment should be clustered as much as possible and appropriately screened from view.  The method of screening shall be architecturally integrated with the adjacent structure in terms of materials, color, shape, and size.  Where individual equipment is provided, a continuous screen is desirable. 
E. 	All screening must be properly maintained by the developer or property owner. (Ord. No. 2013-10, Sec. 6.) 
15.16.07  Architectural design guidelines The architectural design of commercial buildings must consider and accommodate the overall desire of the city of Greenwood, to create and enhance community image.  Greenwood’s identity and livability will be strengthened 
210 S-14 
through thoughtful design and development.  The identification and application of architectural design requirements will assist Greenwood in achieving a strong community image. 
A. 	Height and mass 
1. 	
Heights of structures should relate to adjacent open spaces to allow maximum sun and ventilation, protection from prevailing winds, enhance public views of surrounding mountains and minimize obstruction of view from adjoining structures. 

2. 	
Height and scale of new development should be compatible with that of surrounding development.  New development height should “transition” from the height of adjacent development to the maximum height of the proposed structure. 

3. 	
Multiple buildings in single projects should be varied in size and mass. A transition from low buildings at the site perimeter to larger and taller structures on the interior of the site is generally encouraged. 


B. 	“360 degree” architecture is generally required.  All sides of buildings are to be treated with the same architectural style, use of materials, and details as the front elevation of the building as determined by the city.  Where it can be demonstrated with certainty that a particular side of the building will not be visible from public view in the future, the Planning Commission may consider a variance from this requirement. 
C. 	Large buildings which give the appearance of “box-like” structures are generally unattractive and detract from the overall scale of most buildings.  There are several ways to reduce the appearance of large scale, bulky structures. 
1. 	
Vary the planes of the exterior walls in depth and/or direction.  Wall lanes should not run in one continuous direction for more than 50 feet without an offset. 

2. 	
Vary the height of the buildings so that it appears to be divided into distinct massing elements. 

3. 	
Articulate the different parts of a building’s façade by use of color, arrangement of façade elements, or a change in materials. 

4. 	
Use landscaping and architectural detailing at the ground level to lessen the impact of an otherwise bulky building. 

211 S-14 

5. 
Avoid blank walls at the ground floor levels.  Utilize windows, trellises, wall articulation, arcades, change in materials, or other features. 


D. 	Scale Scale, for purposes here, in the relationship between the size of the new structure and the size of adjoining permanent structures.  It is also how the proposed building’s size relates to the size of a human being (human scale).  Large scale building elements will appear imposing if they are situated in a visual environment which is predominantly smaller in scale. 
1. 	
Building scale can be reduced through the proper use of window patterns, structural bays, roof overhangs, siding, awnings, moldings, fixtures, and other details. 

2. 	
The scale of buildings should be carefully related to adjacent pedestrian areas (i.e., plazas, courtyards) and other structures. 

3. 	
Large dominating structures should be broken up by: 

a. 	
Creating horizontal emphasis through the use of trim; 

b. 	
Adding awnings, eaves, windows, or other architectural ornamentation; 

c. 	
Use of combinations of complementary colors; and 

d. 	
Landscape materials 




E. 	Franchise architecture Building elements must not function as signage.  The appearance of “franchise architecture,” where the building functions as signage is discouraged.  Exact duplicate prototypes are generally not acceptable as a solution for the design of commercial developments.  It is understood that the chains want to present a consistent corporate identity; however, the proliferation of exact replicas throughout the city creates an anonymous, bland, characterless environment.  The building footprint, building massing and general design scheme may be repeated to some degree, but incorporation of franchise or business design elements unique or symbolic of particular business must be secondary to the overall architectural design of the commercial development. 
F. 	Building materials 
1. 	
The use of brick as a primary material is required unless determined otherwise by the city.  Quality finish materials that can be used in conjunction with brick include stone, integrally tinted textured masonry block; pre-cast concrete, tilt-concrete panels with brick or stone facing, 

212 stucco and external insulation finish system that simulates a stucco appearance. 

2. 	
Wood siding may be considered for use in limited applications and not as a 

primary building material. 

3. 	
Smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels, or metal siding is prohibited as a predominant exterior building material. 

4. 	
Pre-cast concrete must have integral color, contain other materials embedded within, and be articulated with design detailing or have application of other building materials to create detailed design interest. 

5. 	
The city will consider a variance from the requirement to use brick as the primary building material only when the design and use of an alternate acceptable building material is incorporated into a set of overall design guidelines that are determined by the city to be exemplary of outstanding design and desirable by the city. 


G. 	Architectural focal points Architectural focal points provide visual interest and can help define a sense of place.  The use of building or design elements such as towers, articulated rooflines, artwork, fountains, pedestrian seating areas, or landscape plantings as special focal points is encouraged.  Signage on towers or other highly visible architectural features should be discouraged. 
H. 	Color 
1. 	
The color and intensity of color of all building materials is subject to city approval.  In general, subdued colors typical of the muted native grasses, wood, rocks, and soil of Greenwood’s natural setting are to be used as the primary color(s). 

2. 	
Large areas of intense white color should be avoided.  While subdued colors usually work best as a dominant overall color, a bright trim color can be appropriate. 

3. 	
The color palette chosen for new structures should be compatible with the colors of adjacent structures.  An exception is where the colors of adjacent structures strongly diverge from these design guidelines. 

4. 	
Wherever possible, minimize the number of colors appearing on the structure’s exterior.  Small commercial structures should use no more than three colors. 

213 S-14 

5. 	
Primary colors should only be used to accent elements, such as door and window frames and architectural details. 

6. 	
Architectural detailing should be painted to complement the façade and tie in with adjacent structures. 


I. 	Building top Buildings should have a defined top.  This can be accomplished with cornices, caps, parapets or roofs. 
1. 	
Tops take advantage of the visual prominence of a building’s silhouette and should be approximately one-twentieth of a building’s height or 12 inches (whichever is more). 

2. 	
Techniques for clearly expressing a top include (but are not limited to): cornice treatment, roof overhangs, stepped parapets, textured materials and differently colored materials.  Colored “stripes” are not acceptable as the only treatment. 


J. 	Building mounted equipment The location of building mounted equipment (mechanical, electrical, gutters, downspouts, etc.) must result in these elements being hidden or screened so they are unobtrusive.  All building mounted elements must be painted to match the color of the surrounding building material unless approved otherwise by the city. 
K. 	Accessory buildings Accessory buildings or structures, which are not compatible and consistent with the material and design of the main building are not allowed. 
L. 	Trash enclosures 
1. 	
Trash enclosures should be clustered and where site planning permits, made to appear as an extension of the building.  Trash areas within the building itself are encouraged. 

2. 	
Dumpsters and trash cannot be visible above the height of surrounding enclosure.  Unroofed enclosure walls shall be a minimum of 8 feet.  Trash enclosures visible over 8 feet from residential areas or public streets should be roofed. 

3. 	
Outdoor trash compactors are generally prohibited, due to concerns of noise, smell, fire and access. 


214 S-14 
M. 	Vending machines Soda, water and other vending machines of a similar size should be placed within a building.  Smaller vending machines, such as newspaper machines, are exempt from these criteria. (Ord. No. 2013-10, Sec. 7.) 
15.16.08  Roofs 
A. 	Three-dimensional rooftops 
1. 	
Variation in rooflines is suggested to reduce the scale of large building. 

2. 	
Parapets must conceal flat roofs. 

3. 	
Pedestrian entries into buildings should be further emphasized. 

4. 	
overhanging eaves, sloped roofs, and three or more roof planes may be required. 

5. 	
The roofline at the top of the structure should not run in continuous plane for more than 50 feet without offsetting or jogging the roof plane. 


B. 	Rooftop equipment Rooftop equipment shall be screened from public view by screening materials of the same nature as the structure’s basic materials. Mechanical equipment should be located below the highest vertical element of the building. 
C. 	Roofing materials The following roof materials should not be used: 
1. 	
Corrugated metal (standing rib metal roofs are permitted) 

2. 	
Highly reflective surfaces (copper roofs may be considered) 

3. 	
Illuminated roofing. 


Metal roofs shall have a low gloss finish to reduce glare. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10.) 

15.16.09  Windows 
A. 	The use of windows is required in areas where there is significant pedestrian activity or to assist in breaking up the appearance of blank walls, as determined by the city. 
B. 	Windows should be for display purposes or allow viewing both into and out of the interior of the building. 
C. 	Windows may be required to be recessed into the building wall to create shadow. 
215 S-14 
D. 	Windows, windows with awnings, and covered pedestrian walkways should total at least 60% of the building frontage along public streets or parking lots.  An exception to this requirement may be considered for individual tenants in excess of 20,000 square feet gross floor area or the rear elevation of a building that backs up to a public street. 
E. 	Reflective glass or mirrored glass is prohibited, unless determined otherwise by the city.  Clear glass shall be used for storefronts, windows and doors.  Window painting or view blocking techniques are generally not permitted.  (Ord. No. 2013­10.) 
15.16.10  Awnings 
A. 	The use of awnings along a row of contiguous structures should be restricted to awnings of the same form and location.  Color of the awnings should be consistent and a minimum 7 foot vertical clearance should be maintained. 
B. 	Signs on awnings should be painted or stenciled and be limited to the awning’s flap (valance) or to the end panels of angled, curved, or box awnings. 
C. 	Plexiglas, metal, and glossy vinyl illuminated awnings are strongly discouraged. Canvas, treated canvas, matte finish vinyl, and fabric awnings are encouraged. 
D. 	The practice of suspending a small sign from an awning to guide pedestrian traffic to a business it encouraged.  The sign should have a minimum clearance of 7 feet from ground level.  (Ord. No. 2013-10.) 
15.16.11  Signs 
A. 	Every structure and commercial complex should be designed with a precise concept for adequate signing.  Provisions for sign placement, sign scale in relationship with the building, and sign readability should be considered in developing the signing concept.  All signing should be highly compatible with the building and site design relative to color, materials, and placement. 
B. 	All signage is not necessarily intended to be viewed from a public street; however, if signs are visible from a public street, they must not compromise public safety by attracting undue attention, as determined by the city. 
C. 	Monument-type signs are the preferred alternative for business identification whenever possible.  Where several tenants occupy the same site, individual wall-mounted signs are appropriate in combination with a monument sign identifying the development and address. 
216 S-14 
D. The use of backlit individually cut letter signs is strongly encouraged. 
E. 	Each development site should be appropriately signed to give directions to loading and receiving areas, visitor parking and other special areas.  (Ord. No. 2013-10.) 
15.16.12  Lighting 
A. 	Lighting should be used to provide illumination for the security and safety of on-site areas such as parking, loading, shipping, and receiving, pathways, and working areas. 
B. 	The design of light fixtures and their structural support should be architecturally compatible with the main structures on-site.  Illuminators should be integrated within the architectural design of the structures. 
C. 	Parking lot lights should not exceed 30 feet in height. 
D. 	Illumination levels should be designed to average 1 foot candle in parking lots and other similar areas (measured 4/5 feet above the ground surface).  Parking lot lighting should be with metal halide or other type of white lighting. 
E. 	As a security device, lighting should be adequate but not overly bright and high contrast between properties should be avoided.  All building entrances should be well-lighted. 
F. 	Lighting should be designed to minimize excessive lighting of the night sky. 
G. 	All lighting fixtures must be shielded to confine light spread within the site boundaries.  Off-site glare onto adjacent properties or right-of-way is not permitted. 
H. 	The location of freestanding, thematic lighting should occur in the pedestrian area between buildings and parking areas and along primary access drives.  (Ord. No. 2013-10.) 
217 

City of Greenwood, AR Dept. of Planning and Development 
GREENWOOD, ARKANSAS ZONING ORDINANCE & DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
ORDINANCE 316 PASSED AUGUST 1, 1983 AMENDED BY: ORDINANCE 347, OCTOBER 7 1985 ORDINANCE 406, SEPTEMBER 1988 ORDINANCE 437, DECEMBER 3, 1990 ORDINANCE 475, JULY 6, 1992 ORDINANCE 581, SEPTEMBER 3, 1986 ORDINANCE 01-22, ZONING MAP, ARTICLE III, SECTON 2, ITEM 1 ORDINANCE 01-24 
AS AMENDED TO DATE: SEPTEMBER 23, 1997 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc Page 1 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
ZONING REGULATIONS 
FOR 
GREENWOOD, ARKANSAS 

Article I. Purpose 
The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are enacted to implement in part the land use plan of the City and to promote the health, safety, morals,  convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community; to provide for the establishment of districts within the corporate limit; to regulate within such districts the location, height, bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings and structures, the percentage  of lot occupancy, the required open spaces, the density of population, and the uses of land and buildings.  These regulations have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things as to the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
Article II. Definitions 
Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this Ordinance, have the meaning herein indicated. 
1. 	
Accessory Use or Building. A use or building customarily incident and subordinate to the actual principal use or building and located on the same lot with such actual principal use or building. 

2. 	
Alley. A minor public way used for utility easements and vehicular service 
access to the back or the side or properties abutting a street. 


3. 	
Area. This term refers to the amount of land surface in a lot or parcel of land. 

4. 	
Area Requirements. The yard, lot area, width of lot, height of structure, and parking requirements as set forth for a specific zone in the Ordinance. 

5. 	
Dwelling. A unit intended to be occupied as a housekeeping unit. 

6. 	
Family. One or more persons occupying premises and living as a single, non­profit housekeeping unit. 

7. 	
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a structure or use and its accessory structures and uses, and including such open spaces as are required under these regulations and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. 

8. 	
Mobile Home. Any vehicular or similar portable structure originally having no foundation other than wheels, jacks, or skirtings and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes. 

9. 	
Mobile Home Park. 

a. 	
Definition: Mobile Home Park means any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation. 

b. 	
A mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 

c. 	
The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements: 




i.	  The park shall be located in a well-drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 2 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
ii.	  Mobile home spaces shall be provided, consisting of a minimum of 1,500 square feet for each space which shall be at least 30 feet wide and clearly defined. 
iii.	  Mobile home shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at least a 15-foot clearance between mobile homes. 
iv.	  All mobile home spaces shall have abut a driveway of not less than 20 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street. 
10. 	
Non-Conforming Use of Land. That use of land which does not conform to the permitted use of land in the zone in which it is located and which does not utilize a principal or permanent structure. 

11. 	
Non-conforming use of structure. That use of a structure which does not conform to the permitted use of structures of the zone in which it is located. 

12. 	
Non-conforming structure. That structure which, by its nature, is not intended for uses permitted within the zone in which it is located and/or that structure which does not conform to the area requirements of the zone in which it is located. 

13. 	
Open Space. Any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky and occupied by no structure or portion of structures whatever. 

14. 	
Parking Space. Two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of useable and accessible space. 

15. 	
Principal Use. The chief or main recognized use of a structure or of land. 

16. 	
Property Line. The line bounding a lot as defined herein. 

17. 	
Story. That portion of a structure included between the upper surface of the floor next above; also any portion of a structure used for human occupancy between the topmost floor and the roof.  A basement shall not be counted as a story unless the height of the surface of the first floor above the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the structure exceeds 4 feet. 

18. 	
Street. A public way of more than 20 feet established by or maintained under public authority, a private way open for public use, and a private way plotted or laid out for ultimate public use, whether or not constructed. 

19. 	
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.  Among other things, structure includes buildings, walls, fences, billboards, and poster panels. 

20. 	
Yard. The horizontal distance from a lot line to a parallel distance line.  A yard is an open and unoccupied space extending the full distance of the lot. 


Article III. Establishment of Districts 
Section 1 Classification of Districts 
For purposes of these regulations there are eight (8) zoning districts designated as follows: 
R-1 Single Family Residential District R-2 General Residential District R-3 Multi-family Residential District R-4 Mobile Home Park District 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 3 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
C-1 Central Commercial District C-2 Highway Commercial District -3 Entertainment C-3 Entertainment Commercial District (Ord. 475 – 7/6/92) I-1 Restricted Industrial District 
Section 2 Boundaries of Districts 
1. 	
The boundaries of the zoning districts are on the official zoning map approved and adopted by the City Council on which is part of these regulations. (Amended by ordinance 01-22). 

2. 	
Unless otherwise indicated on the Zoning Districts Map, the District boundaries are lot lines, the center lines of streets alleys or a specified distance there-from, railroad right-of-way, of the city limit lines as they existed at the time of the enactment of these Regulations.  Questions concerning the exact location of district boundaries shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment. 

3. 	
When the street or property layout existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the Zoning Districts Map or with other requirements of this article, the Board of Adjustments shall interpret and determine the property lines. 

4. 	
Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership at the time of passage of these Regulations, the use, height, and area authorized in the least restricted district shall apply to the entire lot, but shall not extend more than twenty-five (25) feet beyond the more restricted boundary line.  The use so extended shall be deemed to be conforming.  Where the district boundary is on a platted lot line, this extension is not permitted. 

5. 	
Where a lot under single ownership at the time of passage of these Regulations is a double frontage lot and where the frontage on one street is in a commercial or industrial district (except corner lots) and the frontage of the other street is in a residential district, any commercial or industrial uses placed upon this lot shall be fronted onto the street in the commercial or industrial district.  In all cases of ambiguity or uncertainty, the Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to determine on which street the commercial or industrial use shall face or front so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed. 

6. 	
Where a corner lot with commercial zoning is located on a predominantly commercial street, i.e., located in a block in which the frontage is 51% or more residential frontage, any commercial use placed on the corner lot must have its principal frontage on the predominantly (51% or more) commercial street. 


Article IV. General Provisions 
For the purpose of these Regulations, there shall be certain general provisions which shall apply to the City as a whole, as follows: 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 4 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
Section 1.01 Use of Buildings and Land. No building or land shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and in conformity with the Regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Section 1.02 Non-Conforming Uses. Any lawful use of buildings or land existing at the time of the enactment of these Regulations but not in conformity with its provisions may be continued, subject to the following limitations: 
(a) 	
A non-conforming use of land: 

(1) 	
Shall not be changed unless changed into a conforming use. 

(2) 	
Which shall cease for a continuous period of more that one year shall be deemed discontinued and any use thereafter established must be in conformity with these Regulations. 

(3) 	
In all other use districts may be continued until deemed permanently 
discontinued. 




(b) 	
A non-conforming use of structure: 

(1) 	
May be continued and is subject to such regulations as to maintenance of premises and conditions of adjacent property as approved by the Board of Adjustment. 

(2) 	
May be extended to any portion of a structure arranged or designed for such non-conforming use at the time of passage of these Regulations. 

(3) 	
May be changed to a similar use if no structural changes are necessary. 

(4) 	
Once changed to a conforming use, all new uses shall be conforming uses. 



(c) 	
A non-conforming structure: 

(1) 	
May, with the approval of the Board of Adjustment, be remodeled to maintain the premises in a safe and useable condition regardless of use of structure. 

(2) 	
May, with the approval of the Board of Adjustment, be added to if said addition meets the area requirements of the zone district in which the structure is located. 



(d) 	
Any use of a structure not permitted or any structure not intended for the uses permitted may not be rebuilt or re-established if damaged less than two-thirds of its value, the structure may be rebuilt, restored, and used as before, provided that restoration or reconstruction is completed with 12 months of such happening. 


Section 1.03 Principal Building on Lot. 
(a) 	In residential districts only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot unless otherwise permitted by these Regulations. 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 5 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
(b) 	The equipment of an accessory building with sink, cookstove, or other kitchen facilities for independent occupancy shall be considered evidence that such building is not an accessory building but a separate dwelling and must meet all minimum lot requirements of the district in which it is located. 
Section 1.04 Reduction of Lot Area or Yard Requirements. 
(a) 	
No lot shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family, lot width, building area, or other requirements of these regulations are not maintained.  This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 

(b) 	
No yard or lot area requirements for buildings existing at the time of the passage of these Regulations shall be considered as yard or lot area requirements for any other building. 


Section 1.05 Zoning of Annexed Territory. 
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City shall be governed by and subject to the requirements of R-1, Single Family Residential District until such time as the Zoning district Map shall have been amended to authorize other use or uses for the newly annexed territory. 
Section 1.06 Off-street Loading and Unloading Space. 
Every building or structure hereafter constructed for Commercial or industrial uses shall provide space for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley.  The adequacy of such space shall be determined by the City Building Inspector. 
Section 1.07 Visual Clearance Requirements. 
No lot facing and intersection street shall be occupied by hedges, tall plantings, fences or structures which will obstruct vision for drivers of automobiles and similar modes of transportation.  Such plants or structures shall not be permitted within fifteen (15) feet of an intersection street or corner. 
Section 1.08 Home Occupation in Residential Districts. 
(a) 	Residents of residential zones may, as a conditional usage, engage in occupations, operate businesses and offer professional services in their homes provided that those activities do not conflict with the purposes and objectives of the Zoning Ordinance as stated in Article 1 of this ordinance and provided such activities comply with the conditions and limitations set forth in this section.  Home occupations are intended to be activities that are incidental to the residential nature of the areas in which they are allowed and are not intended in any way to detract from or infringe upon the residential character of these areas. 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 6 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
(b) 	
The following and all essentially similar usages are allowed as a Home Occupation: 

Art and Music Lessons Interior Decorators 
Baking Mail Order Business 
Catering Photography Shop 
Clock Repair Portrait Painting 
Craft Shop Professional Consultant 
Flower Arranging Sewing, Draperies 
Furniture Re-upholstery Telephone Order Business 
Gift Shop Typing, Mailing 
Hair Styling Sales Representative 


(c) 	
Any of the above listed activities or essential similar activities allowed as home occupations are permitted only if these activities are conducted in such a manner so that the proprietor has control of the number of patrons that will be present on the premises at any one time under normal circumstances. 

Generally, only such activities as those conducted by appointment are considered to meet the requirements of this Section.  The number of patrons will be limited to two at any given time on the premises under normal circumstances. 

(d) 	
A business, occupation, or profession may be established in approved zones only if it complies with the following: 

(1) 	
Requires the use of no more than two (2) rooms otherwise normally considered as living space, but in any case no more than twenty (20) percent of the total floor space of the living quarters. 

(2) 	
Requires the use of no accessory building or yard space, provided however, that detached garage building may be used if the garage building does not exceed four hundred fifty (450) square feet of floor space. 

(3) 	
Requires no activity outside the main structure not normally associated with 
residential use. 


(4) 	
Has no sign in excess of four (4) square feet to denote the business occupation, or profession.  Lighted or animated signs are not permitted. 

(5) 	
Involves no outdoor display of goods and services. 

(6) 	
Requires approval of parking by the Planning commission according to the 
following guidelines: 





i. On-street parking is not permitted; 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 7 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
ii. A maximum of two (2) parking spaces, in addition to those currently in use for residential purposes; 
iii.Backing vehicles onto streets may be permitted as an exception in cases when safety is not affected, such as near the end f a dead-end street; 
iv. 
All parking spaces must be completely contained on private property; 

v. 
A parking site plan must be approved by the Planning Commission. 


(e) 	
Businesses, occupations, or professions conducted at the time of the effective date of these regulations in a residential structure, or accessory building in a residential use area may be continued until such use of the structure is abandoned provided that this shall not be construed to approve continuation of any activity constituting a common law nuisance, or any activity prohibited by statues, ordinance, or restrictive covenants applicable to the area. 

(f) 	
Home occupations must be operated by the residents of the structure in which the home occupation is contained. 

(g) 	
It shall be unlawful for residents of residential zones to commence or engage in occupations, operate businesses and offer professional services in their homes, until the Building Inspector has issued a “Home Occupations Permit”.  The applicant for a home occupation permit shall obtain an application from the City Clerk. Upon return of the completed application, the filing of a parking site plan, and payment of a fee of $10.00, to the City Treasurer, plus cost of publications of required notices. The applicant will be instructed to present the parking site plan to the Planning Commission for approval at the next regularly scheduled meeting.  Upon approval of the parking site plan by the Planning Commission, the Building Inspector will inspect the residence for compliance with other requirements of this Section within five (5) days of the approval of the parking site plan.  If the applicant conforms with all provisions, the Building Inspector will issue a home occupation permit.  If a home occupation permit is refused, the Building Inspector will state such refusal in writing with cause. 

(h) 	
A parking site plan must indicate the location and names of nearby alleys and streets, the size of the lot on which the applicant proposes to engage in home occupation, the size and location of existing parking spaces.  The plan must also include the size of lots, and building, and the proposed parking spaces.  The parking site plan must be prepared in a legible manner on a sheet 81/2 inches by 13 inches. 


Article V. Provisions Governing Zoning Districts Section 1 R-1 Single Family Residential District 
1. 	Permitted Uses: 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 8 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
a. 	
Detached one family dwellings 

b. 	
Detached one-family dwellings manufactured homes (Ord. 406 – 9/12/88) 

c. 	
Churches 

d. 	
Library 

e. 	
Schools offering general education course. 

f. 	
Municipal recreation of water supply use. 

g. 	
Accessory structures and use pertinent to the principal structure and use. 

h. 	
Signs 


i. 	Nameplates not over one square foot in area. 
ii. Temporary real estate sings not over three square feet.  Lighted signs are 
not permitted. iii.For places of public assembly, may not exceed thirty square feet. 
2. 	
Lot Area. One-family dwelling:  Minimum 9,000 square feet subdivision. 

3. 	
Yard Requirements. 

a. 	
Front yard: 25 feet from the property line or fifty feet from the centerline of the existing right-of-way, whichever is greater. 

b. 	
Side yard: Minimum 71/2 feet measured from roof line to property line. 

c. 	
Side yard facing street: Fifteen (15) feet (Ord. 581 – 9/3/96) 

d. 	
Rear yard: Minimum of twenty feet from property line or center of alley where one exists. 



4. 	
Width. Minimum width of a lot at the front yard line or building line shall be 75 feet for one-family dwellings. 

5. 	
Height. No building shall be more than 35 feet in height or contain more than two and one-half stories, whichever is greater. 

6. 	
One-family. Minimum on-lot parking space shall be provided. 

7. 	
Places of Public Assembly. 

a. 	
Height.  Maximum height shall be two stories and not to exceed 35 feet for that portion of the structure utilized for the assembly or offices. 

b. 	
Yard Requirements. Minimum of 25 feet from all property lines.  On property abutting a street, 25 from the center of street, whichever is greater. 

c. 	
Parking.  Places of public assembly shall provide one on-lot parking space per each four (4) persons accommodated in the assembly hall. 




Section 2 R-2 General Residential District 
1. 	Permitted Uses. 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 9 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
a. 	
One-family dwellings 

b. 	
Detached one-family dwelling manufactured homes (Ord. 406 – 9/12/88) 

c. 	
Two-family dwelling 

d. 	
Churches 

e. 	
Parks, playgrounds, etc. 

f. 	
Schools offering a general education course 

g. 	
Kindergarten (public and private) 

h. 	
Hospitals, nursing homes, doctor and dental clinics, etc. 

i. 	
Accessory structures and uses pertinent to the principle structure and use 

j. 	
Signs – same as R-1 


2. 	Lot Area. 
a. 	
One-family: Minimum 9,000 square feet for first unit 

b. 	
Two-family: Minimum 9,000 square feet – plus 1,000 square feet for second unit. 


3. 	Yard Requirements. 
a. 	
Front Yard: 25 feet from property line or 50 feet from centerline of existing right-of-way, whichever is greater. 

b. 	
Side yard: Minimum 71/2 feet measured from roof line to property line. 

c. 	
Rear yard: Minimum of twenty (20) feet measured from roof line to property line. 


4. 	
Width. Minimum width of a lot at the front yard line or building line shall be 75 feet for one-family dwelling and 75 feet for two family dwelling.  For each additional unit over one, an additional unit over one, an additional 10 feet shall be added to minimum width requirement for two-family dwellings. 

5. 	
Height. No building shall be more than 35 feet in height or contain more than two and one-half stories, whichever is greater. 

6. 	
On-lot Parking Spaces. One-family and Two-family: One on-lot parking space shall be provided for each family unit. 

7. 	
Places of Public Assembly. 

a. 	
Height. Maximum height shall be 2 ½ stories and not to exceed 35 feet for that portion of the structure used for assembly or offices. 

b. 	
Yard Requirements. Minimum of 25 feet from all property lines.  On property abutting a street, 25 feet from property line or 50 feet from center of street, whichever is greater. 




Section 2-A R-3 Multi-Family Residential District 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 10 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
1. Permitted Uses. 
a. 	
One-family dwellings 

b. 	
Detached one-family dwellings manufactured homes (Ord. 406 9/12/88) 

c. 	
Two-family dwellings 

d. 	
Multi-family dwellings 

e. 	
Churches 

f. 	
Parks, playgrounds, etc. 

g. 	
Schools offering a general education course 

h. 	
Kindergarten (public or private) 

i. 	
Hospitals, nursing hoes, doctors and dental clinics 

j. 	
Accessory structures and uses pertinent to the principle structure and use. 

k. 	
Signs – Same as R-1 


2. 	Lot Areas. 
a. 	
One-family: Minimum 9,000 square feet for the first unit 

b. 	
Two-family: Minimum 9,000 square feet for the first two-family unit, plus 1,000 square feet for second unit. 

c. 	
Multi-family: more than one bedroom units: 9,000 square feet for first two-family units, plus 1,500 square feet for each additional unit. 


3. 	Yard Requirements. 
a. 	
Front yard: 25 feet from the property line or 50 feet from centerline of existing right-of-way, whichever is greater. 

b. 	
Side yard: Minimum 7 ½ feet measured from roof line to property line. 

c. 	
Side Yard Street: Same as front yard. 

d. 	
Rear yard: Minimum of 20 feet measured from roof line 


In NO CASE may a dwelling structure cover over 60% of an area. 
4. 	
Width. Minimum width of a lot at front yard or building line shall be 75 feet for a one-family dwelling.  For each additional over one, sufficient width shall be added to insure adequate parking facilities and recreation available for tenants. 

5. 	
Height. No building shall be more than 35 feet in height or contain more than two and one-half stories, whichever is greater. 

6. 	
On-lot Parking. One family and Multi-family.  Two on-lot parking spaces shall be provided for each family unit. 

7. 	
Places of Public Assembly. Same requirements as R-2. 


Section 2-B R-4 Mobile Home Park District 
1. 	Intent 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 11 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
The intention of this section is to encourage groupings of mobile homes into Mobile Home Park Districts where facilities are adequately and specifically designed to serve mobile homes and the occupants, thereof; and provide reasonable conditions and standards for the location and installation of mobile homes within the corporate limits of Greenwood. 
2. 	Permitted Uses. 
a. 	
Mobile home parks 

b. 	
Mobile home park accessory and service buildings 

c. 	
Signs – same as R-1 


3. 	Planning Commission Approval Required for Location of Mobile Homes outside Mobile Home Parks. 
a. 	Prior to the location or installation of a mobile home within the city limits of Greenwood, other than on a parcel or plot of ground previously zoned as an R­4 mobile home park district application, shall be made to the Planning Commission, for a change in zoning classification. 
Section 2 Mobile Homes. 
1. 	Mobile Home Parks 
a. 	Location: Mobile home parks may be located in an R-4 mobile home park district under the provisions of this subsection. 
2. 	Definition of Terms: Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall for the purpose of this subsection have the meanings indicated. 
a. 	
Licenses Means, any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park within the city limits of Greenwood, Arkansas. 

b. 	
Mobile Home Means any vehicle or similar portable structure having been constructed with wheels, whether or not such wheels have been removed and having no foundation, other than wheels, jacks or skirtings, and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes. 

c. 	
Mobile Home Park 


Means a planned development of not less than two (2) acres designed exclusively for the accommodation of mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 12 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
d. 	Mobile Home Space 
Means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the 
accommodation of one mobile home. 
3. 
Regulatory Agencies 

All current rules and regulations of federal, state and local agencies governing the design and construction of mobile home parks, including FHA, FHMA, and Arkansas Board of health shall be complied with. 

4. 
Development Plan Required 


Prior to commencing construction, the owner or developer of a mobile home park shall submit a detailed site plan of the proposed development to the Greenwood Planning Commission for review and approval.  The site plan shall show the location of all proposed improvements.  The Planning Commission may also require that the site plan show the topography of the area. All mobile home parks shall conform to the following minimum requirements: 
a. 	
Where the boundary of a mobile home park directly abuts property which is improved with a permanent residential building or directly abuts unimproved property which may, under existing laws and regulations, be used for permanent residential building construction, a wall, solid fence, with a minimum height of 5’4” shall be erected and maintained along such boundary. 

b. 	
The mobile home park shall be located on a well drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage, and free from stagnant pools of water. 

c. 	
Each mobile home park shall provide mobile home spaces and such space shall be clearly defined and delineated. Each space shall have an area of not less than 1,500 square feet and a width of not less than 30 feet and 50 feet long. 

d. 	
Mobile homes shall be so located on each space that there shall be at least a 15 foot clearance between mobile homes.  No mobile home shall be located closer than 10 feet to any building within the park, or to any property line of the park which does not abut upon a public street or highway, more than 25 feet or such other distances as may be established by ordinance or regulation as front yard or setback requirement with respect to conventional buildings in the zone in which the mobile home park is located. 

e. 	
All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 26 feet in width, which driveway shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. At least two (2) interior streets of the Mobile Home Park shall connect with exterior public streets at two (2) separate points except that if the 


Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 13 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
property on which the Mobile Home Park is so located and the design of the park does not permit two (2) separate connections to exterior public streets, only one (1) street may be connected to an exterior street, provided such single street is of sufficient width and load-bearing ability to allow free access of municipal police, fire, and other service vehicles and shall provide a turn­around for such vehicles. 
f. 	
All mobile home spaces shall be provided with two (2) off-street parking spaces on or within 300 feet of the mobile home space.  In addition one (1) guest parking space for each four (4) mobile home spaces shall be provided in the park at locations approved by the city. 

g. 	
Walkways not less than four feet wide shall be provided from the mobile home spaces to the service and recreation areas if such areas exist. 

h. 	
All driveways and walkways within the park shall be hard surfaced and well lighted at night, and must meet the requirements of the City of Greenwood. 

i. 	
All sanitary and service facilities shall comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health. 

j. 	
An electrical outlet supplying at least 110-115/220-250 volts, 50 amperes shall be provided for each mobile home space. 

k. 	
All utility lines (water, gas, electricity, telephone, cable TV, etc.) must be installed underground. 


5. 
Service Connections 

All service connections (water, gas, electricity, sewer, etc.) must be at back end of each mobile home space.  Theses connections must conform with the Arkansas State Department and Greenwood codes and ordinances. 

6. 
Inspection 

Each mobile home entering a park must be inspected by the City to determine adequate and safe tie-in connections to electrical, water, and sewer hookups.  The fee for the inspection will be seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50). 

7. 
Water Supply 


An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home spaces within the park to meet the requirements of the park.  Each mobile home space shall be provided with a cold water tap at least four inches above the ground.  An adequate supply of hot 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 14 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for all bathing, washing, and cleansing facilities, if such buildings are required. 
8. Sewage and Refuse Disposal 
a. 	
Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories and slop sinks in service or other buildings within the park shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a system in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant system of such construction and in such manner as will present no health hazard. 

b. 	
Each mobile home space shall be provided with a sewer line of at least four inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive waste from the shower, bathtub, flush toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink of the mobile home harbored in such space and having any and all such facilities.  The sewer in each space shall be connected to discharge the mobile home waste into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant system of such construction and in such manner as will present no health hazard.  Plans for construction of sewage disposal and / or treatment facilities shall be approved by the State Board of Health and the /city of Greenwood, Arkansas. 

c. 	
The disposal of trash and garbage shall be governed by existing ordinances of the city of Greenwood, Arkansas. 


9. 
Fire Protection 

Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment and hydrants in good working order of such type, size and number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable regulations of the Fire Department.  No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may endanger life or property.  No fires shall be left unattended at any time. 

10. 
Supervision 


The owner or operator, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable with the owner or operator for the violation of any provision of this ordinance to which the owner or operator is subject. 
Section 3 C-1 Central Commercial District 
1. Permitted Uses 
a. 	Retail establishments providing goods and services such as grocery, drug, hardware, variety stores and similar uses, and hotels, motor hotels, restaurants. 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 15 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
b. 	
Offices and bank buildings and uses. 

c. 	
Processing and manufacturing that by reason of operation are not a nuisance in respect to noise, odor, dust, vibration, etc. 

d. 	
Wholesaling and warehousing. 

e. 	
Bulk storage of non-combustible materials. 

f. 	
Automotive service, repair and storage, provided that wrecked or salvage vehicles are stored inside a building or are enclosed by a solid fence and are not visible to the public from the street or sidewalk. 

g. 	
Signs – all must be on private property. 


2. 	
Height. Maximum height of a structure shall be three stories and not to exceed 48 feet. 

3. 	
Rear Yard. Minimum 10 feet (Ord. 437-12/3/90) from the property line or center or alley where one exists. 

4. 	
Loading and Unloading. Loading and unloading facilities shall be provided so as not to block any public way. 

5. 	
Side Yard. Minimum 7 ½ feet from property line or center of alley where one exists to a roof line. (Ord. 437 – 12/3/90) 


Section 4 C-2 Highway Commercial District 
1. 	Permitted Uses. 
a. 	
Retail establishments providing goods and services for the motoring public. 

b. 	
Office building and uses. 

c. 	
Automotive service, repair and storage provided that wrecked or salvaged vehicles are stored inside a building or are enclosed by a solid fence and are not visible to the public from the street or sidewalk. 

d. 	
Motels, tourist courts, mobile home parks, etc. 

e. 	
Veterinarian clinics. 

f. 	
Signs – advertising signs not over three hundred square feet in area. 


2. 	Street yard requirements. Minimum of 25 feet from all street property lines or 50 feet from the centerline of existing right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
Height.  Maximum height of a structure shall be three (3) stories and not to exceed 40 feet. 
On-lot Parking Spaces. 
a. 	
On-lot parking facilities shall be provided all employees. 

b. 	
Provisions shall be made for on-lot and customer parking to handle normal anticipated demand. 


Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 16 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
c. Motels, tourist courts, mobile home parks, shall provide one on-lot parking space for each sleeping unit or mobile home space. 
3. 	
Side Yard. Minimum: 7 ½ feet from property line or center of alley where one exists to a roof line.  (Ord. 437 12/3/90) 

4. 	
Rear Yard. Minimum: 10 feet from property line or center of alley, where one exists. (Ord. 437 12/3/90) 

5. 	
Loading and Unloading. Loading and unloading facilities shall be provided so as not to block any public way. 

C-3 Entertainment Commercial District (Ord. 475- 7/6/92) 

6. 	
Permitted Uses. 

a. 	
Skating Rinks 

b. 	
Bowling alleys 

c. 	
Commercial Amusement Centers 

d. 	
Theaters or Playhouses 

e. 	
Miniature Golf Courses 



7. 	
Height: The minimum height of a structure shall be two stories and not to exceed 48 feet. 

8. 	
Rear Yard: Minimum 20 feet from property line or center of alley way where one exists. 

9. 	
Loading and Unloading: Loading and unloading facilities shall be provided so as not to block any public way. 


Section 5 I-1 Restricted Industrial District 
1. 	Permitted Uses. 
a. 	
Manufacturing, compounding, processing packaging, or assembling of those products that will require cleaner and more quiet industries and will involve a minimum of noise, dust, odor, or vibration. 

b. 	
The storage of bulk materials that will not endanger the health, safety, and general welfare of the people. 

c. 	
Retail uses that are accessory to the above operations and other essentially similar uses such as animal hospitals, repair shops, transportation terminals, wholesale outlets, farm machinery sales, laundries, lumber yards, restaurants, and service stations. 


Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 17 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
2. 	
Area. Lot Coverage: no structure may cover more than 33 1/3 percent of the lot area. 

3. 	
Yards. 

a. 	
All structures shall be built at least 25 feet from all property lines. 

b. 	
Where property abuts a railroad where siding facilities are utilized, structures may be built up to the property line. 



4. 	
Height 

a. 	
Maximum height of a structure shall not exceed 50 feet. 

b. 	
The Board of adjustments may waive the height requirements when it is demonstrated that the equipment and the structure to house the operation requires greater height. 



5. 	
On-lot parking. Adequate on-lot parking space shall be provided for all 
employees and visitors. 


6. 	
On-lot Loading and Unloading facilities. Each structure or use shall provide on- lot loading and unloading facilities which shall not block a street, alley, or public way. 


Article VI. Board of Adjustments 
Section 1 Creation and Appointments. 
These Regulations provide for a Board of Adjustment in accordance with Act 186 of the 1957 General Assembly.  Board of Adjustment shall be made up of planning commission members.  All members of said Board shall serve without pay.  The term of membership shall be five years.  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member in the same manner as original appointments. 
The Board shall meet and organize annually to elect its own Chairman and Vice-chairman, each of whom shall serve for one year or until his successor duly qualifies.  The Mayor shall appoint a secretary who shall hold office during the will and pleasure of the mayor and who shall receive such compensation from the City as may be fixed from the time to time by the City Council. 
Section 2 Procedure. 
Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at such times and at such places within the City as the board may designate, or at the call of the chairman.  But the Board shall have at least one meeting each month.  All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, of if a member is absent or fails to vote, noting such fact.  The Board shall 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 18 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city Clerk and shall be a public record. 
The presence of three members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum and the concurring vote of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any administrative officer or to decide in favor of the application on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the zoning ordinance or to effect any variation in such regulations.  
The Building Inspector or his representative shall attend each meeting of the Board and shall make available all plans, specifications, plats and papers relating to any case before the Board for consideration. 
Section 3 Appeals or Variances. 
Any appeal or application for variance to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved, or by any governmental officer, department, board or bureau affected by any decision of the enforcement officer, based in whole or in part, upon the provisions of these Regulations. The Board of Adjustment shall publish a notice of the time and place of a public hearing upon such appeal or application for variance; such notice shall be published at least once, not less than ten (10) days preceding the date of such hearing, in an official paper or newspaper of general circulation in Greenwood, such notice to contain the particular location for which the appeal or variance is requested as well as a brief statement as to what the proposed appeal or variance consists of. A sign one (1) foot by two (2) feet shall be placed upon the property by the Building Inspector giving the date and place of the public hearing and what the appeal or variance consists of, fifteen (15) days before the date of public hearing. The Board shall also give notice of such hearing to interested persons and organizations as it shall deem feasible and practical, upon the date of the hearing, any party may appear before the Board in person or by attorney. 
The applicant shall be required to pay a filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover the cost of publishing and mailing notices and such other expenses as may be incurred in connection with such appeal or application. 
Section 4 Expiration of Permits. 
1. 	
No order of the Board permitting the erection or alteration of a building shall be valid for a period longer than ninety (90) days unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 

2. 	
No order of the Board permitting a use of the building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than ninety (90) days unless such use is established within this period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect, if a building permit for the erection or alteration is obtained within such period and 


Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 19 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance 
with the terms of the permit. 
Section 5 Powers 
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers: 
1. 	
Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirements, permits, decision, determination or refusal made by the enforcement officer or other administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision of these Regulations. 

2. 	
Special Exceptions. To hear and decide applications for special exceptions upon which the board of Adjustment is specifically authorized to pass. 

3. 	
Variance. To hear and decide applications for variance from the terms of these Regulations in cases where a specific piece of property characterized by exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape was a lot of record at the time of adoption of these regulations; or where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situations or conditions of a piece of property, provided that such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of these Regulations as specifically authorized in Article VI, Sections 1 and 3. 


Section 6 Appeal from Decision of the Board. 
Appeal from the decision of the board of Adjustment shall be to a court of record having jurisdiction within thirty days from the date of the decision of the Board. 
1. 	
In granting a variance, the Board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purpose of these Regulations.  

2. 	
Before any variance is granted, it shall be shown that special circumstances are attached to the property which do not generally apply to other property in the neighborhood. 


Article VII. Enforcement 
Section 1 Enforcing Officer. 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by a Building Inspector or other official appointed by the Mayor and the City Council who shall have the power to make inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of these Regulations. 
Section 2 Building Permits 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 20 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
1. 	
Building Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for the construction of any building, including accessory building, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building, including accessory buildings, until the Building Inspector has issued a building permit for such work. 

2. 	
Issuance of a Building Permit. When applying to the Building Inspector for a building permit, the applicant shall submit a plat and / or plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, height, and location on lot of all buildings to be erected, altered, or moved and of any building already on the lot.  The applicant shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and supply such other information as may be required by the Building Inspector for determining whether the provisions of regulations are being observed. 


If the proposed excavation is in conformity with the provisions of these Regulations and with other ordinances of the City now in force, the Building Inspector shall issue a building permit for such excavation or construction. If a building permit is refused, the Building Inspector shall state such refusal in writing with the cause. 
a. 	
The issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of these Regulations. 

b. 	
A building permit shall become void six months from the date of issuance unless work has been started on the project described therein.  

c. 	
A building permit shall become void twenty-four (24) months from the date of issuance unless the construction work has been completed. 


3. 	Records. A complete record of all certificates, plats and plans shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk for inspection or use by the public.  Copies reproduced at the applicant’s expense shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. 
Section 3 Violation Policy. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating or not complying with any provision of these Regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
Article VIII. Amendment. 
The City Council may from time to time amend these Regulations.  Members of the City Council or any other official or person may petition for an amendment to these Regulations, which petition shall first be submitted to the Planning commission for its report and recommendations. 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 21 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
Section 1 Amendment Procedures for Private Parties. 
1. 	
Fee. Any private party or parties desiring a zoning change shall pay a fee of $50.00 to the City Treasurer to cover the costs of public notices and related expenses. 

2. 	
Petition. Any private party or parties desiring an amendment to these Regulations, upon payment of the above fee, shall submit to the Planning Commission a petition giving the legal description of the property involved and the zoning classification requested for the property.  The petition shall also include a statement and diagram explaining why the proposed changes will not conflict with surrounding land uses. 

3. 	
Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a petition for an amendment, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, after: 

a. 	
Publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least one time fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing, setting forth the time and place of such hearing and the amendment proposed. 

b. 	
Posting a sign one (1) foot by two (2) feet in size at a conspicuous place on the property, fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing and on which is set forth the date and place of the hearing and the amendment proposed. 



4. 	
Action by Planning Commission. Following the public hearing, the proposed amendment may be approved as presented or in modified form by a majority of the Planning commission and recommended for adoption by the City Council, with reason for such recommendations stated in writing. 


If the Planning Commission disapproves a proposed amendment, the reasons for such disapproval shall be given in writing to the petitioner. 
If the Planning commission neither approves nor disapproves a proposed amendment within forty-five (45) days after receipt of a petition for amendment, the Secretary, upon request of the applicant, shall refer the proposed amendment to the City Council for its action. 
5. 	Action by the City Council. The City Council, by majority vote, may, by ordinance, adopt the recommended amendment submitted by the Planning commission or may return the proposed amendment to the Planning commission for further study and recommendation. 
If the City Council does not concur with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, either as first submitted or as submitted after restudy, the City Council may by a majority vote, amend these Regulations by granting the original request for amendment in full or in modified form. 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 22 of 23 
City of Greenwood, AR 	Dept. of Planning and Development 
6. 	
Appeal by Petition to City Council. Following disapproval of a proposed amendment by the Planning commission, the petitioner may appeal such disapproval to the City Council, provided that the petitioner states specifically in writing to the City Clerk why he considers the Planning Commission’s findings and decisions are in error.  Such appeal shall be filed with the City clerk within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning Commission action. 

7. 	
Re-Petition for Amendments. No application for zoning amendments will be considered by the Planning Commission within twelve (12) months from the date of final disapproval of a proposed amendment unless there is evidence submitted to the Planning commission which justifies reconsideration. 


Section 2 Amendment Procedure for members of the City Council. 
When members of the City Council desire to initiate amendments to these Regulations, such proposals shall be referred by resolution to the Planning commission for study and recommendations.  Following public hearing as provided for in 1-c above, the Planning Commission and City Council shall act in accordance with the procedures set forth in 1-d and 1-3 above. 
Article IX. Legal Status Provisions. 
Section 1 Conflicting Ordinances Repealed. 
All ordinances or part of ordinances of the City of Greenwood in conflict herewith including, but not limited to, the following ordinances are hereby repealed. 
Section 2 Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or part of these Regulations shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such section, clause, provision, or part shall be deemed severable and separable, and the remainder of these Regulations shall be and remain in full force and effect.  It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council that these Regulations would have been passed and adopted had such invalid or unconstitutional provisions, if any, not been included here. 
Section 3 Effective Date. This Ordinance being necessary fort the preservation, of the public peace, health, comfort, convenience, morals, safety, and welfare of the City of Greenwood, an emergency is declared to exist and this Ordinance shall be in full force from the date of its approval. 
Greenwood Zoning Regulations.doc 	Page 23 of 23 







