8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
1/543
NORTH LITTLE ROCK, ARKANSAS MUNICIPAL CODE
____________
Published by Order of the City Council
Adopted: February 24, 1997
____________
M MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
CC Tallahassee, Florida 1996
OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
NORTH LITTLE ROCK, ARKANSAS
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
____________
Patrick Henry Hays
Mayor
____________
Martin Gipson
Clark McGlothin
Ira Scoccins
Olen Thomas
Dan Carter
Tony Vestal
Murry Witcher
Leonard Spinelli
City Council
____________
Randall W. Morley
City Attorney
____________
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
2/543
Mary L. Munns
City Clerk
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of North
Little Rock, Arkansas.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, as supplemented through July 26,
1993, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the
history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is
new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables
appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any
subsequent ordinance included herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within
each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and
which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their
location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local
government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash
refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter.
Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this
system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their
proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one
section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would
be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles,
may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the
end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or
division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that
the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters.
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an
abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents
the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon
indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of
the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may
or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:
CODE CD1:1
CODE APPENDIX CDA:1
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1
CODE INDEX CDi:1
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
3/543
Index
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several
headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language
generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the
index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested.
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the
publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be
properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders
of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete
pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As
revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted
according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be
inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and
filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Supervising Editor, and Charles Vignos,
Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members
of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Randy Morley, City Attorney, and Ms. Mary L. Munns, City Clerk, for
their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts
and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city
readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's
affairs.
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of North
Little Rock, Arkansas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents;
section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering
system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or
reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the
City of North Little Rock, Arkansas.
© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of North Little Rock, Arkansas. 1996.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 7033
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Municipal Code for the City of North Little Rock, Arkansas;
Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation
Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code.
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of North Little Rock, Arkansas:
Section 1. The code entitled "North Little Rock, Arkansas, Municipal Code" published by Municipal Code
Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 118, as on file with the City Clerk on Tuesday, February 4, 1997,
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
4/543
each inclusive, is adopted.
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 26, 1996, and not
included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
Section 4. That the repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not affect any of the following:
(a)
Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or
accruing before the effective date of such Code;
(b)
Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of
bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness;
(c)
Any contract or obligation assumed by the City;
(d)
Any right or franchise granted by the City;
(e)
Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc.,
any street or public way in the City;
(f)
Any ordinance relating to specific public improvements or assessments therefor;
(g)
Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets;
(h)
Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget;
(i)
Any zoning ordinance;
(j)
Any ordinance creating positions and establishing compensation or benefits for municipal officers or employees,
not inconsistent herewith;
(k)
Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City or otherwise relating to subdivision;
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
5/543
(l)
Any ordinance relating to water, sewer or electricity rates or changes;
(m)
Any ordinance affecting the boundaries of the City.
Section 5. Regardless of the provisions contained within the Code book on file with the City Clerk, all housing
and technical codes shall remain as adopted prior to the passage of this ordinance.
Section 6. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision
of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a
fine of up to $500.00, or double such sum for each repetition thereof. The penalty provided by this section,
unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not
such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may
pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 7 Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City
to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the
Code includes the additions and amendments.
Section 8 Ordinances adopted after August 26, 1996, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified
in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
PASSED:
February 24, 1997
APPROVED:
/s/ Patrick H. Hays
Mayor
/s/ May L. Munns
City Clerk
SPONSOR
/s/ Mayor Patrick H. Hays
/s/ Martin Gipson
/s/ Clark McGlothin
/s/ Olen Thomas
/s/ Ira Scoggins
/s/ Tony Vestal
/s/ Dan Carter
/s/ Leonard Spinelli
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
6/543
/s/ Murray Witcher
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
/s/ Randall W. Morley
City Attorney
PREPARED BY THE OFFICE OF THE CITY ATTORNEY/R
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "North
Little Rock, Arkansas, Municipal Code," and may be so cited, or cited as the "NLRMC."
(Code 1980, § 1-1)
State law reference— Codification of ordinances, A.C.A. § 14-55-701 et seq.
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction.
In this Code and all ordinances of this city, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed,
unless such construction or definition would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the
context clearly requires otherwise.
Generally. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved
usage of language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate
meaning.
A.C.A. The abbreviation "A.C.A." means the Arkansas Code of 1987 Annotated.
State law reference— Designation, etc. of state code, A.C.A. § 1-2-113.
City. The word "city" shall be construed as if the words "of North Little Rock" followed it and shall extend to
and include its several officers, agents and employees.
City council. Whenever the words "city council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the city council of the
City of North Little Rock.
Code. The terms "Code" or "this Code" shall refer to the North Little Rock, Arkansas, Municipal Code adopted
in section 1-1.
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by ordinance, the day of the act,
event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the
period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period
runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time
prescribed or allowed is less than 11 days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays shall be excluded
in the computation. As used in this section, "legal holiday" means those days designated as a holiday by the
President or Congress of the United States or designated by state law.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
7/543
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Pulaski County, Arkansas.
Gender. The word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males.
Include, including. The term "include," "including" or any other similar term of inclusion shall mean without
limitation or restriction.
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed
as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise specifically
declared.
Law. Any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the United States, the state, the county, the city or any
agencies thereof, as well as the rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate.
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory.
May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect and states a prohibition.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory and not permissive.
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number.
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed."
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.
Other city officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc.,
by title only, i.e., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards,
commissions and departments of the city.
Owner. The word "owner" shall, when applied to a building or land, include any part owner, joint owner, tenant
in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building
or land.
Person. The word "person" shall include and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property.
Public property. The term "public property" shall mean any property, real or personal, owned by the city or
lawfully being used, occupied or possessed by the city.
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory and not permissive.
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means a strip of land in front or on the sides of a house or lot of land lying
between the property line and the street.
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write.
State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Arkansas.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
8/543
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts
and all other public highways in the city.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present.
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
(Code 1980, § 1-2)
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; reference to sections.
(a)
The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended merely as catchwords to indicate
the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the
section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(b)
The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any
legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references
and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in
footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect.
(c)
All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless
otherwise specified.
(Code 1980, § 1-3)
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances.
(a)
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed
took effect.
(b)
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor
any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action
arising under the ordinance repealed.
(Code 1980, § 1-4)
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code.
(a)
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code, or in the
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
9/543
case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed
portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and such subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are
readopted as a new code by the city council.
(b)
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific
reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of the North
Little Rock, Arkansas, Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set
out in full.
(c)
If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The North
Little Rock, Arkansas, Municipal Code is amended by adding a section (article, etc.) to read as follows:…." The
provisions shall then be set out in full.
(d)
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section,
article or chapter number, as the case may be.
Sec. 1-6. - Additions and amendments deemed incorporated in Code.
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the
city to make such additions and amendments a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this
Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
In addition, any addition to this Code that was not passed in such form, but that has been published in this Code,
shall be considered a part of this Code.
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion
of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby.
(Code 1980, § 1-7)
State law reference— Destruction of public records, A.C.A. § 13-4-110.
Sec. 1-8. - Penalty for violations; continuing violations.
(a)
In this section, "violation of this Code" means:
(1)
Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by
rule or regulation authorized by ordinance;
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
10/543
Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by
ordinance; or
(3)
Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by
rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(b)
In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform
an official duty unless it is clear that failure to perform such duty is to be punished as provided in this section.
(c)
Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500.00, or double such sum for each repetition thereof. If the violation is, in its nature, continuous in
respect to time, the penalty for allowing the continuance thereof is a fine not to exceed $250.00 for each day that
the violation is unlawfully continued.
(d)
If a violation of this Code is also a violation of state law, the penalty for the violation shall be as prescribed by
state law for the state offense.
(e)
The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this Code does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license,
permit or franchise.
(f)
Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by
injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty, however, does not prevent the simultaneous
granting of equitable relief in appropriate cases.
(Code 1980, § 1-8)
State law reference— Ordinance violations, A.C.A. §§ 14-55-501 et seq., 14-55-601 et seq.
Sec. 1-9. - Issuance of citation or notice of offense, who may issue; failure to appear on citation declared a
misdemeanor; issuance of warrant or summons upon disregard of notice of offense; contents of citation and
notice of offense.
(a)
The police department, community planning department, code enforcement officers, health officers, and animal
control workers, or persons employed by such departments, are authorized, for the violation of any ordinance or
city code provision for which they have enforcement responsibility, to give to an offender either a citation to
appear in municipal court, or a notice of offense.
(b)
Citations for code violations shall be used in all instances wherein the violator is physically present, and failure
to appear in court or pay the fine and costs prior to the court date set pursuant thereto shall constitute a
misdemeanor; the violator shall be requested to sign the citation, but refusal to sign shall not relieve the violator
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
11/543
of the obligation to appear in court as specified on the citation, and the issuing officer or employee shall note
upon the citation the violator's refusal to sign.
(c)
A notice of offense shall be used in all instances wherein the violator is not physically present to receive a
citation, and may be served by either mailing a copy thereof to the violator by any form of mail, or by posting a
copy thereof upon the property of the violator which forms a basis for the violation. The notice of offense shall
inform the owner of the property in violation that he must appear at the city office or department designated on
the notice to pay a stated sum representing a civil penalty equivalent to the established minimum fine but
without imposition of court costs, or alternatively to accept service of a citation to appear in court for trial,
subject to both fine and court costs; the notice shall also state the consequence of failure to do so. Upon failure
to either pay the civil penalty or to accept service of a citation, as instructed on such notice of violation, the code
enforcement officer shall swear out a complaint with the city attorney for the purpose of obtaining an arrest
warrant or summons for the violation, and usual procedures shall thereafter govern the arrest and trial of the
person so served.
(d)
Both the citation and the notice of offense shall state the name and address of the violator and the date of
violation, shall contain a statement of the nature of the violation and shall be signed by the officer or city
employee having knowledge of such violation; in addition, the citation shall have a signature line for the violator
to promise to appear in court, and the notice of violation shall contain the cautionary language previously
prescribed in this section.
(e)
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of discretionary warning tickets, or the use of a separate form of
parking ticket or uniform traffic ticket by police personnel.
(Code 1980, § 1-9)
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses,
sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
(Code 1980, § 1-5)
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance:
(1)
Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city.
(2)
Granting any right or franchise.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
12/543
Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or
public way in the city.
(4)
Making any appropriation.
(5)
Adopting a budget or amending a budget.
(6)
Levying or imposing taxes not in this Code.
(7)
Establishing or prescribing grades of any street in the city.
(8)
Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor.
(9)
Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city.
(10)
Extending, contracting or defining the boundaries of the city.
(11)
Prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or city employees.
(12)
Rezoning specific property or granting special exceptions for specific property.
(13)
Adopting or amending zoning maps or street master plans.
(14)
Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations.
(15)
Which is temporary, although general in effect.
(16)
Which is special, although permanent in effect.
(17)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
13/543
The purpose of which has been accomplished.
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at
length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office.
Sec. 1-12. - Provisions considered continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this
Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-13. - Code does not affect prior offenses and rights.
(a)
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or
any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this
Code.
(b)
The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any
use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this
Code.
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. - Referendum petitions.
(a)
All referendum petitions, pursuant to amendment 7 to the Arkansas Constitution, except those pertaining to bond
issues, must be filed with the city clerk within 60 days after passage of the ordinance which is the subject of the
petition. Referendum petitions pertaining to bond issues must be filed with the city clerk within 30 days after
passage of the ordinance which is the subject of the petition.
(b)
The sufficiency of any referendum petition shall be decided in the first instance by the city clerk, subject to
review by the chancery court, provided that suit to review the city clerk's determination must be brought within
30 days.
(c)
If a referendum petition is in all respects sufficient and proper, the city council may order a special election or
place the question on the ballot at the next municipal general election to determine by vote of the qualified
electors whether the ordinance shall stand or be revoked. The date for any special election shall be not less than
ten days after the order therefor has been made by the council, and such special elections shall be had and
conducted as general municipal elections held in the city.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
14/543
(d)
If any ordinance referred to the people is defeated at the polls, the city council shall make a note of such fact on
the ordinance.
(Code 1980, § 2-63)
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 34.
Sec. 2-2. - Identification of city vehicles.
(a)
Each vehicle owned or leased by the city shall display the North Little Rock Paddlewheel logo, a copy of which
is attached to the ordinance from which this section derives for informational purposes, which will identify the
vehicle as one owned or leased by the city; such seal shall have a minimum diameter of ten inches and shall be
placed on the center of the front door on each side of such vehicles.
(b)
All vehicles operated by the fire and police departments shall be exempted from the use of the North Little Rock
Paddlewheel logo; however, such vehicles shall be marked with an appropriate marking of the minimum size
and in the location described in subsection (a) of this section.
(c)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the mayor's car, the director of advertising and promotion's
car, and all vehicles operated by the police department narcotic division, detective division, and other vehicles
used in undercover operations as designated by the chief of police are hereby specifically exempted from this
section.
(Code 1980, § 31-11)
Sec. 2-3. - Personal use of city-owned vehicles.
The mayor shall be empowered to designate which department heads and city employees will be authorized to
take home city-owned vehicles and shall likewise be empowered to specify the scope of such authority,
consistent with law.
(Code 1980, § 2-6)
Sec. 2-4. - Council consideration of distribution of city-owned real estate.
(a)
Required in relation to advertising. It is hereby mandatory that any consideration by any municipal official,
department head, employee, agent or representative of the city to sell, convey, lease, rent or let any real estate
owned or controlled by the city shall be immediately brought before the city council for consideration and
approval with regard to the manner of advertising the terms of the subsequent distribution of such real property.
(b)
Required in relation to final disposition. Subsequent to the approval and advertisement of real property of the
city for sale or other distribution, such matter shall once again be brought before the city council for approval
prior to final disposition of such real property. No change of title or proprietary interest in any municipally
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
15/543
owned real property will be valid or complete until such time as a majority of the council has rendered its
approval of the final terms of the sale or distribution of such real property.
(Code 1980, § 2-7)
State law reference— Unlawful for city official or employee to give away municipal property or public utility
services, A.C.A. § 14-42-108; ownership of real and personal property by cities and towns authorized, A.C.A. §
14-54-301; authority of cities and towns to purchase, lease and sell real and personal property, A.C.A. § 14-54-
302.
Sec. 2-5. - Record of leases and contracts.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk and other city officials to record in a well-bound book kept exclusively for
that purpose all leases and contracts in which the city is a party, and to keep such book promptly and properly
indexed.
(Code 1980, § 2-80)
Sec. 2-6. - Register of licenses issued.
The city clerk and other city officials shall keep a register of all licenses that may be issued by them in
pursuance of any ordinances of this city, giving the names of the persons to whom such licenses may have been
issued, the number of such license, the date and duration thereof, and the amount paid therefor.
(Code 1980, § 2-79)
Sec. 2-7. - Payment of fees for opening or closing streets or plat approval.
All persons who petition the city council for the opening or closing of any street or alley or the approval of any
subdivision plan, plat or replat, shall pay all advertising costs and legal fees connected with such procedures in
advance to the city clerk. Under no circumstances shall the clerk record or expend any funds belonging to the
city for such procedures.
(Code 1980, § 29-4)
Sec. 2-8. - Use of city facilities for public announcements.
(a)
The city hall lobby will be available for public announcements at any time during normal working hours by the
citizens of the city.
(b)
The city council chambers can be used for public announcements if a reservation is made in advance and the
council chambers are not scheduled for use for any city government function at the same time.
(c)
The city council chambers and lobby may be used for public announcements by any citizen of the city during
nonwork hours, including weekends, if authorization is first obtained upon written request submitted at least 48
hours before the scheduled event.
(Code 1980, § 2-14)
Secs. 2-9—2-45. - Reserved.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
16/543
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 34.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-46. - Regular meetings.
(a)
Except as provided in subsection (b), regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the second and fourth
Mondays of each month, commencing at 7:00 p.m.
(b)
If the regular meeting date falls on a holiday, the meeting shall automatically be postponed until the next night
which is not a holiday, commencing at 7:00 p.m.
(Code 1980, § 2-46)
State law reference— Council to provide time for meetings, A.C.A. § 14-43-502.
Sec. 2-47. - Place of meetings.
Except as otherwise provided, all meetings of the council shall be held in the council chambers located in the
city hall.
(Code 1980, § 2-47)
State law reference— Council to provide place for meetings, A.C.A. § 14-43-502.
Sec. 2-48. - Calling of special meetings.
(a)
The mayor or any three regularly elected and qualified aldermen may call the council in special session by
giving each member elect 24 hours' notice thereof.
(b)
The call for a special meeting shall disclose the subject or subjects to be considered by the council in such
special session, and no other business than that mentioned in the call or notice shall be considered. The call shall
have attached thereto a copy of any and all proposed ordinances or resolutions, without which the subject or
subjects shall not be considered.
(Code 1980, § 2-49)
State law reference— Mayor or three aldermen may call special meetings as provided by ordinance, A.C.A. §
14-43-502; notice of public meetings, A.C.A. § 25-19-106.
Secs. 2-49—2-75. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
17/543
Subdivision I. - General Provisions
Sec. 2-76. - Rules of order.
There is hereby adopted as the parliamentary rules of the council that publication known as Robert's Rules of
Order, Newly Revised.
(Code 1980, § 2-51)
Sec. 2-77. - Determination of seniority.
For the purposes of this division, seniority shall be based on the total amount of time served by an alderman,
with no distinction between continuous and noncontinuous periods of service. Aldermen of equal seniority shall
be ranked alphabetically by surname.
(Code 1980, § 2-54)
Sec. 2-78. - Calling of roll.
Upon the call of the roll for any purpose, the alderman's name shall be called on a seniority basis by ward,
beginning with Ward 1 and continuing in a series through Ward 4.
(Code 1980, § 2-53)
Secs. 2-79—2-100. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Legislation
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Ordinances generally, A.C.A. § 14-55-101 et seq.
Sec. 2-101. - Time of filing ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other matters; form thereof.
The city council shall not pass or consider at the next city council meeting any proposed ordinance, resolution,
or other proposed item of legislation filed with the city clerk after 12:00 noon on Tuesday of the week prior to
the regular city council meetings. All such resolutions, ordinances, petitions, contracts, leases, appointments, or
any other matters affecting the general public must conform with the form prescribed by the city attorney, and in
such cases where the deadline falls on a holiday, the filing date shall then be 24 hours subsequent to that time.
(Code 1980, § 2-50; Ord. No. 6846, § 1, 9-26-94)
Sec. 2-102. - Sponsoring.
All proposed ordinances or resolutions may be offered to the city council by one of its members or the mayor.
The person or persons who initiate the request for the preparation of an ordinance or resolution by the city
attorney shall be the principal sponsor or cosponsors; but only the principal sponsor or cosponsor may call an
ordinance or resolution for consideration by the city council, with the exception of those ordinances or
resolutions sponsored by the mayor only, which may be called for consideration by any council member
designated by the mayor to do so, and only the principal sponsor or cosponsor may sign the ordinance or
resolution; however, another member of the city council may sign as an additional sponsor, provided such
member has first obtained the principal sponsor's permission to sign as a cosponsor.
(Code 1980, § 2-61)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
18/543
Sec. 2-103. - Drafters of ordinances, resolutions to sign copy.
(a)
Each ordinance and resolution to come before the city council, except those prepared by the city attorney's
office, shall have the typed name and signature of the author prominently displayed at the end of the ordinance
or resolution in the following manner:
"DRAFTED BY:
_____
JOHN SMITH"
(b)
Legislation prepared by the city attorney's office shall so indicate at the bottom of the ordinance or resolution.
(c)
Any legislation lacking indication of authorship shall be deemed to be improper in form and shall neither be
accepted for filing by the city clerk nor approved as to form by the city attorney.
(Code 1980, § 2-65)
Sec. 2-104. - Removal of ordinances and resolutions remaining on agenda.
Any and all ordinances and resolutions remaining on the city council's calendar and agenda after 90 days from
filing or six regular meetings of the city council, whichever occurs first, shall be removed from the council's
calendar and agenda by the city clerk.
(Code 1980, § 2-66)
Secs. 2-105—2-150. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
Cross reference— Board of civil service commissioners, § 2-531 et seq.; municipal court public defender, § 30-
61 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-151. - Personnel manual adopted.
The city's personnel manual, as heretofore adopted and amended by the city, is adopted by reference.
(Code 1980, § 2-352; Ord. No. 7690, § 3, 2-28-05)
Sec. 2-152. - Civil service system established.
A civil service system is hereby established for all nonuniformed employees of the city pursuant to A.C.A. tit.
14, ch. 50 (A.C.A. 14-50-101 et seq.).
(Code 1980, § 2-186)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
19/543
State law reference— Authority to provide for civil service, A.C.A. § 14-50-101.
Sec. 2-152.1. - Affirmative action plan adopted.
An affirmative action plan is hereby adopted by reference for implementation. A copy of the plan shall remain
on file with the city clerk and the personnel department.
(Ord. No. 6799, §§ 1, 2, 4-11-94)
Sec. 2-153. - Oath of officers and employees.
All persons elected by the public or elected or appointed by the mayor and/or city council to any position, board,
agency, committee or commission shall take and file the oath of office prescribed by the state constitution within
ten days of appointment or election. The city clerk shall notify all persons required to take such oath upon their
election or appointment.
(Code 1980, § 2-2)
State law reference— Oath required, A.C.A. § 14-42-106.
Sec. 2-154. - Right of employees to communicate with city officials.
(a)
Authorized; recriminations prohibited. All city employees shall have the right to confer, discuss, relate or
convey information on any and all matters concerning city business, including their jobs, to any duly elected
official without fear of recrimination. These rights are all-inclusive and may not be abridged, subverted,
modified or restricted in any way. Any employee who so communicates with any official shall not be threatened,
coerced, intimidated, penalized or discriminated against in any manner.
(b)
Report of wrongdoing, unethical practices. All city employees shall report to elected city officials all incidents
of wrongdoing or unethical practices of which they have knowledge. Such reports shall be privileged and
confidential, and the employee may remain anonymous if he so desires.
(Code 1980, § 2-11)
Sec. 2-155. - Elected and appointed officials prohibited from engaging in business with city.
(a)
The mayor, councilmembers, other elected officials or members of the following boards, commissions,
committees and agencies: airport commission, civil service commission, parks and recreation commission,
planning commission, sewer committee and water commission, shall not be interested, directly or indirectly, in
the profits of any contract for the furnishing of supplies, equipment or services to the municipality.
(b)
The prohibition prescribed in this section shall not apply to contracts for the furnishing of supplies, equipment or
services to be performed for a municipality, or board, commission, committee or agency, by a corporation in
which no alderman or councilmember, elected official, or board, commission, committee or agency member
holds any executive or managerial office, or by a corporation in which a controlling interest is held by
stockholders who are not aldermen or councilmembers, an elected official, or members of a board, commission,
committee or agency.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
20/543
(c)
The prohibition prescribed in this section shall not apply to:
(1)
Contracts approved by the city council;
(2)
Manufacturers' warranty service/parts; or
(3)
Miscellaneous services/parts not exceeding $1,000.00 per calendar year; and
(4)
May be waived by the city council if the city council shall have enacted a resolution or ordinance specifically
permitting the mayor, alderman or councilmember, other elected official, or member of a board, commission,
committee or agency, to conduct business with the city and prescribing the extent of the authority.
(d)
No member as described in subsection (a) of this section, or any other board, commission, committee or agency,
shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the profits of any contract for the furnishing of supplies, equipment
or services to the board, commission, committee or agency on which they serve.
(e)
Willful and knowing violation of this section by the mayor, alderman or councilmember, other elected official,
or member of any board, commission, committee or agency shall be deemed nonfeasance in office, and if, upon
hearing by the city council, the violation is proved to be true, the city council shall remove the guilty person
from office, in addition to other remedies or penalties provided by law.
(Code 1980, § 2-220)
Secs. 2-156—2-180. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) ---
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 34.
State Law reference— Mayor generally, A.C.A. § 14-43-301 et seq.
Sec. 2-181. - Office in municipal building.
The mayor shall keep and maintain his office in the offices provided for him in the municipal building.
(Code 1980, § 2-31)
State law reference— Mayor to keep office at place council provides, A.C.A. § 14-43-401.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
21/543
Sec. 2-182. - Survivor benefits.
The city council hereby exercises its option pursuant to A.C.A. § 24-12-123(b), or any subsequent legislative
enactment pertaining thereto, by allowing a surviving spouse of a retired mayor or a surviving spouse of a mayor
who dies in office after becoming eligible for retirement benefits to receive one-half of the retirement benefits
that the mayor was entitled to receive as long as the surviving spouse and mayor were married for ten years or
longer. Additionally, the spouse must also have been married to the mayor not less than 12 months prior to the
date the mayor died in office or the date the mayor retired.
(Ord. No. 7369, § 1, 5-14-01)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7369, § 1, adopted May 14, 2001, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-182
was at the discretion of the editor.
Secs. 2-183—2-200. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) ---
State Law reference— City clerk, A.C.A. §§ 14-43-313, 14-43-316, 14-43-317, 14-43-406.
Sec. 2-201. - Office in city hall; attendance at council meetings; office hours.
The city clerk shall keep and maintain his office in the office provided for him in the city hall. He shall attend all
meetings of the council. The office of the city clerk shall be open during the regular business hours of the city
hall.
(Code 1980, § 2-76)
Sec. 2-202. - Record of council proceedings.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a record of the proceedings of the city council of all regular and
special meetings thereof in a book to be kept by him for that purpose; and he shall keep an index of such record,
showing all important matters, such as ordinances, bylaws, petitions, resolutions, contracts and the like.
(Code 1980, § 2-77)
Sec. 2-203. - Custody of surety bonds.
The city clerk shall be the custodian of all bonds of city officials, deputy officials and city employees who are
required to give bond by ordinance.
(Code 1980, § 2-78)
Sec. 2-204. - Record of city-owned real property.
The city clerk shall maintain a schedule of all real property owned by the city.
(Code 1980, § 2-81)
Sec. 2-205. - Collection of license fees; settlement with treasurer.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
22/543
The city clerk shall collect all licenses and revenues derived from privileges of any and all kinds due the city,
except the electric department of the city, and keep a record of all funds turned over to the treasurer of the city,
of whatsoever kind or character, and take the city treasurer's receipt therefor.
(Code 1980, § 2-82)
Sec. 2-206. - Record of ordinances; publication.
The city clerk shall record all ordinances or bylaws at length in a book to be kept by him for that purpose, as
soon after their passage as may be expedient, and shall authenticate such ordinances or bylaws with his signature
appended thereto, just beneath the signature of the presiding officer of the council. The city clerk shall as soon
after their passage as may be, cause all bylaws or ordinances of a general and permanent nature, or which may
impose any fine, penalty or forfeiture, to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in this city, over the
signature of the presiding officer of the council, and his own as clerk.
(Code 1980, § 2-64)
State law reference— Ordinance recording and publication, A.C.A. §§ 14-55-205, 14-55-206.
Secs. 2-207—2-230. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - CITY TREASURER
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) ---
State Law reference— City treasurer, A.C.A. §§ 14-43-302, 14-43-507.
Sec. 2-231. - Keeping of moneys.
The city treasurer shall take and safely keep all moneys turned over to him or coming into his hands and custody
for the city, and shall keep such moneys in the depository designated by the mayor.
(Code 1980, § 2-120)
Sec. 2-232. - Office in city hall.
Office space shall be provided for the city treasurer in the city hall.
(Code 1980, § 2-120)
Secs. 2-233—2-255. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - FINANCE DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT FINANCE DIRECTOR
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (8) ---
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 98.
Sec. 2-256. - Finance director, position created; duties.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
23/543
There is hereby created the position of finance director for the city, who shall be appointed by the mayor. The
finance director shall be supervisor and in charge of the finance department and shall perform the following
duties:
(1)
Maintain revenue and expenditure records for the city, including budget, appropriations, fund allocations,
payrolls, tax and insurance data, records required for bond issues, bank accounts, investments and any and all
other functions generally assigned to a comptroller.
(2)
Prepare, not less than once a month, a complete statement of the condition of all funds of the city.
(3)
Prepare warrants for the disbursement of city funds, but shall not have authority to endorse or sign such
warrants.
(4)
Prepare a voucher for each and every expenditure of city funds. He shall be held responsible for determining that
such voucher is in accordance with the approved budget and all ordinances of the city council.
(5)
He shall make all purchases for the city and receive and process all requisitions from department heads and
assist the mayor and other authorized city representatives in the preparation of bid specifications and notices.
(b)
It shall be the duty of the finance director to perform such other services as may be directed by the mayor or city
council.
(Code 1980, § 2-121)
Sec. 2-257. - Assistant finance director.
(a)
Position created. There is hereby created the position of assistant finance director of the finance department of
the city.
(b)
Duties. The assistant director of the finance department shall work in conjunction with and under the direction of
the director of the finance department and shall perform such duties as the director of the finance department so
directs.
(Code 1980, § 2-124)
Secs. 2-258—2-280. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - PURCHASING AGENT
Sec. 2-281. - Position created.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
24/543
There is hereby created the position of city purchasing agent for the city, who shall be appointed by the mayor.
(Code 1980, § 2-125(a))
Sec. 2-282. - Duties.
The purchasing agent shall make all purchases for the city. He shall receive and process all requisitions from the
department heads, and he shall prepare specifications and bid notices and prepare any other information or
documents required.
(Code 1980, § 2-125(b))
Secs. 2-283—2-325. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS AND SIMILAR AGENCIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (9) ---
Cross reference— Fire department, § 46-36 et seq.; police department, § 58-36 et seq.; traffic services
department, § 102-31; utilities accounting department, § 106-26.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-326. - Mayor's office of volunteer services.
(a)
A permanent mayor's office of volunteer services is hereby authorized to be created and staffed by unpaid
volunteers who are residents of the city. Such office of volunteer services shall be authorized to enlist, train and
place unpaid volunteers in host city departments to the extent feasible. Such office of volunteer services shall be
under the operational and administrative control of the mayor, who will encourage the use of unpaid volunteers
by all city departments and independent commissions except where limited by law.
(b)
Citizens of the city are hereby encouraged to avail themselves of the opportunity to participate in the governance
of their city by freely giving of their time and talents in volunteer service.
(c)
The mayor's office of volunteer services shall develop and maintain the information set forth in A.C.A. § 21-13-
110.
(Code 1980, § 2-35)
State law reference— State and Local Government Volunteers Act, A.C.A. § 21-13-101 et seq.
Sec. 2-327. - Department of community planning.
(a)
There is hereby created a community planning department which shall enforce the city's building, housing,
electrical, sign and plumbing ordinances. The department shall also perform the functions of the former planning
department and shall perform such other functions as are provided by ordinance or resolution.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
25/543
(b)
There is hereby created the position of director of the community planning department. The director shall be
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The director shall serve as building official and shall
be in charge of the community planning department.
(Code 1980, § 2-4)
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18.
Secs. 2-328—2-365. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LEGAL DEPARTMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (10) ---
Cross reference— Municipal court, § 30-36 et seq.
State Law reference— City attorney generally, A.C.A. §§ 14-43-313—14-43-315; deputy city attorneys,
A.C.A. § 14-43-407; compensation of city attorneys, A.C.A. § 14-43-410.
Sec. 2-366. - Established; department head.
A legal department of the city is hereby established. The head of the department shall be the city attorney, who
shall be responsible for its functioning and operation.
(Code 1980, § 2-94)
Sec. 2-367. - City attorney and assistants to be full-time employees.
The city attorney and his duly authorized assistants shall be full-time officers and employees of the city and shall
not engage in the private practice of law, after January 1, 1991, except to the limited extent as necessary and
required by the Arkansas Rules of Professional Conduct to complete a legal matter pending at the time the city
attorney or assistant assumes the duties of the office.
(Code 1980, § 2-94.1)
Sec. 2-368. - Duties generally.
The city attorney and his duly authorized assistants shall attend all council meetings, and shall draft all
ordinances requested by the mayor or any alderman. The city attorney or his duly authorized assistants shall also
be required to appear regularly in the municipal court and represent the city in the prosecution of violations of its
ordinances and criminal statutes, and to represent the city in the prosecution of cases appealed from the
municipal court to the circuit court of the county.
(Code 1980, § 2-95)
Sec. 2-369. - Representation of city.
The city attorney shall, through the legal department of the city, take charge of and direct the management of all
litigation in which the city may be a party or in which the city may have an interest. The legal department shall
represent the city and all city officials in their official capacity in all legal matters and proceedings in which they
may be a party, or interested, whether the proceedings be in a court of law or equity in this state, including the
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
26/543
(Code 1980, § 2-98)
Sec. 2-370. - Duty to advise city officers.
Unless prohibited by ethical considerations, the city attorney shall advise the city council, or any committee or
member thereof, the mayor, and the heads of all departments, and, through the mayor and heads of departments,
all other officers or officials of the city upon any and all legal questions affecting the city's interest.
(Code 1980, § 2-96)
Sec. 2-371. - Defense of municipal officers sued in official capacity.
The legal department shall defend any municipal official sued in his official capacity. The fact that the municipal
official is no longer in office at the time of the suit or trial shall not alter such duty.
(Code 1980, § 2-100)
Sec. 2-372. - Approval of documents.
The city attorney shall approve as to form all contracts, leases, resolutions, agreements, bonds, except
construction and contractor bonds, insurance policies, and/or other documents filed with the city pursuant to the
ordinances and regulations thereof, which are in the name of, made to, or with the city.
(Code 1980, § 2-97)
Sec. 2-373. - Time limitation for submitting legislation drafting requests to city attorney.
All requests to the city attorney's office for the drafting and preparation of ordinances, resolutions and other
documents to be considered by the city council must be received in full and complete fashion by 12:00 p.m.
(noon) on the Thursday which precedes the filing deadline with the city clerk's office.
(Code 1980, § 2-103; Ord. No. 6846, § 2, 9-26-94)
Sec. 2-374. - Certain commissions and boards not required to be represented.
The legal department shall not be required to represent the hospital commission, the board of commissioners of
the housing authority, the sewer committee, or the water commission.
(Code 1980, § 2-99)
Secs. 2-375—2-400. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS
Sec. 2-401. - Established; composition.
There is hereby created and established a department of commerce and governmental relations, which shall
consist of the following personnel positions:
(1)
Director of commerce and governmental relations (formerly purchasing agent).
(2)
Assistant director for procurement (formerly assistant to purchasing agent).
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
27/543
(3)
Buyer (formerly office assistant II).
(4)
Courier.
(Code 1980, § 2-155)
Sec. 2-402. - Director, appointment and duties.
The director of the department of commerce and governmental relations shall be appointed by the mayor, and his
salary, subject to approval by the city council, shall be negotiated by the mayor. The director shall have the
following duties:
(1)
To prepare and oversee implementation of city economic development activities;
(2)
To administer and oversee city procurement and purchasing activities;
(3)
To assist local businesses and city government with development finance projects;
(4)
To prepare applications to secure funding for city industrial and community development;
(5)
To coordinate economic development activities and projects with the city planning department, the community
development agency, the office of the mayor, and other pertinent government and private organizations;
(6)
To conduct special projects for the office of the mayor;
(7)
To oversee the preparation of bid specifications and requests for proposals consistent with state law and city
ordinance; and
(8)
To do such other acts as may be necessary and proper to perform those duties specified above.
(Code 1980, § 2-156)
Sec. 2-403. - Duties of assistant director for procurement.
The assistant director for procurement, department of commerce and governmental relations, shall have the
following duties:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
28/543
(1)
To conduct the city's purchasing and procurement activities as may be assigned by the director of commerce and
governmental relations;
(2)
To prepare bid specifications and requests for proposals as may be assigned by the director of commerce and
governmental relations; and
(3)
To perform such other duties as may be assigned by the director of commerce and governmental relations as may
be necessary and proper to achieve departmental objectives.
(Code 1980, § 2-157)
Sec. 2-404. - Duties of buyer and courier.
The buyer and courier, respectively, of the department of commerce and governmental relations shall have such
duties as the director thereof shall assign to them in order to achieve departmental objectives.
(Code 1980, § 2-158)
Secs. 2-405—2-450. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (11) ---
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94.
Sec. 2-451. - Created.
The public works department is hereby created.
(Code 1980, § 29-1)
Sec. 2-452. - Director of public works.
There is hereby created the position of director of public works for the city, whose duties shall be to supervise
and coordinate the activities of the public works department. He shall be responsible for the planning and the
prompt, orderly and efficient execution of the programmed work assigned to the department.
(Code 1980, § 29-2)
Sec. 2-453. - Duties and responsibilities.
The public works department performs the following duties and responsibilities:
(1)
It shall have general supervision over the street and maintenance division created by ordinance.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
29/543
The duties formerly conducted by the city engineer.
(3)
The duties formerly conducted by the equipment maintenance division of the public works department.
(Code 1980, § 29-1)
Secs. 2-454—2-460. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - DEPARTMENT OF CODE ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 2-461. - Established.
There is hereby established a city department entitled the department of code enforcement.
(Ord. No. 6807, § 1, 5-9-94)
Sec. 2-462. - Personnel.
The code enforcement department shall consist of 13 employees as follows:
(1)
Director (1);
(2)
Code enforcement officer (6);
(3)
Rental inspection officers (2);
(4)
Health code enforcement officer (1);
(5)
Code enforcement assistant (1); and
(6)
Helper (2).
(Ord. No. 6807, §§ 2—4, 5-9-94; Ord. No. 7121, § 1, 5-11-98)
Sec. 2-463. - Duties of rental inspection officers.
It is the intent of the council that the two rental inspection officers shall perform their duties as follows:
(1)
That the officers shall not be complaint driven code officers, but instead shall be proactive in the enforcement of
North Little Rock's Housing Code.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
30/543
That the officers shall make block by block inspections of the exterior of rental housing units as allowed by law.
Such officers shall not make any inspections of owner-occupied homes.
(3)
That if an exterior inspection of a rental property results in the findings of three exterior violations, the officer
may request an inspection of the interior of the structure. Notices requesting an interior inspection shall be made
by mailing a certified letter to the last known address of the owner and by leaving a copy of such letter at the
housing unit. Notices shall request an inspection on a date that is 14 days after the mailing of such notice. If a
request to inspect the interior of the unit is denied, the officer may seek to inspect the interior of the rental
housing units pursuant to existing legal procedures.
(Ord. No. 7121, § 4, 5-11-98)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7121, § 4, adopted May 11, 1998, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-463
was at the discretion of the editor.
Secs. 2-464—2-470. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - DEPARTMENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES
Sec. 2-471. - Created; purpose.
There is hereby created a department of neighborhood services, for the purpose of assisting and coordinating
neighborhood action groups in furthering their goals of reducing crime, preserving the history and culture of our
neighborhoods, preventing blight and deterioration of property values, and improving the quality of life in our
residential neighborhoods.
(Ord. No. 6840, § 1, 9-12-94)
Sec. 2-472. - Funding; staff.
There is hereby appropriated from the general fund the amount of $20,000.00 to fund the creation of the
department of neighborhood services, the position of director of neighborhood services, and one support staff
person.
(Ord. No. 6840, § 2, 9-12-94)
Secs. 2-473—2-485. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND SIMILAR AGENCIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (12) ---
Cross reference— Airport commission, § 14-98; board of electrical examiners and supervisors, § 18-191 et
seq.; hospital commission, § 54-1; municipal jail board, § 58-121 et seq.; library board of trustees, § 62-2; parks
and recreation commission, § 70-1; city advertising and promotion commission, § 98-39; water committee, §
106-121; sewer committee, § 106-156; tree board, § 110-31 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-486. - Appointment not to be made until vacancy exists.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
31/543
The appointment of a person to serve on any board, committee, commission or agency of the city is prohibited
until such time as a vacancy exists on such board, committee, commission or agency. Any appointment made
prior to the existence of a vacancy on any board, committee, commission or agency of the city shall be null and
void.
(Code 1980, § 2-216)
Sec. 2-487. - Appointment to be by resolution.
Except as otherwise required by state law, appointments to any board, committee, commission or agency of the
city government shall be by a resolution duly adopted by the city council.
(Code 1980, § 2-217)
Sec. 2-488. - Appointees' personal information questionnaire required.
(a)
Every appointee to serve any board, committee, commission or agency of the city shall complete a personal
information questionnaire prior to confirmation by the city council, and such appointee shall not be confirmed
by the city council unless and until a personal information questionnaire has been completed in proper form by
the prospective appointee.
(b)
The personal information questionnaire required by this section to be completed by any prospective appointee
shall be obtained by the appointee from the city clerk and submitted to the city clerk, with copies to be given the
mayor and aldermen, on or before 12:00 noon on the Wednesday prior to the city council meeting at which the
appointee's confirmation will be considered by the city council.
(Code 1980, § 2-217.1)
Sec. 2-489. - Serving on more than one committee or board prohibited.
No person shall be considered for appointment to any board, commission or committee of the municipal
government who, at the time, is a member of any other board, commission or committee of the municipal
government.
(Code 1980, § 2-218)
Sec. 2-490. - Residence requirements for members; exceptions.
(a)
Members to be residents.
(1)
Members of all city committees, commissions and boards shall be residents of the city, except as may be
specifically exempted.
(2)
The board of electrical examiners and supervisors is exempt from this residency requirement.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
32/543
The Americans with Disabilities Act grievance committee is exempt from this residence requirement.
(b)
Exception for individuals currently serving as a member of a city board, commission, etc. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to any individual who is currently serving as a member of any city committee,
commission or board.
(c)
Exception for individuals serving as a member of the advertising and promotion commission. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to any individual presently serving or who shall be appointed in the future to serve as
a member of the advertising and promotion commission.
(Code 1980, § 2-10)
Sec. 2-491. - Attendance at meetings.
(a)
No member of any board or commission of the city shall be absent from three consecutive regularly scheduled
meetings of such board or commission without a valid excuse, which excuse must be accepted and approved by
a majority vote of the membership of the affected board or commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting at
which a quorum is present. Acceptance of such excuse by the chairman of such board or commission shall not
be deemed to constitute compliance with this section.
(b)
No member of any board or commission of the city shall have unexcused absences from 25 percent or more of
the regularly scheduled meetings of such board or commission within any given 12-month period; unexcused
absences are absences which have not been properly excused as provided in subsection (a) of this section.
(c)
The violation by any member of a board or commission of the city of subsection (a) and/or subsection (b) of this
section shall automatically result in the removal from office of such member without notice or further action of
the board or commission or the city council.
(d)
The provisions of this section shall not affect any rule, regulation or bylaw of any city board or commission
which presently provides for the removal from office of any board or commission member who fails to attend a
lesser number or percentage of regularly scheduled meetings of such board or commission than is prohibited in
this section. For example, a present board or commission rule, regulation or bylaw which provides for a
member's removal if such member fails to attend two regularly scheduled meetings, or 15 percent of such
meetings within any given 12-month period, is not affected by the provisions of this section.
(Code 1980, § 2-11)
Sec. 2-492. - Filing of minutes with mayor and clerk.
All boards, commissions and agencies of the city shall file a written report of the minutes of each meeting in the
offices of the mayor and city clerk within two weeks from the date of the meeting.
(Code 1980, § 2-219)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
33/543
Secs. 2-493—2-530. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSIONERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (13) ---
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-151 et seq.; fire department, § 46-36 et seq.; police department,
§ 58-36 et seq.
State Law reference— Board of civil service commissioners generally, A.C.A. § 14-51-201 et seq.
Sec. 2-531. - Created.
There is hereby created a board of civil service commissioners for the police and fire departments and for the
nonuniformed employees of the city.
(Code 1980, § 2-167)
State law reference— Authority to create board of civil service commissioners for police officers and
firefighters, A.C.A. § 14-51-102; board to serve as civil service board for nonuniformed employees, A.C.A. §
14-50-201.
Sec. 2-532. - Composition.
The board of civil service commissioners shall consist of seven upright and intelligent citizens of the city named
by ordinance of the city council.
(Code 1980, § 2-168)
State law reference— Composition of board, A.C.A. § 14-51-201.
Secs. 2-533—2-555. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - CITY BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (14) ---
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 110.
Sec. 2-556. - Created.
There is hereby created a city beautiful commission.
(Code 1980, § 2-236)
Sec. 2-557. - Composition; term.
The city beautiful commission shall be open to one representative of each civic, business club and organization
in the city, including, but not limited to, dads' clubs, parent-teacher associations, church organizations and social
clubs who are working for the betterment of the city. There shall also be a representative from each ward and
from each community within the city. Members shall serve for a period of one year and may succeed
themselves.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
34/543
(Code 1980, § 2-237)
Sec. 2-558. - Officers.
The members of the city beautiful commission shall select, by a majority vote of the commission as a whole, a
chairman, vice-chairman, second vice-chairman, secretary and treasurer.
(Code 1980, § 2-238)
Sec. 2-559. - Board of directors.
(a)
From the membership of the city beautiful commission there shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by
the city council a board of directors which shall consist of 11 residents of the city. The members of the board of
directors shall hold office for terms of one, two and three years, and their appointments shall designate the
number of years that they are to serve. Such members may be appointed to succeed themselves.
(b)
The board of directors of the city beautiful commission shall meet at least once each month, and a quorum shall
consist of seven members. Should any member fail to attend three consecutive meetings, the term of such
member shall automatically terminate and a new member shall be appointed by the mayor to fill the unexpired
term of such member.
(Code 1980, § 2-239)
Sec. 2-560. - Meetings.
The city beautiful commission shall hold membership meetings once each quarter.
(Code 1980, § 2-240)
Sec. 2-561. - Minutes of meetings.
The city beautiful commission shall keep accurate records of all meetings.
(Code 1980, § 2-241)
Sec. 2-562. - Powers and duties.
The city beautiful commission shall be under the general supervision of the mayor. Its powers shall be to study,
investigate, develop and carry out plans for improving the beauty and cleanliness of streets, highways, parks and
similar places in the city.
(Code 1980, § 2-243)
Sec. 2-563. - Reports to mayor.
It shall be the duty of the city beautiful commission to give to the mayor on July 1 and January 1 of each year a
written report describing work performed and results accomplished and setting out its plans, suggestions and
recommendations for the future.
(Code 1980, § 2-242)
Secs. 2-564—2-585. - Reserved.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
35/543
DIVISION 4. - HISTORY COMMISSION
Sec. 2-586. - Created.
There is hereby created the North Little Rock History Commission, referred to in this division as the
"commission."
(Code 1980, § 2-251)
Sec. 2-587. - Composition; terms; filling of vacancies; compensation.
(a)
The history commission shall consist of nine members who shall be residents and electors of this city, who shall
be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council for terms of three years each.
(b)
If any member of the history commission resigns, dies, becomes incapable of acting as a member, or ceases to be
a qualified elector of the city, the commission shall nominate one or more qualified electors to fill the position.
The city council shall then elect from those nominated the successor to serve for the unexpired term. Members
shall be eligible for reelection to succeed themselves in office.
(c)
In the case of a vacancy by virtue of the expiration of a term, the history commission shall nominate one or more
qualified electors and the city council shall elect from those nominated a person to serve for a regular term in the
position involved.
(d)
The members of the history commission shall serve without compensation.
(Code 1980, § 2-252; Ord. No. 7344, § 1, 1-22-01)
Sec. 2-588. - Quorum.
A majority of the members of the history commission shall constitute a quorum.
(Code 1980, § 2-253)
Sec. 2-589. - Officers; meetings and rules.
The history commission shall from time to time select from its membership a chairman and a vice-chairman.
The commission shall adopt, and may modify, rules for the conduct of its business, and shall keep a record of its
transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. The rules shall provide for
regular meetings and for special meetings at the call of the chairman, or the vice-chairman if he is, for any
reason, the acting chairman, either at his own instance or upon the written request of at least three members. The
commission shall meet at such times and places as in each instance may suit the commission's convenience; all
such meetings shall be open to the public.
(Code 1980, § 2-254)
Sec. 2-590. - Records to be property of city.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
36/543
All records, papers, archives, and historical material at any time in the possession of the history commission,
excepting such as it may have on loan, shall be and remain the property of the city.
(Code 1980, § 2-255)
Sec. 2-591. - Powers and duties.
The history commission shall have the power or duty to:
(1)
Receive, classify and preserve, through the making of photographic copies or by other means, all official
archives of the city which may come either permanently or temporarily into its custody.
(2)
Collect, classify and preserve, through the making of photographic copies or by other means, all records,
manuscripts, maps, diaries, letters, journals and papers of historical value pertaining to the city.
(3)
Collect and preserve portraits, photographs, sketches, drawings and other likenesses of eminent residents of the
city, historic places, houses, buildings and scenes in the city.
(4)
Select and publish such papers and other source material of other city history as it shall deem appropriate and as
its funds will permit.
(5)
Build up and maintain at a place provided by the city a reference library of the source material of city history.
(6)
Destroy, exchange or otherwise dispose of any materials in its possession, except borrowed materials, which it
may find to be worthless or surplus to its needs.
(7)
Establish and make reasonable charges for furnishing photographic and certified copies of materials in its
possession, and the funds collected therefrom shall be deposited to the credit of its account in a bank; and from
time to time withdraw from such account for the purchase of photographic equipment and supplies, to pay for
processing films, and for related purposes.
(8)
Receive and expend any moneys arising from grants, contributions or gratuities, and receive bequests or
donations of real or personal property and convert into money any such property which cannot be used in the
form received, and expend such moneys for any of the functions performable by it.
(9)
Cooperate with, and receive the cooperation of, historical associations and other nonprofit organizations devoted
to the history of this city and state.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
37/543
(10)
Take such other action, not inconsistent with law, as it shall deem necessary in the performance of any of its
functions.
(Code 1980, § 2-256)
Secs. 2-592—2-630. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - SENIOR CITIZENS COMMISSION
Sec. 2-631. - Created.
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the North Little Rock Senior Citizens Commission.
(Code 1980, § 2-268)
Sec. 2-632. - Composition; terms of office.
(a)
The senior citizens commission shall consist of nine members who are residents and qualified electors of the
city, whose appointments shall be made by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The membership shall
include the following:
(1)
One member from each ward.
(2)
Five members at-large (one of which shall be a city council member, and one of which shall be the North Little
Rock Housing Authority Director).
(b)
Upon appointment by the city council, the commission shall designate a term of office for each member with
two members having an initial one-year term, two members having an initial two-year term, and three members
having an initial three-year term. At the expiration of the initial terms of office, all terms shall be three years.
(c)
Upon the resignation, death, or incapacity of any member or at the end of a term of any member of the
commission, the mayor shall appoint a new member to the commission subject to the approval of the city
council.
(d)
Members of the commission shall serve without compensation.
(Code 1980, § 2-269; Ord. No. 7451, § 1, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 7548, § 1, 5-26-03)
Sec. 2-633. - Officers; meetings and rules; quorum.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
38/543
The senior citizens commission shall, from time to time, select from its membership a chairman and vicechairman.
The commission shall adopt, and may modify, rules for the conduct of its business, and shall keep a
record of its transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be public.
(b)
The rules of the senior citizens commission shall provide for regular monthly meetings and for special meetings
at the call of the chairman, or the vice-chairman if he be, for any reason, the acting chairman, either at his own
instance or upon the written request of at least three members. The commission shall meet at such times and
places as in each instance may suit the commission's convenience, and all such meetings shall be open to the
public.
(c)
A majority of the members of the senior citizens commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
(Code 1980, § 2-270)
Sec. 2-634. - Powers and duties.
It shall be the function, power and duty of the senior citizens commission to:
(1)
Collect data and make studies of the problems affecting the senior citizens of the city;
(2)
Make recommendations to the city council as to the need of projects affecting the elderly of the city;
(3)
Make recommendations as to the expenditure of the city's funds in behalf of the elderly;
(4)
Make quarterly reports to the city council of the activities of the commission; and
(5)
Take such other action, not inconsistent with law, as it shall deem necessary in the performance of any of its
functions.
(6)
Be responsible for the day-to-day management and operation of the North Little Rock Senior Citizens Center on
behalf of the Parks and Recreation Commission. The director of the senior citizens center shall be a department
head and shall be appointed by the mayor pursuant to state law. All other employees of the senior citizens center
shall be city employees subject to the rules and regulations of the civil service commission and all applicable
state laws.
(Code 1980, § 2-271; Ord. No. 7451, § 2, 5-13-02)
Secs. 2-635—2-655. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - RESIDENTIAL HOUSING FACILITIES BOARD
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
39/543
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (15) ---
State Law reference— Public Facilities Boards Act, A.C.A. § 14-137-101 et seq.
Sec. 2-656. - Findings.
The city council hereby finds and determines:
(1)
There exists within and near the city a shortage of decent, safe and sanitary residential housing facilities
available for rehabilitation, construction or purchase on terms that persons and families of low and moderate
income can afford to pay.
(2)
Existing economic conditions, including high rates of interest on residential mortgage loans and a shortage of
funds within lending institutions in the state for residential mortgage loans, are operating to:
a.
Further restrict the rehabilitation, construction and purchase of residential housing by persons of low and
moderate income at reasonable affordable costs;
b.
Create unemployment and hardship within the residential construction industry, adversely affecting residents of
the city; and
c.
Reduce and limit the value of property within the city;
all of which adversely affect the city's tax revenues and which, if not alleviated, will lead to further urban blight
and decay and result in disproportionately large expenditures for services by the city.
(3)
The availability of mortgage financing to assist such persons and families in the rehabilitation, construction or
purchase of decent, safe and sanitary residential housing facilities will be aided by the providing of funds for
mortgage financing of residential housing facilities by the creation of a public facilities board pursuant to the
provisions of the Public Facilities Boards Act (A.C.A. § 14-137-101 et seq.).
(4)
The providing of financial assistance in order to enable persons and families of low and moderate income to
finance the costs of decent, safe and sanitary residential housing facilities is a proper public purpose as declared
by the Public Facilities Boards Act (A.C.A. § 14-137-101 et seq.) and this determination of the city council.
(5)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
40/543
The public purpose of financing residential housing facilities may best be served by establishing a public
facilities board to purchase mortgages on such residential housing facilities or make loans to mortgage lenders to
provide financing for residential housing facilities as provided in the Public Facilities Boards Act (A.C.A. § 14-
137-101 et seq.).
(Code 1980, § 2-277)
Sec. 2-657. - Created; purpose.
Pursuant to the authority of the Public Facilities Boards Act (A.C.A. § 14-137-101 et seq.), there is hereby
created and established the city residential housing facilities board (referred to in this division as the "board"),
with authority as provided in this division to accomplish, finance, contract and make or purchase mortgage loans
concerning, and otherwise act in such manner as may be permitted by, the Public Facilities Boards Act (A.C.A. §
14-137-101 et seq.) to provide decent, safe and sanitary residential housing facilities within or near the city.
(Code 1980, § 2-278)
State law reference— Authority to create board, A.C.A. §§ 14-137-106, 14-137-107.
Sec. 2-658. - Powers.
(a)
The residential housing facilities board is empowered to own, acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend, equip,
improve, operate, maintain, sell, lease and contract concerning land for the purpose of constructing, acquiring or
equipping, or otherwise deal in or dispose of, either health care facilities, residential housing facilities, off-street
parking facilities, recreational and tourist facilities, waterworks facilities, sewer facilities, facilities for securing
or developing industry, or any combination of such facilities, or any interest in such facilities, including, without
limitation, leasehold interest in and mortgages or such facilities. Additionally, such board shall have all the
powers as enumerated in A.C.A. § 14-137-106.
(b)
In effecting the purposes of this division to provide decent, safe and sanitary residential housing facilities within
or near the city, the residential housing facilities board shall require that the funds made available for the
purchase of mortgages or making loans to mortgage lenders shall be used for residential housing facilities
(including multifamily housing facilities), and that the facilities shall be located within the five-mile planning
jurisdiction of the city as now existing or as may hereafter be extended.
(c)
In addition, the residential housing facilities board shall have each of the powers set forth in A.C.A. § 14-137-
111, as amended, and appropriate to the purposes for which the board is created. The board may enter into such
contractual or cooperative agreements with such persons as may, in its discretion, be advisable to accomplish the
purpose of this division, including, without limitation, departments, agencies or instrumentalities of the United
States of America, the state, or the city, e.g., the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Federal
Housing Administration, the state housing development agency and the city housing authority.
(Code 1980, § 2-280)
Sec. 2-659. - Issuance of bonds.
The residential housing facilities board is authorized to issue revenue bonds, from time to time, and to use the
proceeds, either alone or together with other available funds and revenues, to accomplish the purposes for which
the board is created as the same relates to the providing of decent, safe and sanitary residential housing facilities
or any other public purpose as set out in A.C.A. § 14-137-106, as amended. Such revenue bonds shall be
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
41/543
obligations only of the board and shall not constitute an indebtedness for which the faith and credit of the city or
any of its revenues are pledged; and the principal and interest on the bonds shall be payable from and secured by
a pledge of revenues derived from the project financed, in whole or in part, from bond proceeds and as
authorized by and in accordance with the provisions of the Public Facilities Boards Act (A.C.A. § 14-137-101 et
seq.), together with such other collateral as may properly be pledged under the Public Facilities Boards Act
(A.C.A. § 14-137-101 et seq.) and as the board in its discretion may determine.
(Code 1980, § 2-281)
Sec. 2-660. - Organization; reports.
As soon as practicable after the adoption of this division, the residential housing facilities board shall meet and
elect such officers as shall be required by the Public Facilities Board Act (A.C.A. § 14-137-101 et seq.). The
board may adopt such bylaws and other rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the conduct of its business
and consistent with the provisions of the Public Facilities Board Act (A.C.A. § 14-137-101 et seq.). The board
shall cause to be filed with the city clerk the annual report described in A.C.A. § 14-137-123.
(Code 1980, § 2-282)
Secs. 2-661—2-670. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - HEALTH FACILITIES BOARD
Sec. 2-671. - Findings.
The city council of the city hereby finds and determines:
(1)
The project will make available advances and innovations for the health care of inhabitants of the city and the
state, and the project is plainly in the interest of the city and its inhabitants. Further, proper planning dictates that
provision should be made for financing any additional facilities that may be required in the future in order that
Baptist Health satisfy the increasing health care needs of the inhabitants of the city and the state ("subsequent
projects").
(2)
Financing of the project and subsequent projects under the Act, including refinancing of existing debt, is and
will be necessary for accomplishing the project and subsequent projects and will make available quality health
care facilities and services to the public at lower costs, thereby benefiting the public in general and the
inhabitants of the city in particular.
(3)
The facilities and services afforded by Baptist Health are now and hereafter will be made available to patients,
staff privileges are afforded to medical and supporting personnel and persons are employed without
discrimination on the basis of race, creed, religion or sex.
(4)
The city is authorized by the Act to provide financing of health care facilities through the creation of a public
facilities board and the issuance of revenue bonds by such a public facilities board.
(5)
It is in the best interest of the city and its inhabitants that there be created a public facilities board under the Act
and that the authority of the board be limited to accomplishing, financing, contracting, concerning and otherwise
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
42/543
dealing with health care facilities (as defined in the Act) to be owned or operated by Baptist Health, including
the refinancing of all or any part of existing debt.
(Ord. No. 6999, § 1, 8-12-96)
Sec. 2-672. - Creation of board.
Pursuant to the authority of the Act there is hereby created and established the "City of North Little Rock,
Arkansas Health Facilities Board (Baptist Health)" (the "board") with authority as hereinafter provided to
accomplish, finance, contract concerning, and otherwise deal with health care facilities (as defined in the Act) to
be owned or operated by Baptist Health, including the refinancing of all or any part of existing debt.
(Ord. No. 6999, § 2, 8-12-96)
Sec. 2-673. - Powers.
The board is empowered, from time to time, to own, acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend, equip, improve, sell,
lease, contract concerning or otherwise deal in or dispose of health care facilities, including mortgage loans with
respect thereto (including specifically the project and any subsequent project, as hereinbefore defined); provided,
however, that the authority of the board shall be limited to such health care facilities as are sold, leased or
mortgaged to Baptist Health or are otherwise owned by, dealt in, disposed of, or concerning which a loan is
made to Baptist Health, pursuant to a contract or contracts between the board and Baptist Health. The board
shall have all of the powers provided for in the Act, subject to the limitations of this division, and shall carry out
its duties in accordance with the Act.
(Ord. No. 6999, § 2, 8-12-96)
Sec. 2-674. - Issuance of bonds.
The board is authorized to issue revenue bonds, from time to time, and to use the proceeds, either alone or
together with other available funds and revenues, to accomplish the purposes for which the board is created.
Such revenue bonds shall be obligations only of the board and shall not constitute an indebtedness for which the
faith and credit of the city or any of its revenues are pledged, and the principal and interest on the bonds shall be
payable from and secured by a pledge of revenues derived from the health facilities financed, in whole or in part,
from bond proceeds or from any debt previously incurred and refinanced by bonds, and as authorized by and in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, together with such other collateral as may properly be pledged. Each
bond issue for a subsequent project must be approved by the city council of the city prior to delivery of such
bonds to the purchaser or purchasers thereof.
Any issuance of revenue bonds shall be preceded by notice and a public hearing, before the board, as and to the
extent required by law, and a report on each such public hearing shall be presented to the city council.
(Ord. No. 6999, § 4, 8-12-96)
Sec. 2-675. - Organization; reports.
As soon as practicable after the adoption of this division the board shall meet and elect officers. The board may
adopt by-laws and such other rules and regulations, if any, as shall be necessary of desirable for the conduct of
its business and consistent with the provisions of the Act. The board shall cause to be filed with the city clerk of
the city the annual report described in 1987 A.C.A. § 14-137-123.
(Ord. No. 6999, § 5, 8-12-96)
DIVISION 8. - RESIDENTIAL DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
43/543
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (16) ---
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 7687, §§ 1, 2, 4—6, adopted January 10, 2005 did not specifically amend the
Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as a new division 8 at the editor's discretion.
Sec. 2-676. - Created; established.
There is hereby created and established the North Little Rock Residential Design Review Board.
(Ord. No. 7687, § 1, 1-10-05)
Sec. 2-677. - Members.
The North Little Rock City Council hereby finds and determines that the number of persons serving on such
board shall be three to better serve the needs of North Little Rock's residential building requirements. The
members of such board shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve three-year staggered terms. The
members shall represent the interests of the entire city. Any member may be removed at any time without cause
upon a majority vote of the city council. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member,
his/her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. No. 7687, § 2, 1-10-05)
Sec. 2-678. - Compensation.
Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 7687, § 4, 1-10-05)
Sec. 2-679. - Guidelines.
It shall be the responsibility of the board to develop guidelines for new construction of residential homes. Such
guidelines shall be presented to the city council for its approval and acceptance and shall constitute the official
guidelines for new residential home construction. All amendments and/or additions to the guidelines shall be
approved by the city council. The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make
findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work.
(Ord. No. 7687, § 5, 1-10-05)
Sec. 2-680. - Meetings.
The board shall choose its own officers and make its own rules and regulations. Meetings of the board shall be
held as needed, but no less than quarterly. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. Copies of such minutes shall be transmitted to the mayor and
city council following each meeting.
(Ord. No. 7687, § 6, 1-10-05)
DIVISION 9. - PUBLIC FACILITIES BOARD FOR RIVERFRONT DEVELOPMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (17) ---
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
44/543
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 7695, §§ 1—6, adopted March 17, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code.
Therefore, such ordinance has been added as a new division 9, §§ 2-681—2-686, at the editor's discretion.
Sec. 2-681. - Findings.
It is hereby found and determined that:
(1)
The project will provide entertainment for the citizens of the city and surrounding areas as well as promoting
and enhancing the downtown and urban development of the city. Further, proper planning dictates that
provisions should be made for financing any additional facilities that may be required in the future to satisfy
increasing recreational needs of the city and its inhabitants and nearby and surrounding areas ("subsequent
projects").
(2)
Financing of the project and subsequent projects under the act, including refinancing of existing debt, is and will
be necessary for accomplishing the project and subsequent projects and will make available quality recreational
facilities and services, benefiting the public in general and the inhabitants of the city in particular.
(3)
The city is authorized by the act to provide financing of stadiums, meeting or entertainment facilities, public
marinas, off-street parking facilities and garages (the "facilities") through the creation of a public facilities board
and the issuance of revenue bonds by such a public facilities board.
(4)
It is in the best interests of the city and its residents that a North Little Rock Public Facilities Board for
Riverfront Development be created, with those powers provided by Ark. Code Ann. § 14-137-111 et seq., for the
purpose of construction of stadium or entertainment facilities, public marina, off-street parking facilities and
garages, and development of the surrounding area.
(Ord. No. 7695, § 1, 3-17-05)
Sec. 2-682. - Creation of board.
Pursuant to the authority of Ark. Code Ann. §§ 14-137-101, et seq., there is hereby created and established the
North Little Rock Public Facilities Board for Riverfront Development (the "board"). The board shall have the
powers set out in Section 2-686 below.
(Ord. No. 7695, § 2, 3-17-05)
Sec. 2-683. - Members.
The number of persons serving on the board shall be five. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the
mayor, confirmed by the city council, and shall serve five-year staggered terms. The members shall represent the
interests of the entire city. Any member may be removed at any time without cause upon a majority vote of the
city council. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his/her successor shall be
appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. Each member shall qualify by taking and filing with the North
Little Rock City Clerk the oath of office in which the member shall swear to support the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of the State of Arkansas and to discharge faithfully his or her duties in the
manner provided by law.
(Ord. No. 7695, § 3, 3-17-05)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
45/543
Sec. 2-684. - Organization; reports.
The members of the board shall meet and organize by electing one of their members as chairman, one as vicechairman,
one as secretary, and one as treasurer. Such officers shall be elected annually thereafter in like manner.
The duties of the secretary and treasurer may be performed by the same member. The board may also appoint an
executive director who shall serve at the pleasure of the board and receive such compensation as shall be fixed
by the board. The members of the board shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be entitled to
reimbursement of expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Any member of the board may be
removed pursuant to the provisions of Ark. Code Ann. § 14-137-108. The board shall adopt by-laws for its
internal operation. The board shall cause to be filed with the North Little Rock City Clerk the annual report
described in Ark. Code Ann. § 14-137-123.
(Ord. No. 7695, § 4, 3-17-05)
Sec. 2-685. - Powers.
The board shall have the power to:
• Finance, build and operate a professional baseball stadium;
• Finance, build and operate off-street parking facilities and/or garages;
• Finance, build and operate a downtown marina on the north shore of the Arkansas River; and
• To do any and all other things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purposes of the board.
The board is empowered, from time to time, to own, acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend, equip, improve, sell,
lease, contract concerning or otherwise deal in or dispose of facilities, including mortgage loans with respect
thereto (including specifically the project and any subsequent project, as hereinbefore defined. The board shall
have all of the powers provided for in Ark. Code Ann. § 14-137-111 et seq., subject to the limitations of this
division, and shall carry out its duties in accordance with the act.
(Ord. No. 7695, § 5, 3-17-05)
Sec. 2-686. - Issuance of bonds.
The board is authorized to issue revenue bonds, from time to time, and to use the proceeds, either alone or
together with other available funds and revenues, to accomplish the purposes for which the board is created.
Such revenue bonds shall be obligations only of the board and shall not constitute an indebtedness for which the
faith and credit of the city or any of its revenues are pledged, and the principal and interest on the bonds shall be
payable from and secured by a pledge of revenues derived from the Facilities financed, in whole or in part, from
bond proceeds or from any debt previously incurred and refinanced by bonds, and as authorized by and in
accordance with the provisions of the act, together with such other collateral as may properly be pledged. Each
bond issue for a subsequent project must be approved by the city council of the city prior to delivery of such
bonds to the purchaser or purchasers thereof.
Any issuance of revenue bonds shall be preceded by notice and a public hearing, before the board, as and to the
extent required by law, and a report on each such public hearing shall be presented to the city council.
(Ord. No. 7695, § 6, 3-17-05)
Secs. 2-687—2-695. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL AFFAIRS
FOOTNOTE(S):
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
46/543
--- (18) ---
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 98.
State Law reference— Municipal finance generally, A.C.A. § 14-58-101 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-696. - Fiscal year.
The fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. The term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal
year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered.
(Code 1980, § 2-114)
State law reference— Fiscal year, A.C.A. § 14-71-102.
Sec. 2-697. - Annual audit by independent accountant.
(a)
On or before September 1 of each year, the city council shall select an independent certified public accountant to
prepare the annual audit of the financial affairs of the city.
(b)
The annual audit of the financial affairs of the city for the preceding fiscal year shall be completed and presented
to the city council on or before May 15 of each year. Such audit shall reflect all income and expenditures of the
municipality and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and one copy with the county clerk.
(Code 1980, § 2-115)
State law reference— Annual audit, A.C.A. § 14-58-901 et seq.
Sec. 2-698. - Mayor's examination of claims.
The mayor may examine all payrolls, vouchers, bills and other claims and demands against the city and shall not
approve such claims for payment thereof unless he has found by diligent investigation that the claim has preaudit
budget justification, is in proper form, correctly computed, that it is justly and legally due and payable, and that
it is accompanied by the certification of a responsible official of the department concerned and that the goods
and services listed therein were actually received.
(Code 1980, § 2-119)
Sec. 2-699. - Issuing of warrants.
The finance director shall issue all warrants drawn upon the treasury of the city when he finds that such warrants
are authorized by law, which warrants shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. The treasury
of the city shall include all funds remitted to or collected by all departments of the city except those funds which
are specifically designated for the water department, sewer department, advertising and promotion commission,
and the housing authority.
(Code 1980, § 2-122)
Sec. 2-700. - Competitive bids.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
47/543
(a)
The purchasing agent shall have authority to make any and all purchases of any amounts less than $10,000.00.
Where the amount of any expenditure for any purpose or contract exceeds the sum of $10,000.00, the mayor or
his duly authorized representative shall invite competitive bidding thereon by legal advertisement in any
newspaper having general circulation in the city. Bids received pursuant to such advertisement shall be opened
and read on the date set for receiving such bids in the presence of the mayor or his duly authorized
representative, together with any committee that may be named by the mayor or the city council for this purpose.
The officials designated to receive such bids shall have exclusive power to award to the lowest, responsible
bidder; provided however, that the mayor and any committee designated to receive bids may reject any and all
bids received; provided further, that the city council, by ordinance, may waive the requirements of competitive
bidding in exceptional situations where such procedure is deemed not feasible or practical.
(b)
Reverse internet auctions.
(1)
Definitions.
Reverse internet auction means an internet-based process in which bidders:
a.
Are given specifications for items and services being sought for purchase by the City of North Little Rock; and
b.
Bid against themselves in order to lower the price of the item or service to the lowest possible level.
Reverse internet auction vendor means an internet- based entity that hosts a reverse internet auction.
(2)
The city's purchasing agent shall also have the option to make purchases by participating in a reverse Internet
auction, except that purchases and contracts for construction projects and materials shall be undertaken pursuant
to A.C.A. §§ 14-59-303(a) and (b) and 22-9-203. The reverse internet auction shall include, but is not limited to
the following procedures:
a.
Bidders shall be provided instructions and individually secured passwords for access to the reverse internet
auction by either the city and/or its reverse internet auction vendor;
b.
The bidding process shall be timed, and the time shall be part of the reverse internet auction specifications;
c.
The reverse internet auction shall be held at a specific date and time;
d.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
48/543
The reverse internet auction and bidding process shall be interactive with each bidder able to make multiple bids
during the allotted time;
e.
Each bidder shall be continually signaled his or her relative position in the bidding process;
f.
Bidders shall remain anonymous and shall not have access to other bidders or bids; and
g.
The city's purchasing agent shall have access to real-time data including all bids and bid amounts.
(3)
The city's purchasing agent is authorized to pay a reasonable fee to the reverse internet auction vendor. The fee
may be included as part of the bids received during the reverse internet auction and paid by the winning bidder
or paid separately by the city.
(4)
The city retains the right to:
a.
Refuse all bids made during the reverse internet auction; and
b.
Begin the reverse internet auction process anew if the city or its purchasing agent determines it is in the best
interest of the city to do so.
(Code 1980, § 2-123; Ord. No. 7192, § 1, 1-11-99; Ord. No. 7745, § 1, 9-26-05)
State law reference— Purchases, A.C.A. § 14-58-303.
Sec. 2-701. - Turnover of funds to treasurer; records.
At least once a month each city officer shall make a settlement with the city treasurer as to moneys belonging to
the city which are in his hand, and shall make a report available to the mayor and city council showing the funds
collected and exhibit a receipt attached to such report from the city treasurer.
(Code 1980, § 2-1)
Secs. 2-702—2-735. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - REPORTS AND SUMMARIES
Sec. 2-736. - Filing of financial reports.
(a)
City government. All commissions, agencies, departments, committees or other entities created by the city shall
file every third month of each fiscal year a financial report with the city clerk, detailing all deposits in the
accounts of such agency, commission or department.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
49/543
(b)
Financial institutions. All banks, savings and loans and other financial institutions having deposits belonging to
the city, its agencies, commissions or departments are hereby required to file a financial report with the city
clerk, showing the balance of each city-related account.
(c)
Date for filing. The reports required by this section for the immediately preceding three months shall be filed
with the city clerk on or before April 15, July 15, October 15 and January 15 of each year.
(Code 1980, § 2-126)
Sec. 2-737. - Annual publication of summary of revenues and expenditures.
Within seven days after the annual audit is received, a summary of the revenues and expenditures made by the
city during the preceding year shall be published in a local newspaper. Such summary shall contain the total
expenditures by department and indicate the percentage between expenditures from within a department to the
total revenues received.
(Code 1980, § 2-116)
Sec. 2-738. - Statement re bank accounts.
(a)
The finance department shall provide each alderman and the mayor a statement of each account in every
financial institution of the city which is under the supervision and control of the mayor and city council. This
report shall be in addition to all other reports.
(b)
The statement required by this section shall contain the following information:
(1)
The name of each account, whether a checking or savings account or whether a certificate of deposit, or any
other account of whatever nature;
(2)
The balance of each account, disclosing any interest received;
(3)
All deposits and withdrawals to such accounts, but payroll checks need not be itemized, but merely classified as
"payroll";
(4)
The due date of any and all certificate of deposit accounts; and
(5)
The purpose for which each account was established.
(Code 1980, § 2-117)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
50/543
Sec. 2-739. - Reports and statements to be submitted by mayor.
At the close of each month, and at any other time, if so ordered by the city council, the mayor shall have
prepared for submission to the members of the council a statement of the condition of each departmental budget
and such other reports as may be required of him. At the close of the year, the mayor shall submit to the
members of the city council a complete report of the budget transactions of the year.
(Code 1980, § 2-118)
Secs. 2-740—2-770. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - BUDGET
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (19) ---
State Law reference— Budgets generally, A.C.A. § 14-58-201 et seq.
Sec. 2-771. - Nature and scope.
The budget for the city shall set forth all proposed expenditures for the administration, operation, maintenance
and improvement of all offices and departments for the ensuing budget year, and expenditures for capital
projects to be undertaken and/or completed during the year. In addition thereto, the budget shall set forth the
anticipated income and other means of financing the proposed expenditures for the fiscal year.
(Code 1980, § 2-131)
Sec. 2-772. - Preparation and submission by mayor.
The mayor, on or before December 1 of each year, shall submit to the council a budget and an explanatory
budget message for the ensuing year in the form and with the contents provided by sections 2-775 through 2-
777.
(Code 1980, § 2-132)
State law reference— Budget submission deadline, A.C.A. § 14-58-201.
Sec. 2-773. - Documents constitute public record; distribution to public.
The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the city
clerk open to the public for inspection by anyone. The mayor shall cause sufficient copies of the budget and
budget message to be prepared for distribution to interested persons.
(Code 1980, § 2-133)
Sec. 2-774. - Publication of adopted budget; copies made available.
Within ten days after final action has been taken on the budget by the city council, it shall be made public, by
publication or otherwise, of a summary statement which shall be in the form of the general budget summary
provided for in section 2-778. Such statement shall show, in addition to the figures set forth in the general budget
summary, the changes made by the council in the course of its review, revision and adoption of the budget. The
adopted budget shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced, and sufficient copies thereof shall be
made available for the use of all offices, departments, agencies and for the use of interested persons.
(Code 1980, § 2-135)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
51/543
Sec. 2-775. - Budget message—Current operations.
The budget message submitted by the mayor to the council shall be explanatory of the budget, shall contain an
outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the budget year, and shall describe in connection
therewith the important features of the budget plan. It shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the
previous year in cost and revenue items and shall explain any major changes in financial policy.
(Code 1980, § 2-136)
Sec. 2-776. - Same—Capital improvements.
As part of the budget message, with relation to the proposed expenditures for capital projects stated in the
budget, the mayor shall include a statement of pending capital projects and proposed new capital projects,
relating the respective amounts proposed to be raised therefor by appropriations in the budget and the respective
amounts, if any, proposed to be raised thereafter by the issuance of bonds during the budget year.
(Code 1980, § 2-137)
Sec. 2-777. - Same—Supporting schedules.
Attached to the budget message shall be such supporting schedules, exhibits and other explanatory material in
respect to both current operations and capital improvements as the mayor shall believe useful to the council.
(Code 1980, § 2-138)
Sec. 2-778. - Budget summary.
At the head of the budget there shall appear a summary of the budget, which need not be itemized further than
by principal sources of anticipated revenue and total proposed expenditures of each department, in such a
manner as to present to taxpayers a simple and clear summary of the estimates of the budget.
(Code 1980, § 2-139)
Sec. 2-779. - Complete budget plan.
The budget shall provide a complete plan for the operation of all city departments and offices for the ensuing
budget year. It shall contain in tabular form:
(1)
Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues.
(2)
All proposed expenditures.
(Code 1980, § 2-140)
Sec. 2-780. - Transfers of appropriations.
The mayor may at any time with council approval transfer any unencumbered budget balance or portion thereof
between general classifications of expenditures within an operating department. At the request of the mayor and
within the last three months of the budget year, the council may by ordinance transfer any unencumbered budget
balance or portion thereof from one operating department to another; provided however, such transfer shall
comply with all applicable state statutes.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
52/543
(Code 1980, § 2-152)
Sec. 2-781. - Mayor responsible for budget control.
The mayor shall have maintained through his office the city's preaudit budget procedure in such a manner that
the accounts will show daily all transactions relating to departmental budgets.
(Code 1980, § 2-153)
Sec. 2-782. - Budgets lapse at end of year.
All budgets shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or
lawfully encumbered.
(Code 1980, § 2-154)
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 54; alcoholic beverages in parks, § 70-45;
taxation, ch. 98.
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, A.C.A. § 3-1-101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. - Possession in public of containers with broken seals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess in any public place any package or container containing liquor on
which the seal has been broken or the container opened.
(Code 1980, § 4-10)
Cross reference— Library, ch. 62; park and recreation facility rules, § 70-37 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other
public places, ch. 94.
Sec. 6-2. - Attempt to purchase by persons under 21 years.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to misrepresent his age for the purpose of obtaining
liquor, beer or alcoholic beverages.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any
alcoholic beverage from a retail dealer who sells such beverages for off-premises consumption or from a public
tavern, restaurant, or other establishment which sells such beverages for on-premises consumption.
(c)
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any
alcoholic beverage at a private club.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
53/543
(d)
Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more
than $500.00.
(Ord. No. 6826, §§ 1—4, 7-11-94)
Sec. 6-3. - Notice to persons under 21 years posted in establishments.
(a)
The manager of any public establishment which sells alcoholic beverages for on-premises or off-premises
consumption, and the manager of any private club which serves alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption shall be required to post in a conspicuous place a notice stating:
NOTICE TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE
You are subject to a $500.00 fine for:
(1)
Misrepresenting your age for the purpose of obtaining liquor, beer, or alcoholic beverage.
(2)
Attempting to purchase or otherwise obtain liquor, beer, or alcoholic beverage.
(b)
The size of the notice shall not be less than 8½ inches by 11 inches. The lettering on the notice shall be clearly
legible.
(c)
Any establishment which sells alcoholic beverages at a drive-in window shall post a separate notice at each
drive-in window.
(Ord. No. 6826, § 5, 7-11-94)
Sec. 6-4. - Prohibited sales of mixed drinks, beer, wine or alcoholic beverages in private clubs.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, employee or any agent of a private club, as defined and permitted by
the laws and regulations of the state, to serve, sell, or permit the serving, sale or consumption of mixed drinks,
beer, wine or any alcoholic beverages of any type or nature on the premises of such private club between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on any day. Violations of this section shall be punishable by the standard
punishments contained within this Code, together with all other remedies available under state and federal law.
(Ord. No. 7139, § 1, 6-8-98)
Secs. 6-5—6-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS (BEER AND LIGHT WINE EXCEPTED)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 6-36. - Definitions.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
54/543
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Intoxicating liquors means whiskey, wine, gin, cordials or any other bottled liquors as are handled as shelf goods
and stock in trade by duly authorized, licensed and permitted dealers as prescribed in and pursuant to and
authorized under and by virtue of the Arkansas Alcoholic Control Act (A.C.A. § 3-1-101 et seq.).
Permitted dealers means all persons, corporations, associations or individuals, or otherwise, who are engaged in
the sale of "intoxicating liquors" as defined in this section, being licensed and permitted to do business pursuant
to and authorized under and by virtue of the Arkansas Alcoholic Control Act (A.C.A. § 3-1-101 et seq.).
Signs or advertising matter means any sign, placard, words, letterings or symbols of any kind and nature
displayed outside on the premises of licensed and permitted dealers so as to attract the notice of persons and call
attention of the public to the fact that intoxicating liquors are being sold and offered for sale in the place of
business where such sign or advertising matter is displayed and exhibited.
(Code 1980, § 4-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
State law reference— Definitions generally, A.C.A. § 3-1-102.
Sec. 6-37. - Privilege tax on retailers.
The business of storing, transporting, selling or dispensing at retail of any and all vinous (except wines),
spirituous or malt liquors within the city is hereby declared to be a privilege, and for the exercise of such
privilege there is hereby levied an annual privilege tax in the sum of $200.00 for each retail store operated
within the city by any person. Such tax shall be paid by July 1 of each year.
(Code 1980, § 4-2)
State law reference— Authority to levy license fee not exceeding one-half the state fee, A.C.A. § 3-4-202; state
fee, A.C.A. § 3-4-604.
Sec. 6-38. - Privilege tax on wholesalers.
The business of storing, transporting or selling of spirituous, vinous (except wines) or malt liquors at wholesale
within the city is hereby declared to be a privilege, and for the exercise of such privilege there is hereby levied
an annual tax in the sum of $250.00 for each and every such business conducted. Such tax shall be paid by July
1 of each year.
(Code 1980, § 4-3)
State law reference— Authority to levy license fee not exceeding one-half the state fee, A.C.A. § 3-4-202; state
fee, A.C.A. § 3-4-602.
Sec. 6-39. - Application for license; contents; approval of location.
(a)
Before any person shall engage in the wholesale or retail intoxicating liquor business in the city, an application
for a privilege license shall be filed with the city clerk. Such application shall contain sworn statements
indicating the name and kind of business sought to be licensed, the names and addresses of all persons owning
or holding any interest in such business, the proposed location where such business shall be conducted, and the
name and address of the owner of the building or premises in which such business shall be located.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
55/543
(b)
No license shall be granted by the city clerk to conduct or engage in any retail or wholesale liquor business
unless the location is in conformity with the zoning ordinance.
(Code 1980, §§ 4-4, 4-5)
Sec. 6-40. - Sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, prohibited times; exceptions.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or give away any alcoholic beverage by the drink
between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., Tuesday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, or between 1:00 a.m.
Sunday and 7:00 a.m. Monday morning, except as such sales are authorized by A.C.A. § 3-9-215 and A.C.A. tit.
3, ch. 9, subch. 4 (A.C.A. § 3-9-401 et seq.) and by subsection (b) of this section.
(b)
Hotels and restaurants that possess a permit for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, and that obtain
a state license to do so, may sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption on Sundays between the
hours of 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m.
(Code 1980, § 4-6; Ord. No. 7623, § 1, 3-8-04)
State law reference— Authority to fix hours of sale etc., A.C.A. §§ 3-9-205, 3-9-233; sale during prohibited
times unlawful, A.C.A. § 3-9-236; penalty for violation of A.C.A. §§ 3-9-201 et seq., 3-9-204.
Secs. 6-41—6-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— On-premises consumption of alcohol, A.C.A. § 3-9-101 et seq.
Sec. 6-61. - Definitions.
The definitions set forth in A.C.A. § 3-9-202 are hereby adopted by reference and shall apply to the provisions
of this division.
(Code 1980, § 4-36)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 6-62. - Hotels, restaurants—Permit fee.
Any permittee issued a permit by the state alcoholic beverage control board who desires to provide alcoholic
beverages for sale for on-premises consumption in a hotel or restaurant within the city shall pay to the city clerk
on or before July 1 of each year a permit fee in the following applicable amount:
(1)
Hotel, having fewer than 100 rooms .....$ 500.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
56/543
(2)
Hotel, having 100 or more rooms .....1,000.00
(3)
Restaurant, having a seating capacity of less than 100 persons .....500.00
(4)
Restaurant, having a seating capacity of 100 or more persons .....1,000.00
(Code 1980, § 4-37)
State law reference— Local fee not to exceed that levied by state authorized, A.C.A. § 3-9-214; state fee,
A.C.A. § 3-9-212.
Sec. 6-63. - Same—Supplemental tax.
A supplemental tax of ten percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts of the sale of alcoholic beverages
pursuant to A.C.A. tit. 3, ch. 9 (A.C.A. § 3-9-101 et seq.) is hereby levied on hotels, motels and restaurants. The
tax levied in this section shall be reported, and paid, to the city clerk by the tenth day of each calendar month for
the preceding calendar month.
(Code 1980, § 4-38)
State law reference— Local tax not to exceed state tax authorized, A.C.A. § 3-9-214; state tax, A.C.A. § 3-9-
214.
Sec. 6-64. - Private clubs—Permit fee.
Any private club dispensing alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption pursuant to a permit issued by the
state alcoholic beverage control board within the city shall pay to the city clerk a permit fee in the amount of
$250.00 on or before July 1 of each year.
(Code 1980, § 4-39)
State law reference— Power of city to require permit fee, A.C.A. § 3-9-223(f).
Sec. 6-65. - Same—Supplemental tax.
Any private club dispensing alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption pursuant to a permit issued by the
state alcoholic beverage control board within the city shall, in addition to the required permit fee, report and pay
to the city clerk by the tenth day of each calendar month for the preceding calendar month a supplemental tax of
five percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts of the sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to A.C.A. tit. 3,
ch. 9 (A.C.A. § 3-9-101 et seq.).
(Code 1980, § 4-40)
State law reference— Authority to levy above tax, A.C.A. § 3-9-223(f).
Secs. 6-66—6-95. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - BEER AND LIGHT WINE
FOOTNOTE(S):
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
57/543
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Authority of cities to provide for the issuance and revocation of beer licenses and to fix
restrictions, zones, hours of sale and other rules and regulations governing the sale of beer and wine, A.C.A. § 3-
5-213.
Sec. 6-96. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Beer means any fermented liquor made from malt or any substitute therefor and having an alcoholic content of
not in excess of five percent by weight.
Intoxicating liquor means vinous, ardent, malt fermented liquor or distilled spirits with an alcoholic content in
excess of five percent by weight.
Light wine means the fermented juice of grapes or other small fruits, including berries, and having an alcoholic
content of not in excess of five percent by weight.
Retail dealer means any person who sells to the consumer light wine and/or beer in quantities of less than 16
gallons.
(Code 1980, § 4-21)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. § 3-5-202.
Sec. 6-97. - Annual sales tax.
Every person engaged in the business of selling and/or distributing any beer and/or wine at retail within the city
shall be subject to and shall pay to the city clerk an annual tax according to the following scale:
(1)
For total gross annual sales not exceeding $1,000.00, a tax of $15.00 per annum.
(2)
For each $1,000.00 additional gross annual sales, or fraction thereof, an additional tax of $5.00 per annum.
(Code 1980, § 4-22(a))
Sec. 6-98. - Sales reports.
A report of the gross monthly sales for the previous year shall be submitted by every person engaged in the
business of selling and/or distributing beer and/or wine at retail within the city once annually before July 15 of
each year.
(Code 1980, § 4-22(b))
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. § 3-5-212.
Sec. 6-99. - When fees due and payable.
All fees required in this article shall be due and payable on July 1 of each year, or upon commencing business.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
58/543
(Code 1980, § 4-23)
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 42-31 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 54; parks to be bird sanctuaries, § 70-
38; Burns Park to be wildlife sanctuary, § 70-78; dogs in Burns Park, § 70-79.
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. - Interference with enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1)
Interfere in any manner with the director of the animal shelter or any animal control worker while they have in
their custody any animal;
(2)
Remove from the animal shelter any animal which is in the custody of the animal shelter unless the director or
other person in charge of the animal shelter has authorized the release of such animal; or
(3)
Knowingly obstruct, impair or hinder, directly or indirectly, the lawful performance of enforcement and animal
control functions of the director or other appointed animal control officer.
(Code 1980, § 7-8; Ord. No. 7441, § 1, 4-8-02)
Sec. 10-2. - Cruelty to animals.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1)
Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry or confine in a vehicle in an
inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat, any animal.
(2)
Fail to provide any animal with proper food, drink, protection from the weather and veterinary care.
(3)
Abandon any animal.
(4)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
59/543
Intentionally poison any animal.
(5)
Allow or promote any fight between animals, or to allow or permit any such fight in or upon any premises in his
possession or under his control.
(6)
Allow an animal to be kept in unsanitary conditions.
(7)
Keep or confine an animal in any other capacity than a humane manner.
(8)
Any owner of a dog, when confining such dog on a chain, shall confine such dog by a chain of at least ten feet,
and the chain shall be affixed to the dog's collar and attached to some substantial stationary object adequate to
prevent the dog from running at large.
(b)
Animal control officers have the authority to remove any animal subject to cruelty and impound such animal.
The animal shall be impounded and not released unless:
(1)
The owner of the animal, who shall not be charged, claims the animal from the animal shelter; or
(2)
The owner of the animal, who was charged and is found not guilty, claims the animal from the animal shelter.
If any owner of such impounded animal pleads guilty, nolo contendere, or is found guilty of cruelty to animals,
the animal shall become the property of the North Little Rock Animal Shelter and be available to the public for
adoption.
(c)
A person convicted of cruelty to animals shall be punished by a fine of no more than $1,000.00 and no more
than one year in jail.
(Code 1980, § 7-3; Emer. Ord. No. 7086, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-97)
State law reference— Authority to prevent cruelty to animals, A.C.A. § 14-54-103(7); cruelty to animals,
A.C.A. § 5-62-122.
Sec. 10-3. - Releasing animals in public places.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly release any animal in any public place within the city.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
60/543
As used in this section, the term "animal" shall mean any animal other than a human being; the term "public
place" shall include all properties owned by the city.
(Code 1980, § 7-6)
Sec. 10-4. - Keeping of innately wild animals.
(a)
Definition. As used in this article, the term innately wild animal shall mean any mammal, amphibian, reptile or
fowl of a species that is wild by nature and that, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics, is
dangerous to human beings. Such animals shall include, but not be limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers,
bears, wolves, cougars, coyotes, raccoons, skunks (whether deodorized or not), apes, gorillas, monkeys of a
species whose average adult weight is 20 pounds or more, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, alligators, crocodiles,
caymans, fowl larger than a macaw, all forms of venomous reptiles and any snake that will grow to a length
greater than eight feet. The term shall also include any animal listed as an "endangered species" under the
federal Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, or any fowl protected by the federal Migratory Bird
Treaty Act. The term wolf shall be defined by A.C.A. § 20-19-401, et seq. The term innately wild animal shall
not include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice and domesticated rabbits.
(b)
Violations and penalties. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for a person to own, possess, keep, or harbor an
innately wild animal within the city. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined not more than
$500.00. If the violation in its nature is continuous in respect to time, the fine shall not exceed more than
$250.00 per day. Additionally, the convicting court shall either (1) order the animal to be surrendered to
competent authority for release in an appropriate habitat or for other lawful disposition, or (2) order the humane
destruction of the animal.
(c)
Affirmative defenses. No person shall be convicted of violating this section if such person can establish a defense
listed in this subsection by a preponderance of the evidence.
(1)
Zoos, circuses, etc. This section shall not apply to any zoo, circus or sanctuary complying with applicable laws
and regulations and keeping such innately wild animals for the education and entertainment of the public.
(2)
Domestic dogs and cats. This section shall not apply to domestic dogs and cats that have been duly licensed and
properly treated with a vaccine which the compendium of animal rabies prevention has established is capable of
effectively preventing the spread of rabies in the applicable species.
(d)
Liability for innately wild animal that attacks a person. Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, or possesses an
innately wild that attacks a person causing harm to person or property or exhibits vicious or ferocious behavior
towards a person causing fear shall be guilty of a violation. It is an affirmative defense to this subsection that the
animal was provoked. Any person convicted of violating this subsection shall be fined not more than $500.00.
Additionally, the convicting court shall either (1) order the animal to be surrendered to competent authority for
release in an appropriate habitat or for other lawful disposition, or (2) order the humane destruction of the
animal.
(Code 1980, § 7-7; Ord. No. 7586, § 2, 9-22-03)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
61/543
Sec. 10-5. - Veterinarians to report cases of rabies to health officer.
Every veterinarian shall report promptly to the health officer all cases of rabies in all animals treated by him in
the city, giving the name and address of the owner and owners' addresses of any animals bitten, as far as is
known.
(Code 1980, § 7-27)
Sec. 10-6. - Dogs and cats—Vaccination; penalties.
(a)
All dogs and cats within the City of North Little Rock shall be vaccinated at least once a year against rabies and
it is made the duty of all owners of dogs or cats, or persons having the possession or control of dogs or cats
within this city to have the animals vaccinated with vaccine against rabies.
(b)
Any owner of any dog or cat or any person having the care and control of any dog or cat who fails to have the
dog or cat vaccinated according to the terms of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined in any sum not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00 for each offense. Any dog or cat
termed a stray that is not vaccinated is subject to destruction.
(Ord. No. 7076, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-97)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7076, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 13, 1997 did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 10-
6 was at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 10-7. - Dogs and cats—Number owned, kept or harbored.
(a)
For the purpose of this section, an animal shall be defined as a dog or a cat.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor more than four animals which are over 12 weeks old
within the city limits. Keeping on the premises of the owner of more than four animals outside of their dwelling
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section, and the burden of proof shall be on the owner to show
the age of such animals.
(c)
This section shall not apply to:
(1)
Animal hospitals and veterinarians when such animals are kept for normal business purposes; and
(2)
Cats that are indoor pets.
(Ord. No. 7080, §§ 1—3, 11-10-97; Ord. No. 7181, § 1, 11-23-98)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
62/543
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7080, §§ 1—3, adopted November 10, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as §
10-7 was at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 10-8. - Sterilization of impounded dogs and cats.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any pound, shelter, or humane organization supported wholly or partly by public funds to
release any dog or cat which has not been sterilized to a new owner unless, except as provided in subsection (c)
of this section, a promise to spay or neuter the animal has been signed by the person acquiring the animal.
(b)
(1)
The sterilization shall be performed by the date stipulated, except that the releasing agency may grant an
extension of time not to exceed 30 days upon the request of the owner.
(2)
a.
The signed promise shall be binding, and failure to comply shall constitute a violation of this section.
b.
In such case, the animal described therein shall be returned to the releasing agency upon demand. Ownership of
the animal reverts to the releasing agency in such instance. No claim may be made by the owner to recover
expenses incurred for maintenance of the animal, including the initial procurement cost.
(c)
(1)
In any county in the state having a population of 300,000 or more persons according to the most recent federal
decennial census, it shall be unlawful for any pound, shelter, or humane organization to release to a new owner
any dog or cat over two months of age which has not been sterilized except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of
this section.
(2)
a.
An animal which in the opinion of a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of
Arkansas is medically compromised to the extent that it cannot withstand immediate sterilization may be
temporarily released pursuant to a foster care agreement until such time as it can safely be sterilized or until two
veterinarians licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Arkansas certify that is unlikely that the
animal will ever recover to the extent that it can safely be sterilized.
b.
1.
At that time, ownership of the animal may be transferred to an owner who certifies that the animal will not be
used for breeding.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
63/543
2.
An owner who violates the agreement shall be subject to the penalties set forth in subsection (d) of this section.
(d)
Violations of this section are declared to be misdemeanors punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor
more than $500.00.
(Ord. No. 7403, § 1, 10-22-01)
Secs. 10-9—10-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - DOGS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 10-36. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
At large means a dog which is not confined to the premises of the owner or within a house or other building, or
enclosed or restrained on the premises of the owner by a leash sufficiently strong to prevent the dog from
escaping and restricting the dog to the premises, or not confined by leash or confined within an automobile when
away from the premises of the owner.
Dogs means animals of all ages, both female and male, which are members of the canine or dog family.
Owner means every person owning, keeping or harboring a dog within the city.
(Code 1980, § 7-21)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 10-37. - Number limited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor more than four dogs which are over six months old
within the city, except that this provision shall not apply to proprietors of dog hospitals and veterinarians when
such dogs are kept upon the premises used by such dog hospital and veterinarians as their normal place of
business. Keeping on the premises of the owner of more than four dogs shall be prima facie evidence of
violation of this section, and the burden of proof shall be on the owner to show the age of such dogs.
(Code 1980, § 7-22)
Sec. 10-38. - Running at large prohibited.
No person owning, possessing or keeping a dog shall allow such dog to run at large within the city.
(Code 1980, § 7-23)
State law reference— Authority of city to prevent dogs from running at large and providing for the destruction
of the same, A.C.A. § 14-54-1102.
Sec. 10-39. - Citations.
The police department, the health department and animal control workers are hereby authorized to issue citations
for violations of this article.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
64/543
(Code 1980, § 7-35)
Sec. 10-40. - Barking and howling.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on his premises or under his control any dog which by loud and
frequent barking and howling shall disturb the peace and quiet of any person who may reside within reasonable
proximity of the place where such dog is kept.
(Code 1980, § 7-24)
Sec. 10-41. - Dog confinement.
(a)
Dog pens. Unless otherwise permitted under subsection d, outdoor dog pens shall be located 75 feet from any
dwelling other than the person owning or controlling the dog. There shall be at least 150 square feet in such pen
for each dog kept therein which is over six months of age.
(b)
Tethering. Unless otherwise permitted under subsections (c) and (d), it shall be unlawful for any person to tether
a dog to any inanimate object as a means of confinement.
(c)
Trolley systems. A trolley system is a method to confine a dog by tethering the dog to a cable that is no less than
ten feet in length and elevated four to seven feet off the ground in a manner that allows the tether to move freely
along the length of the cable. Unless otherwise permitted under subsection (d), it shall be unlawful for any
person to confine a dog through the use of a trolley system:
(1)
Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
(2)
That is located within 75 feet from any dwelling other than the person owning or controlling the dog or is
located in a place that allows the dog to trespass on a neighbor's property;
(3)
To which more than one dog is attached; or
(4)
In a manner that poses harm to the dog including, without limitation:
a.
The use of a collar or harness that is ill-fitting or constructed of any material other than leather or nylon;
b.
The use of a tether that exceeds 25 percent of the body weight of the dog; or
c.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
65/543
The use of a trolley system in an area that contains hazards to the dog or deprives the dog of food, water, or
shelter.
(d)
Permit. The Director of the North Little Rock Animal Shelter is hereby authorized to issue permits to allow the
confinement of a dog in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this section.
(1)
Criteria. No permit shall be issued unless the director determines that: (i) unusual circumstances warrant
confinement of the dog in this manner; (ii) the welfare of the dog will not be harmed by the confinement; and
(iii) the neighborhood will not be adversely impacted by the confinement.
(2)
Inspection. All permits issued under this subsection shall require consent to both scheduled and unscheduled
inspections of the animal and confinement area.
(3)
Revocation. The director shall revoke a permit issued under this subsection if: (i) the holder of the permit is
convicted of any offense under local, state, or federal law involving animal cruelty; or (ii) an inspection indicates
that the criteria authorizing the permit are no longer met.
(e)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit walking dogs with a hand-held leash.
(Code 1980, § 7-25; Ord. No. 7860, § 1, 9-25-06)
Sec. 10-42. - Condition of premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person keeping or harboring dogs to fail to keep the premises where such dogs are
kept free from offensive odors to the extent that such odors are disturbing to any person residing within
reasonable proximity of such premises. A diligent and systematic effort must be made to eliminate or fill any
holes on the premises to avoid said holes from holding water, urine or feces. It shall be unlawful to allow
premises where dogs are kept to become unclean by failing to diligently and systematically remove all animal
waste from the premises every 72 hours.
(Code 1980, § 7-26; Ord. No. 7513, § 1, 12-23-02)
Sec. 10-43. - Molesting dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tie to the tail of any dog a tin can or paper bag or in any other way annoy
or harass any dog upon any street, sidewalk or alley in this city.
(Code 1980, § 7-30)
Sec. 10-44. - Vicious dogs.
(a)
Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term vicious dog shall mean any member of the canine (dog)
family that:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
66/543
(1)
Has exhibited fierce or vicious behavior toward a person;
(2)
Has attacked a person or another animal with such severity as to cause physical injury or property damage; or
(3)
Is the offspring of a domestic dog and an innately wild animal. The behavior of a dog should not be considered
vicious if the dog was provoked or teased. When rendering a determination pursuant to this section, any canine
that reasonably resembles an innately wild animal shall be presumed to be the offspring of a domestic dog and
an innately wild animal; however, this presumption may be defeated by a preponderance of evidence to the
contrary. When used in this section, the term "offspring" includes animals that are separated by less than three
reproductive generations from an innately wild animal.
(b)
Initial determination. An animal control officer shall deem a canine to be a vicious dog if the animal control
officer determines that the canine satisfies the definition of a vicious dog as described in subsection (a). Upon
deeming the canine to be a vicious dog, the animal control officer shall notify the owner by hand delivery or by
mailing a notice by certified mail to the owner. The officer shall also apprehend the canine and shall not release
it until the requirements of subsection (d) have been met or until so ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(c)
Appeal of determination. Any person who has received notice that his or her canine has been deemed a vicious
dog may appeal such decision to the Director of the North Little Rock Animal Control Department. The appeal
must be made within ten days of the day the notice was made in accordance with subsection (b). Upon receiving
an appeal, the director shall schedule and hold a hearing within ten days to determine whether the initial
determination was rendered in error. The director's decision shall be considered the final decision of the city as
to whether the canine is a vicious dog. If the initial determination is not appealed or if the right to appeal is
waived, the initial determination shall be considered the final decision of the city as to whether the canine is a
vicious dog. An appeal from the decision of the director may only be made to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(d)
Release. A canine that has been apprehended pursuant to subsection (a) shall only be released by the animal
shelter if all of the following conditions have been met:
(1)
The owner has signed a written agreement that unless and until the canine is determined to no longer be a
vicious dog by the animal control department or a court of competent jurisdiction, the canine shall be controlled
in a manner consistent with this section when it is within the municipal limits of North Little Rock; and
(2)
The canine has been permanently identified by the animal control department by a unique identifying mark as a
vicious dog or the owner has signed a written agreement to have such mark affixed to the canine within 20 days
or until all appeals have expired.
The animal control department shall establish and maintain standardized forms to implement the requirements of
this subsection. No vicious dog in the possession of the animal control department shall be released to any
person other than the owner.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
67/543
(e)
Failure to retrieve. The animal control department may humanely destroy any vicious dog that is not retrieved
by the owner within five days of the day the owner is notified that a final decision has been reached deeming the
canine a vicious dog or within five days of the day that the owner is notified that the vicious dog has been
impounded, whichever is later. A canine that is found to not be a vicious dog shall be retrieved, destroyed, or
adopted in accordance with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city and the animal control department
that generally apply to all impounded dogs.
(f)
Control of vicious dogs. Vicious dogs shall be kept secure at all times. Any person who owns, possesses, keeps,
or harbors a vicious dog within the municipal limits of North Little Rock shall:
(1)
Keep the vicious dog confined within a dwelling unit or a commercial building;
(2)
Keep the vicious dog on a leash under the control of a responsible handler; or
(3)
Keep the vicious dog in a secured enclosure with a covered top and a secure bottom when outdoors and
unattended.
It is hereby declared that violations of this section are unlawful and that such violations are declared to be strict
liability offenses. Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to the penalties described in
subsection (h).
(g)
Transfer of care or ownership. No person who owns, possesses, keeps, or harbors a vicious dog shall knowingly
allow another person to own, possess, keep, or harbor the same vicious dog without first disclosing that it has
been deemed vicious, as well as the requirements associated with vicious dogs. A person who transfers
ownership of a vicious dog to another person shall notify the animal control department no later than ten days
after the transfer is made. It is hereby declared that violations of this section are unlawful. Any person who
violates this subsection shall be subject to the penalties described in subsection (h).
(h)
Violations and penalties. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined not more than $500.00. If the violation in its nature is continuous in respect to time,
the fine shall not exceed $250.00 per day. Additionally, the convicting court may, in the courts discretion, order
the vicious dog that is the subject of the offense to be destroyed.
(Code 1980, § 7-28; Ord. No. 7235, §§ 1—8, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 7281, § 1, 4-10-00; Ord. No. 7586, § 3, 9-22-03)
Sec 10-45. - Liability for dogs.
Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, or possesses a dog that attacks a person causing harm to property or body
or exhibits vicious or ferocious behavior towards a person shall be guilty of a violation. It shall be an affirmative
defense to this offense that the dog was provoked or teased. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not more than $500.00. If the violation in its nature is
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
68/543
continuous in respect to time, the fine shall not exceed $250.00 per day. Additionally, the convicting court may,
in the courts discretion, order the vicious dog that is the subject of the offense to be destroyed.
(Ord. No. 7586, § 4, 9-22-03)
Sec. 10-46. - Banning of pit bull breeds of dogs.
(a)
[Banned.] Banned pit bull breeds of dogs are banned entirely and may not be owned or kept within the city.
Banned breeds of pit bull dogs are any of the following:
(1)
American Pit Bull Terrier.
(2)
Staffordshire Bull Terrier, unless they meet the requirements of section 10-46(b).
(3)
American Staffordshire Terrier, unless they meet the requirement of section 10-46(b).
(4)
American Bull Dog.
(5)
Any dog whose sire or dam is a dog of a breed which is defined as a banned breed of dog under this section.
(6)
Any dog whose owner registers, defines, admits or otherwise identifies the dog as being of a banned breed.
(7)
Any dog conforming or substantially conforming to the breed of American Pit Bull Terrier, American
Staffordshire Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Bull Dog as defined by the United Kennel Club or
American Kennel Club.
(8)
Any dog which is of the breed commonly referred to as "pit bull" and commonly recognizable and identifiable as
such.
(b)
Exemption of registered AKC show dogs. An AKC American Staffordshire Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier
may be exempted from the ban in subsection (a) provided that the owner produces documentation showing that
the dog is a registered AKC American Staffordshire Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier show/performance dog.
The documentation to prove that a dog is an AKC American Staffordshire Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier
show dog/performance dog, must include:
(1)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
69/543
An AKC registration;
(2)
AKC three-generation pedigree;
(3)
Proof of the dog being used as a show dog once the dog reaches the age of six months; and
(4)
The first five numbers of the AKC registration tattooed on the abdomen on the upper side of the left rear leg.
The exemption provide for in the subsection will no apply to any AKC registered dog discussed above that is
found to be vicious pursuant to section 10-44.
(c)
Publication. For any breed which is banned by subsection (a) of this section, a copy of the standards of the
American Kennel Club and United Kennel Club shall be kept on file in triplicate in the city clerk's office; and
prior to the passage of any ban of such breed, the clerk shall advertise the incorporation by reference of the
standards of such breed of dog and shall state that copies of the standards will be on file for public review in the
clerk's office prior to passage of the ban of such breed.
(d)
Grandfathering. The owner of a pit bull dog will have 30 days after passage of this section to register the animal
with North Little Rock Animal Control (NLRAC) pursuant to the following criteria:
(1)
The animal was licensed prior to the effective date of this section.
(2)
The owner shall provide proof of rabies vaccination.
(3)
The owner and/or handler must be at least 21 years of age as of January 1, 2005.
(4)
The owner shall, at his/her own expense, have the animal spayed or neutered and shall present to the North Little
Rock Animal Control documentary proof from a licensed veterinarian that this sterilization has been performed.
An owner of a prohibited dog may be exempted from the spay or neuter requirement if the owner produces
documentation from a licensed veterinarian stating that a spay or neuter would put the dogs life at-risk or if the
owner produces documentation showing that the dog is a registered AKC American Staffordshire Terrier or
Staffordshire Bull Terrier show/performance dog as required by subsection (b).
(5)
The owner shall bring the animal to the North Little Rock Animal Shelter where authorized North Little Rock
Animal Control personnel shall assign a registration number to the animal and shall direct the owner to a
licensed veterinarian to cause the registration number to be tattooed on the animal (said number to be one-half
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
70/543
inch and located on the abdomen near the upper inside of the right rear leg). A dog owner shall have the option
of self-tattooing their animal in accordance with procedures established by the North Little Rock Animal Control
Director. North Little Rock Animal Control shall maintain a file containing the registration numbers and names
of the animals and the names and addresses of the owners. The owner shall notify North Little Rock Animal
Control of any change of address.
(e)
Keeping of registered pit bull dogs under subsection (d) of this section.
(1)
No owner and/or handler shall permit a registered pit bull to go outside its kennel or enclosure unless such dog is
securely leashed with a leash no longer than six feet in length. No person shall permit a pit bull dog to be kept on
a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash.
Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, or buildings without the permission of
NLRAC.
(2)
All registered pit bull dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or fenced
area, except when leashed as provided in subsection (d)(1). All structures used to confine registered pit bull dogs
must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. All structures erected
to house pit bull dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the City of North Little Rock. All
such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(3)
No pit bull dog may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to
exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the
windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from
exiting the structure.
(4)
All owners, keepers or harborers of registered pit bull dogs within the city shall display in a prominent place on
their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog". In addition, a similar sign
is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal.
(5)
All owners, keepers or harborers of registered pit bull dogs must within ten days of the incident, report the
following information in writing to the NLRAC as required hereinafter:
a.
The removal from the city or death of a registered pit bull dog.
b.
The new address of a registered pit bull dog owner should the owner move within the corporate city limits.
(6)
No person shall sell, barter or in any other way dispose of a pit bull dog registered with the city to any person
within the city unless the recipient person resides permanently in the same household and on the same premises
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
71/543
as the registered owner of such dog; provided that the registered owner of a pit bull dog may sell or otherwise
dispose of a registered dog to persons who do not reside within the city and will, therefore, remove the dog
outside the city. Upon notification to NLRAC that the dog has been sold to a person residing outside the city,
NLRAC will make a notation in its files, and the animal will no longer be allowed in the city.
(7)
There shall be an irrebuttable presumption that any dog registered within the city as a pit bull dog or any of those
breeds prohibited by the city code is, in fact, a dog subject to the requirements of this section.
(8)
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of a pit bull dog registered with the City of North Little
Rock to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this section. Any dog found to be the
subject of a violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure
to comply will result in revocation of the license of such animal, and initiation of the procedures set forth in
subsection (f) below.
(f)
Exceptions. A banned breed of dog shall not be considered owned or kept in the city if the dog is only brought
into the city to a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine located in the city for the purpose of veterinary care, as
is necessary for the completion of veterinary care or for special event dog shows sanctioned by the city.
Additionally, any dog used for law enforcement or other governmental purposes, by the police department,
military, FDA or USDA are exempt from this section. However, the dog at all times shall be subject to all
applicable restrictions by virtue of the breed of dog also being defined as a vicious animal in section 10-44
(g)
Procedure for dealing with violators. The owner or possessor of any dog found to be in violation of this
ordinance shall be guilty of a violation and be subject to punishment as provide for pursuant to NLRMC section
1-8. Additionally the Animal Shelter shall handle dogs in violation of this section as follows:
(1)
The animal will be seized by NLRAC and held for three business days for the owner to reclaim the dog with a
reclaim fee of $100.00. The owner must sign an affidavit agreeing to immediately move the animal out of North
Little Rock city limits. The animal must be marked with a NLRAC number and spayed or neutered prior to its
release to the owner.
(2)
If the animal is not reclaimed within three business days as prescribed by subsection 10-46(g)(1), it shall be
humanely destroyed by NLRAC personnel.
(3)
If the animal is found within the city limits a second time, the owner shall, upon conviction in the North Little
Rock District Court, be fined as provided for pursuant to section 1-8. Any such order of conviction shall include
seizure of the animal by NLRAC personnel to be humanely destroyed.
(h)
[Enforcement.] This section may be enforced by either the North Little Rock Animal Control or Police
Departments.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
72/543
(Ord. No. 7673, §§ 1, 2, 11-22-04; Ord. No. 7686, § 1, 12-27-04)
Secs. 10-47—10-65. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT
Sec. 10-66. - Impoundment and destruction authorized.
The animal control worker shall take into custody any dog found at large in the city and shall impound the dog
in the city animal shelter or such other place as such animal control worker may designate for the purpose of
impoundment. Such impounded dog shall be held for a period of five days, at the end of which time the dog may
be destroyed unless custody of the dog is released prior thereto as provided in this division. Provided, however,
that any such animal may be destroyed prior to the expiration of such five-day waiting period when such animal
has been seriously injured or is seriously ill and in the opinion of the city veterinarian such destruction would
eliminate needless suffering on the part of the animal and would constitute the humane solution to such animals
suffering.
(Code 1980, § 7-31)
State law reference— Impoundment and destruction of dogs found at large, A.C.A. § 14-54-1102.
Sec. 10-67. - Receipts.
(a)
The director of the city's animal shelter shall have duplicate receipts prepared and shall ensure that the animal
control workers furnish a receipt to the owners of all dogs picked up or impounded by the city's animal shelter.
(b)
The receipts to be furnished to the owners of impounded dogs shall contain the following information:
(1)
The name, address and telephone number of the dog owner.
(2)
The place and/or address where the dog was picked up.
(3)
The date and time the dog was taken into custody.
(4)
The type or breed of dog.
(5)
The sex of the dog.
(6)
The license number of the dog.
(7)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
73/543
The color and a complete description of the dog.
(8)
The nature of the violation for which the dog was picked up and impounded.
(9)
The name and signature of the animal control worker issuing the citation as well as the receipt.
(10)
The place where the dog can be recovered by its lawful or rightful owner.
(11)
The amount of the penalty and/or charges the owner must pay to recover the dog.
(12)
The date when the dog will be eligible for release from the animal shelter.
(13)
The date the dog will be disposed of provided the owner thereof does not call and recover such dog by paying all
charges.
(c)
The receipts for impounded dogs shall be numbered and prepared in duplicate; the original shall be furnished to
the owner of the animal, and the copy shall be maintained at the animal shelter for a period of not less than 90
days, after which time the duplicate receipts may be destroyed at the discretion of the director.
(d)
If the owner of the impounded dog is not at home or cannot be located at the time such animal is impounded, the
animal control worker shall post the original copy of the receipt in a conspicuous place upon the dog owner's
premises; and, in this event, the worker shall notify such owner by letter stating that the animal has been
impounded at the city's animal shelter.
(e)
Should the animal control worker be unable to determine the identity or locate the address of the impounded
animal, the execution of a receipt shall not be required.
(Code 1980, § 7-33)
Sec. 10-68. - Reclaiming impounded dogs.
(a)
Any person owning, possessing or keeping a dog which has been allowed to run at large and which has been
impounded may claim and retrieve such dog from the city animal shelter by payment of the required fee. The
burden of proof as to vaccination and licensing shall be upon the party attempting to claim the dog from the
animal control worker under this article.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
74/543
Any person claiming unvaccinated and unlicensed dogs shall, after the payment of the fee assessed in this
section, and prior to the release of the dog, sign a promise in writing to the animal control officer that such
person shall immediately have the dog vaccinated and licensed if the animal is released to him. The animal
control worker shall keep such statements in a safe place, and should such a statement be signed and the dog be
again impounded and the dog not having been vaccinated and licensed as promised, then the animal control
worker, prior to releasing such dog, shall require the established fee to be paid by the person claiming the dog,
and require another promise in writing to have the dog licensed and vaccinated before he shall release the dog to
the person claiming such dog.
(c)
If the owner of an impounded dog fails or refuses to reclaim such dog within five days after impoundment, the
city animal shelter is hereby authorized to release such dog to a person other than the owner upon the payment
of the required fees.
(Code 1980, § 7-32)
State law reference— Sterilization of impounded dogs, A.C.A. § 20-19-103.
Sec. 10-69. - Acceptance of unwanted dogs.
(a)
The animal control workers shall accept unwanted dogs from city residents upon the payment by such resident
of the required fee therefor.
(b)
All dogs accepted by the city animal shelter as provided in this section shall become the property of the city.
(Code 1980, § 7-34)
Sec. 10-70. - Fee schedule for animal shelter.
The following fee schedule shall be implemented by the city animal shelter.
(1)
Reclaiming fees:
a.
Ten dollars for all animals; plus $5.00 per day board.
b.
Reclaiming fee shall be $20.00 for each recurring offenses; plus $5.00 per day board.
(2)
Adoption fees: No adoption fees shall exist.
(3)
Relinquishment fees:
a.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
75/543
If an animal is over three months old, a $10.00 relinquishment fee is required for the first animal and $5.00 for
each additional animal over three months of age.
b.
Ten dollars per litter if less than three months old.
(4)
Board: $5.00 per day.
(5)
Private pet cremation: $75.00.
(Code 1980, § 7-9; Ord. No. 7070, § 1, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 7179, § 1, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 7215, § 4, 4-12-99; Ord.
No. 7391, § 1, 8-27-01)
Secs. 10-71—10-95. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE AND VACCINATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Rabies Control Act, A.C.A. § 20-19-301 et seq.
Sec. 10-96. - Dog or cat license required.
(a)
Any person who owns, keeps, or harbors a dog or cat in the city that is at least 16 weeks old shall obtain a city
dog or cat license on an annual basis. Any city dog or cat license issued by a city official or an authorized
veterinarian shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. No dog or cat license shall be issued for a dog
or cat unless the animal has been vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian within the past 60 days. If a
dog or cat is found without the required license the owner shall be charged with the offense of failure to license a
dog or cat.
(b)
The cost of a city dog or cat license shall be $5.00 for sterilized dogs or cats and $30.00 for unsterilized dogs or
cats. However, the cost of a city dog or cat license for an unsterilized dog or cat, who based upon a written
opinion of a duly licensed veterinarian, is not capable of being sterilized due to a serious medical risk or a
serious medical condition, shall be $5.00. In the prosecution for failure to license a dog or cat, it shall be
presumed that an unsterilized dog or cat does not have an abovementioned serious medical risk or condition.
(c)
Any person required to obtain a dog or cat license pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) above has the option, in
lieu of said annual license, to obtain a lifetime dog or cat license if their dog or cat is sterilized. To be eligible for
a lifetime license, the owner must purchase and implant an approved microchip from a qualified veterinarian.
There shall be no cost for a lifetime license for a sterilized dog or cat. It shall be the burden of the owner to
prove that a lifetime license has been obtained. Any person obtaining a lifetime animal license pursuant to this
section shall still be required to have his or her pet vaccinated pursuant to section 10-6
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
76/543
(d)
A person convicted of failure to license a dog or cat shall be punished as provided for in section 1-8 of this
Code, and the dog or cat that was not properly licensed may become the property of the North Little Rock
Animal Shelter and be made available for adoption to the public by order of the convicting court.
(Code 1980, § 7-42; Ord. No. 7210, § 1, 3-22-99; Ord. No. 7404, § 1, 10-22-01; Ord. No. 7415, § 1, 12-10-01)
State law reference— Authority of city to place a tax on dogs, A.C.A. § 14-54-1103.
Sec. 10-97. - Issuance of license.
The director of the North Little Rock Animal Shelter, or a licensed veterinarian is hereby authorized to issue a
city dog or cat license to the owners of dogs or cats provided that the owner can provide proof that the dog or cat
has been rabies vaccinated within the past 60 days. Such licenses shall be furnished by the city and any of the
abovementioned authorized issuers shall maintain a proper record and accounting of the amount of each license
issued and the date that each license was issued.
(Code 1980, § 7-43; Ord. No. 7210, §§ 1, 2, 3-22-99; Ord. No. 7404, § 2, 10-22-01)
Sec. 10-98. - Puppy litter license; dog breeder license.
(a)
Puppy litter license. Any person who resides in the city limits who owns, keeps or harbors a dog that gives birth
to a litter of puppies is hereby required to obtain a puppy litter license for the litter from the North Little Rock
Animal Shelter no later than seven days after the puppies are born. The cost of a puppy litter license shall be
$25.00 per litter. Any person who does not obtain a puppy litter license as required by this section shall be issued
a citation for failure to obtain a puppy litter license.
(b)
Dog breeder license. Any person who resides in the city limits who owns, keeps or harbors a female dog or dogs
that give(s) birth to more than one litter of puppies within a one-year period of time are hereby required to obtain
a dog breeder license from the North Little Rock Animal Shelter and an animal establishment license pursuant to
section 10-201 et seq. The cost of a dog breeder license shall be $100.00. A dog breeder license shall be valid
for one year from the date of issuance. A person who is the holder of a dog breeder license shall be exempt from
obtaining a puppy litter license for any additional litter or litters of puppies born during the period of time that
the dog breeder license is valid. Any person who does not obtain a dog breeder license as required by this
section shall be issued a citation for failure to obtain a dog breeder license.
(c)
Penalty. Any person convicted of failure to obtain a dog breeder license or a puppy litter license shall be
punished as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 7209, §§ 1, 2, 3-22-99)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7210, § 2, adopted Mar. 22, 1999, repealed the former § 10-98, which pertained to the date of issuance
and expiration of dog licenses, and derived from Code 1980, § 7-44. Ord. No. 7209, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 22,
1999, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new § 10-98 was at the editor's discretion.
Sec. 10-99. - Deposit of funds.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
77/543
(a)
All funds generated from the city's dog breeder and puppy litter licenses pursuant to section 10-98 shall be
deposited into a fund established for the city's low cost spay and neuter efforts.
(b)
Twenty dollars of every $30.00 dog or cat license purchased pursuant to section 10-96 shall be deposited into the
fund established for the city's low cost spay and neuter efforts. It is further directed that $2.00 of every $5.00 dog
or cat license purchased pursuant to section 10-96 shall be deposited into a fund established for the city's low
cost spay and neuter efforts.
(c)
The mayor shall be responsible for establishing procedures and guidelines for the utilization of the
abovementioned fund.
(Ord. No. 7215, §§ 1—3, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 7404, § 3, 10-22-01)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7210, § 2, adopted Mar. 22, 1999, repealed the former § 10-99, which pertained to the fee of a dog
license and derived from Code 1980, § 7-45. Ord. No. 7215, §§ 1—3, adopted Apr. 12, 1999, did not specifically
amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new § 10-99 was at the editor's discretion.
Secs. 10-100—10-135. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, A.C.A. § 14-54-1101.
Sec. 10-136. - Certain stables declared nuisance.
All stables within the limits of this city used for the housing of horses, mules, cattle or livestock for sale which
violate any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and menaces to the public
health.
(Code 1980, § 7-2)
Sec. 10-137. - Keeping of horses and cows.
(a)
No person shall keep any horse or cow except in an enclosed pasture containing one acre for each animal.
(b)
The keeping of horses and cows in enclosures as provided in this section within the limits of the city shall be
under the supervision and control of the city health department.
(Code 1980, § 7-1)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
78/543
Sec. 10-138. - Keeping of hogs, goats or sheep.
(a)
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to possess, maintain or keep any hogs, goats or sheep within
the limits of the city or to permit any hogs, goats or sheep to run at large within the limits of the city; except that
hogs, goats or sheep in transit may be kept for a period not to exceed 24 hours in a duly established stockyard.
(b)
The enforcement of the provisions contained in this section shall be the responsibility of the police department,
the city health officer or the city code enforcement officers.
(c)
This section does not apply to Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs. For the purpose of this section, the Vietnamese potbellied
pig is to be considered a pet and subject to any and all laws that may apply to pets, including, but not
limited to, restrictions on running at large.
(Code 1980, § 7-4.1)
Sec. 10-139. - Horses and cattle running at large.
(a)
No person owning, possessing, or keeping horses or cattle shall allow any such animal to run at large within the
city limits.
(b)
Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be punished as required in section 1-8 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 7180, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-98)
Secs. 10-140—10-165. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - FOWL
Sec. 10-166. - Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any chickens, guineas, ducks, geese or other fowl to run at large.
(Code 1980, § 7-53)
Sec. 10-167. - Permit to keep; investigation; fee.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any poultry, duck, goose, turkey, guinea, peafowl, dove or any other
fowl of any type within the city without a permit from the city clerk.
(b)
The city health officer and his authorized agents shall make an investigation to determine whether or not the
person seeking a permit under this section has met all of the requirements of this article and all other health and
sanitary ordinances of the city.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
79/543
(c)
Upon approval of the application for a permit under this section by the city health officer or his duly authorized
agent, such approval shall be presented to the city clerk, who shall issue the permit. The cost of such permit shall
be $1.00 per year and shall be paid on or before July 1 of each year.
(Code 1980, § 7-54)
Sec. 10-168. - Distance from residences.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or permit to be kept or maintained any fowl within 75
feet by air-line measurement of any residence or dwelling or place used for human habitation in the city, other
than the dwelling of the owner of the person keeping and/or maintaining such fowl.
(Code 1980, § 7-55)
Sec. 10-169. - Pens and enclosures, sanitary requirements.
(a)
Where the keeping or maintaining of fowl is permitted under this article, it shall be unlawful to so maintain
coops, pens or enclosures where fowl are kept in an insanitary manner or in such condition that odors from such
premises or enclosures thereon can be detected by persons inhabiting residences or living quarters 75 feet distant
by air-line measurement. Places so maintained are hereby declared to be sanitary nuisances.
(b)
Any person who has been authorized pursuant to this article to keep or maintain fowl shall clean the pens, coops
or other enclosures where such fowl roost or are kept each 24 hours, shall spray and disinfect such areas each
third day, and shall remove and destroy all refuse, droppings, feathers or other matter cleaned from such pens,
coops or enclosures. All droppings from such fowl shall not be left aboveground upon any premises in the city
for longer than 48 hours. Any person occupying, owning or having control of the premises where fowls are
permitted to be kept shall collect and bury under six inches of dirt or soil or remove and carry away any and all
such droppings and refuse each 48 hours.
(Code 1980, § 7-56)
Secs. 10-170—10-200. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 10-201. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Animal establishment means any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition, or
other facility engaged in the handling of animals. Licensed veterinarians, veterinary clinics and hospitals
performing only those functions that are necessary or incidental to the practice of veterinary medicine are
expressly excluded and are not intended to be considered as an animal establishment within the context of this
definition.
(Code 1980, § 7-61; Ord. No. 7814, § 1, 4-10-06)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 10-202. - Permit—Required; term; renewal; one per establishment.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
80/543
(a)
No person shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining a permit from the animal control
authority in compliance with this article, nor may any person operate an animal establishment in a manner in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
(b)
The permit period for a permit under this article shall begin with the first day of the calendar year and shall run
for one year. Renewal applications for permits shall be made 30 days prior to and up to 60 days after January 1
of each year. Application for a new establishment under the provisions of this article shall be made within 60
days of the start of business or operation.
(c)
Every facility regulated by this article shall be considered a separate enterprise, requiring an individual permit
(e.g., two kennels at different locations but owned by the same person shall be considered as two animal
establishments).
(Code 1980, § 7-62)
Sec. 10-203. - Same—Application procedure; inspection; issuance or denial.
(a)
Each animal establishment shall annually file an application for permit with the animal control authority within
the time periods provided in section 10-202(b).
(b)
The application for a permit under this article shall be made on a form provided by the animal control authority
and available from the authority or the city clerk's office.
(c)
Upon receipt of a completed application for a permit under this article, the animal control authority shall make
an inspection of the facility to ensure that all animals are provided for in a humane manner and that the
establishment is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter. The animal control authority shall be
permitted to make such inspection at any reasonable time during normal business hours.
(d)
The animal control authority shall either issue a permit to the applicant for an animal establishment or, if a
permit is not granted, the animal control authority shall notify the applicant in writing of the specific reasons for
denial.
(e)
Any animal establishment denied a permit may not reapply for a period of at least 30 days. Each reapplication
shall describe any previous denial or revocation.
(f)
If an applicant for a permit under this article is shown to have withheld or falsified any material information on
the application, the animal control authority may refuse to issue or may revoke a permit.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
81/543
(Code 1980, § 7-63)
Sec. 10-204. - Same—Revocation.
(a)
The animal control authority may revoke any animal establishment permit if the person holding the permit
refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, or any other law or regulation governing the protection and keeping
of animals, including refusal to allow inspection of the animal establishment as provided in this article.
(b)
Whenever a permit under this article is revoked for cause, or pending any proceedings to contest such action, the
animal control authority shall have power of entry to inspect all premises where the animals are being kept and
shall notify the owner in writing as to the period of time that reasonably shall be allowed for removal of animals
from such premises and shall state the specific reasons for revocation. If any such owner shall fail to remove
such animals as directed, the animal control authority may impound such animals.
(Code 1980, § 7-64)
Sec. 10-205. - Compliance with chapter.
(a)
An animal establishment shall not sell, trade or give away any dog or cat over six months of age unless the dog
or cat has been licensed and/or vaccinated as required by this chapter.
(b)
The animal control authority shall be permitted to inspect any animal establishment and all animals and the
premises where such animals are kept at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance
with all provisions of this article and the animal control code.
(Code 1980, § 7-65)
Sec. 10-206. - Standards for kennels.
All kennels shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of
this section. Failure to meet such standards shall be grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of a permit.
Standards for kennels are as follows:
(1)
Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors of
buildings, runs and walls shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting.
(2)
Building temperature shall be maintained at a comfortable level. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained.
(3)
Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the sides or top
of cages.
(4)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
82/543
Cages are to be of material and construction that permit cleaning and sanitizing.
(5)
Cage floors of concrete, unless radiantly heated, shall have a resting board or some type of bedding.
(6)
Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious
surface.
(7)
All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a sanitary condition.
(8)
The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to
meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.
(9)
All animals shall have fresh water available at all times.
(Code 1980, § 7-66)
Sec. 10-207. - Standards for private kennels.
All private kennels shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum
standards of this section. Standards for private kennels are as follows:
(1)
No person shall operate a private kennel without first obtaining an annual permit from the animal control
authority. Permits shall be based upon calendar years. Application for renewal of a permit shall be made between
30 days prior to and 60 days following January 1 of each year.
(2)
Upon receipt of a completed application, the animal control authority shall make an inspection of the facility to
ensure that all animals are provided for in a humane manner and that the private kennel is in compliance with all
provisions of this chapter.
(3)
Upon receiving a complaint concerning a private kennel, the animal control authority may make an inspection of
the facility to ensure that the facility is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
(4)
All animals shall have adequate space for proper shelter against weather extremes, and for proper exercise.
(5)
All kennel areas shall be maintained in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to adjoining
property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Kennel areas in which animals are confined or maintained
shall be cleaned regularly so that they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
83/543
residing within a reasonable distance of such premises; and the animals themselves shall be restrained in such a
fashion so that noise emanating therefrom shall not be disturbing to such persons.
(6)
Proper food of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for condition and
size of animals shall be provided.
(7)
Fresh water shall be available at all times.
(Code 1980, § 7-67)
Sec. 10-208. - Standards for pet shops.
All pet shops, including pet shops operated in conjunction with another holding facility, shall, in addition to the
other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these
standards shall be grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of a permit. Standards for pet shops are as
follows:
(1)
Water; containers. There shall be available hot water at a minimum temperature of 160 degrees for washing
cages and disinfecting, and cold water easily accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh water shall be available to
all species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day.
(2)
Room temperature. The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for every
species of animal kept in the shop.
(3)
Cages and enclosures. All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and
disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn and stretch out to
its full length.
(Code 1980, § 7-68)
Chapter 14 - AVIATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.; aviation
generally, A.C.A. § 27-114-101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 14-1—14-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT ZONING
FOOTNOTE(S):
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
84/543
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18.
State Law reference— Airport Zoning Enabling Act, A.C.A. § 14-363-201 et seq.
Sec. 14-51. - Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Airport Zoning Ordinance of North Little Rock, Arkansas.
(Ord. No. 6749, § I, 9-27-93)
Sec. 14-52. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Airport means North Little Rock Municipal Airport.
Airport elevation means 544 feet above mean sea level.
Airport manager means the person responsible for the day-to-day operations and management of the municipal
airport appointed by the municipal airport commission.
Approach surface means an imaginary plane longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline,
extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the appropriate
approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 14-54. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
Approach, transitional, horizontal and conical zones. These zones are set forth in section 14-53 of this article.
Board of adjustment means a board consisting of three members appointed by the city council.
Conical surface means an imaginary surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
Director of community planning means the person responsible for the day-to-day operations and management of
the department of community planning appointed by the mayor.
Municipal airport commission means a commission consisting of five members appointed by the mayor and
ratified by the city council to oversee the operations and management of the North Little Rock Municipal
Airport.
Nonconforming use means any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is
inconsistent with the provisions of this article or any amendment thereto.
Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having an existing or planned instrument approach procedure
utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
Obstruction means a structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting
height set forth in section 14-54.
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, public or private corporation, company, association, joint stock
association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any
of them.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
85/543
Planning commission means a commission consisting of nine members appointed by the mayor and ratified by
the city council, the general purpose of which is to prepare or have prepared a plan or plans of the municipality;
to receive and make recommendations on public and private proposals for development; to prepare and
administer planning regulations; to prepare and transmit to the legislative body recommended ordinance
implementing plans; and to advise and counsel the city government and other public bodies.
Precision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an
instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). Such term also means a runway for which
a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other
planning document.
Primary surface means an imaginary surface longitudinally centered on a runway. The primary surface extends
200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in section 14-53. The
elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline.
Runway means a paved area on the airport prepared for the landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
Structure means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without
limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines.
Transitional surfaces means imaginary surfaces extending outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline
and the extended runway centerline at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of
the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
Tree means an object of natural growth.
Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of
12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.
Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
(Ord. No. 6749, § II, 9-27-93)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-53. - Airport zones.
(a)
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which
include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surface, and conical
surface as they apply to the municipal airport. Such zones are shown on the North Little Rock Municipal Airport
Height Zoning Ordinance Plan prepared for the municipal airport commission, which is attached to the
ordinance from which this article derives and made a part hereof.
(b)
An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
(1)
Utility runway, nonprecision instrument approach zone (runways 17 and 35): The inner edge of this approach
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
86/543
uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is
the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(2)
Runway larger-than-utility, nonprecision instrument approach zone (runway 5): The inner edge of this approach
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(3)
Precision instrument runway approach zone (runway 23): The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with
the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(4)
Transitional zones: Areas beneath the transitional surfaces.
(5)
Horizontal zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for the runways
designated as utility (runways 17 and 35), and 10,000 feet radii for the runways designated as precision
instrument (runway 23) and nonprecision instrument (runway 5), measured from the center of each end of the
primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing a line tangent to these arcs. The
horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
(6)
Conical zone: The area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward for a
horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
(Ord. No. 6749, § III, 9-27-93)
Sec. 14-54. - Airport zone height limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall
be allowed to grow, in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limitation
established in this article for each of the zones as follows:
(1)
Utility runway, nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slope 20 feet outward for each foot upward, beginning
at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface, and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000
feet along the extended runway centerline.
(2)
Runway larger-than-utility, nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slope 34 feet outward for each foot upward,
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface, and extending to a horizontal distance
of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
87/543
Precision instrument runway approach zone: Slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end
of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along
the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an
additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
(4)
Transitional zones: Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward, beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 694 feet above mean sea
level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot
upward, beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they
intersect the conical surface.
(5)
Horizontal zone: One hundred fifty feet above the airport elevation, i.e., at a height of 694 feet above mean sea
level.
(6)
Conical zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward, beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone
and at 150 feet above the airport elevation, and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation, i.e.,
to a height of 894 feet above mean sea level.
(7)
Excepted height limitations: Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or
maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree, to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land.
(Ord. No. 6749, § IV, 9-27-93)
Sec. 14-55. - Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone
established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and other lights, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the
airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
(Ord. No. 6749, § V, 9-27-93)
Sec. 14-56. - Nonconforming uses.
(a)
Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the
removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of
September 27, 1993, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained in
this article shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure or alteration
which was begun prior to the effective date of this article and is diligently prosecuted.
(b)
Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, the owner of any existing
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
88/543
of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the municipal airport commission to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and
lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city.
(c)
Lowering or removal of nonconforming uses. In order to eliminate or mitigate existing hazards to landing and
taking-off at the airport, to improve and make safer the airport, and to permit public use of any obstructed
navigable airspace needed for such use, the municipal airport commission may acquire, by purchase, grant or
condemnation, such estate or interest in any structure or tree of nonconforming use for which a permit has been
granted in accordance with section 14-57(c) as is necessary to conform to the applicable height limitation
prescribed in this article. In cases of imminent danger to the health, safety and general welfare of the public, the
municipal airport commission shall take such immediate steps as are necessary to remove such danger, and a
hearing shall thereafter be held to determine what compensation, if any, should be made to the owner of the
structure or tree causing such danger.
(Ord. No. 6749, § VI, 9-27-93)
State law reference— Lawful nonconforming uses, A.C.A. § 14-363-205; permits for change or repair of
nonconforming uses, A.C.A. § 14-363-206.
Sec. 14-57. - Permits.
(a)
Future uses. Except as specifically provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection (a), no material change
shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be
planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted by the
director of community planning. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity for it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would
conform to the regulations prescribed in this article. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall
be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted unless a variance
has been approved in accordance with subsection (f) of this section.
(1)
In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any
tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land
contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such
zones.
(2)
In areas lying within the limits of the approach zone, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from
each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height
above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such
approach zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any
construction or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree, in excess of any of the height limits established
by this article except as set forth in section 14-54(6).
(b)
Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction, or
that would allow a nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
89/543
on September 27, 1993 or on the effective date of any amendments to this article or than it is when the
application for such a permit for existing uses shall be granted.
(c)
Continuance of nonconforming uses. The owner of any structure or tree which is nonconforming to the
regulations of this article on September 27, 1993 shall be granted a permit authorizing continuance of such
nonconforming use, upon application therefor made by him; provided that, if such application is not made within
90 days of such date, the department of community planning shall by appropriate action compel the owner of the
nonconforming structure or tree, at his own expense, to lower or remove such object to the extent necessary to
conform to this article.
(d)
Change and repair of nonconforming uses. Before any existing nonconforming structure or tree for which a
permit has been issued in accordance with subsection (c) of this section may be altered or repaired, rebuilt,
allowed to grow higher or replanted, a permit must be secured from the municipal planning commission
authorizing such change or repair. No such permit shall be granted that would permit the structure or tree in
question to be made higher or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was when the permit for its
continuance was granted.
(e)
Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the director of community planning determines that a
nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 50 percent torn down, physically deteriorated
or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height
limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. In all such cases of 50 percent destruction, deterioration
or decay, whether application is made for a permit for repair or not, the director of community planning shall, by
appropriate action, compel the owner of the nonconforming tree or structure, at his own expense, to lower or
remove such object to the extent necessary to conform to the applicable height limit.
(f)
Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree,
or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of
adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air
navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is
duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship, and the
relief granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this article. Additionally, no application for
variance to the requirements of this article may be considered by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to the airport manager and/or municipal airport commission for advice as to the
aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport manager and/or municipal airport commission does not
respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or
deny such application.
(g)
Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate or maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings
and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the board of adjustment, this condition may be modified to
require the owner to permit the city, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain the necessary markings
and lights.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
90/543
(h)
Notice of hearing of applications for permits and variances; introduction of evidence. In all cases of applications
for permits and variances as provided for in this section, a public notice shall be published, in the manner
prescribed by law for publication of legal notices, of a public hearing upon the application in question; a public
hearing shall be held at which any person having an interest in the proceedings shall have an opportunity to offer
evidence for or in opposition to the application in question; and written findings of fact and conclusions of law
shall be made by the municipal planning commission, based upon the evidence offered at the public hearing.
(Ord. No. 6749, § VII, 9-27-93)
State law reference— Permits and variances, A.C.A. § 14-363-206.
Sec. 14-58. - Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the director of community planning to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in
this article. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the director of community planning upon a
form published for that purpose. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the director of
community planning shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for action by the board of
adjustment shall be forthwith submitted by the director of community planning. A copy of each application for
permits and variances and each permit and variance granted shall be furnished to the airport manager and/or
municipal airport commission by the director of community planning.
(Ord. No. 6749, § VIII, 9-27-93)
Sec. 14-59. - Board of adjustment.
(a)
There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
(1)
To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the director of
community planning in the enforcement of this article;
(2)
To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which the board of adjustment under such
regulations may be required to pass; and
(3)
To hear and decide specific variances.
(b)
The board of adjustment shall consist of three members appointed by the city council, and each shall serve for a
term of three years until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first appointed, one shall
be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, and one for a term of three years. Members
shall be removable by the appointing authority for cause, upon written charges, after a public hearing.
(c)
The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions of this article.
Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
91/543
board of adjustment may determine. The chairperson, or in the absence of the chairperson, the acting
chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of
adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of
its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the city clerk
and due cause shown.
(d)
The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which
it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any order, requirement,
decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article.
(e)
The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of the director of community planning, or decide in favor of the
applicant, on any matter which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect variation to this article.
(Ord. No. 6749, § IX, 9-27-93)
State law reference— Authority for board of adjustment, A.C.A. § 14-363-205.
Sec. 14-60. - Appeals.
(a)
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the director of community planning made in
the administration of this article, may appeal to the board of adjustment.
(b)
All appeals under this article must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of
adjustment, by filing with the director of community planning a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
The director of community planning shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(c)
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the director of community
planning certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of
the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the director of community planning cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of
adjustment on notice to the director of community planning and on due cause shown.
(d)
The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the
parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney.
(e)
The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in
part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
92/543
(Ord. No. 6749, § X, 9-27-93)
Sec. 14-61. - Judicial review.
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may, within 30 days
thereof, appeal therefrom to the circuit court of the county, as provided in A.C.A. § 14-363-208.
(Ord. No. 6749, § XI, 9-27-93)
State law reference— Judicial review of airport zoning regulations, A.C.A. § 14-363-208.
Sec. 14-62. - Violations; penalties.
Each violation of this article or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated under this article shall constitute a
misdemeanor. In addition, the planning commission may institute, in any court of competent jurisdiction, an
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of the regulations of this
article, or any order or ruling made in connection with its administration or enforcement, and the court shall
adjudge then to the plaintiff such relief, by way of injunction (which may be mandatory) or otherwise as may be
proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case, in order to fully carry out and effectuate the purposes of
this article and the orders and rulings made pursuant to the authority herein given.
(Ord. No. 6749, § XII, 9-27-93)
State law reference— Penalties and injunctive relief authorized, A.C.A. § 14-363-203.
Sec. 14-63. - Conflicting regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other
regulation applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees
and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. No. 6749, § XIII, 9-27-93)
Secs. 14-64—14-95. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7343, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2001, repealed §§ 14-96, 14-97, 14-99—14-102, 14-136—
14-142, 14-166—14-169, 14-191—14-194, 14-231—14-235, 14-256—14-264, 14-286—14-302, and 14-336—
14-338 of Art. III which pertained to regulations for the municipal airport and derived from Code 1980, §§ 8-51
—85-56, 8-61—8-66, 8-71—8-74, 8-81—8-84, 8-91—8-95, 8-101—8-103, 8-111—8-119, 8-121—8-123, 8-
127, 8-150—8-157, 8-159—8-162, and Ord. No. 6783, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 1994.
Secs. 14-96, 14-97. - Reserved.
Sec. 14-98. - Airport commission created.
There is hereby created an airport commission for the purpose of operating and managing the airport for the city,
its related properties and facilities.
(Code 1980, § 8-16)
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies, § 2-486 et seq.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
93/543
State law reference— Airport commission authorized, A.C.A. § 14-359-103.
Secs. 14-99—14-338. - Reserved.
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Community planning department, § 2-327; airport zoning, § 14-51 et seq.; housing code, §
18-401 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 46-81 et seq.; flood damage prevention, § 50-36 et seq.
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.; authority to
regulate construction generally, A.C.A. § 14-56-201 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. - Dangerous fences.
(a)
Except as provided in subsection (b), barbed wire fences, electrically charged fences, and fences to which there
is affixed or placed in any manner any spike, nail, or any pointed instrument of any kind or description shall be
prohibited within the city.
(b)
Barbed wire, vertical or inclined inward to the property, may be permitted on top of fences six feet in height
above ground level. Barbed wire on top of fences 6½ feet or more above ground level may be vertical or
inclined inward or outward of the fence or mounted on A or Y arms.
(Code 1980, § 9-2)
Sec. 18-2. - Fee schedule.
The following are hereby established as permit fee schedules for building, electrical, plumbing and other related
work in the city:
(a)
Commercial and industrial building permit fees (Act 474 surcharge added $.50/1000 value):
(1)
Permit fees:
Total Valuation Fee
$100.00 and less No fee, unless inspection required, in which case A
$15.00 fee for each inspection shall be charged
$101.00 to $50,000 $30.00 for the first $500.00 up to $2000.00 plus $3.25
for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000 $162.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $2.75 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $100,000.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
94/543
$100,001.00 to $500,000 $274.50 for the first $100,000 plus $2.25 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $500,000
$500,000.00 and up $974.50 for the first $500,000 plus $1.75 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof.
(2)
Plan review fee. When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds $500.00 and a plan is required to be
submitted by 103.2 of the 1992 Arkansas Fire Prevention Code, Vol. II, a plan review fee shall be paid to the
building official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Said plan review fee shall be
equal to one-fourth of the building permit fee as set forth in 103.7.4, of the 1992 Arkansas Fire Prevention Code,
Vol. II. Minimum fees shall be $50.00 for new construction (added square feet) and $30.00 for repair, remodels
and miscellaneous permits requiring plan review. Such plan review fee is in addition to the building permit fee
and is nonrefundable.
(3)
House moving fees .....$50.00
Inspection fee if it is inside the city limits .....30.00
Inspection fee if outside city limits .....50.00
(4)
Demolition of structure .....25.00
Accessory building .....10.00
(5)
Blasting fee. In addition to insurance and bond as required in Ordinance 6328, section 5, a permit fee of $30.00
per day shall be paid.
(6)
Parking lot fees (impervious surface), per square foot .....0.03
(7)
Tent permit. Flat fee of $30.00 upon proper completion of fire department approval form.
(8)
Swimming pools (no charge up to 4,000 gallons) .....40.00
(9)
Fuel tanks and pumps:
Each (new or replacement) .....40.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
95/543
(10)
Miscellaneous permit fees:
New towers from ground up, per foot .....25.00
Fences and retaining walls .....25.00
Satellite dishes, co-located towers, cell cites, fire alarm systems and any other miscellaneous permit, unless
previously outlined, shall be set forth in the unit cost schedules set out in subsection (a)(1) above.
(11)
Reinspection fee. A reinspection fee of $25.00 will be charged when an additional trip is made by an inspector
due to rejections, lockouts, insufficient information as to location of building or structure, work not ready for
inspection, or any other cause due to neglect or failure on the part of the applicant.
(12)
Penalties (working without a permit). Where work for which a permit is required by the 1992 Arkansas Fire
Prevention Code, Vol. II is started or proceeded prior to obtaining said permit, the fee herein specified shall be
tripled, but the payment of such triple fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the
requirements of the 1992 Arkansas Fire Prevention Code, Vol. II in the execution of the work nor from any other
penalties prescribed herein.
(13)
Copy fees:
Duplicate permit cards (lost, stolen, misplaced, etc,), per card .....5.00
Copier fees:
Per copy for first 25 .....0.50
Per copy for additional copies .....0.25
Duplicate copy of certificate of occupancy .....10.00
(14)
Board of appeals applications (building or electrical). A flat fee of $75.00 shall be included with each board of
adjustments or housing and building application.
(15)
Expiration of permits. All permits issued by the building official shall expire one year from the date of issuance
or as restricted by the Building Code.
Extensions of up to 90 days after the expiration date may be granted for each permit. The request for extension
must be in writing to the building official and must show just cause. A fee of $30.00 shall be assessed for each
90-day extension.
(16)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
96/543
A permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for a one-time extension, provided he can show good
satisfactory reason, and beyond his control the work cannot be commenced within the six-month period from the
issue date. In order to renew work on a permit after it has expired, the permittee shall pay a fee in accordance
with subsection (a)(2) above. Permittee shall pay a new, full permit fee in cases of change in contractor.
(b)
Residential building permit fees.
(1)
Permit fees:
Total Valuation Fee
$100.00 and less No fee, unless inspection required in which case a
$15.00 fee for each inspection shall be charged
$101.00 to $50,000.00 $30.00 for the first $500 up to $2,000 plus $2.75 for
each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $162.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $2.25 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $100,000.00.
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $274.50 for the first $100,000.00 plus $2.25 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 and up $974.50 for the first $500,000.00 plus $1.75 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof.
(2)
Demolition of structure .....25.00
(3)
Swimming pools (no charge up to 4,000 gallons) .....40.00
(4)
Fences .....15.00
(5)
Reinspection fee. A reinspection fee of $25.00 will be charged when an additional trip is made by an inspector
due to rejections, lockouts, insufficient information as to location of building or structure, work not ready for
inspection, or any other cause due to neglect or failure on the part of the applicant.
(6)
Penalties (working without a permit). Where work for which a permit is required by the 1992 Arkansas Fire
Prevention Code, Vol. II is started or proceeded prior to obtaining said permit, the fee herein specified shall be
tripled, but the payment of such triple fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
97/543
requirements of the 1992 Arkansas Fire Prevention Code, Vol. II in the execution of the work nor from any other
penalties prescribed herein.
(7)
Copy fees:
Duplicate permit cards (lost, stolen, misplaced, etc.), per card .....5.00
Copier fees:
Per copy for the first 25 .....0.50
Per copy for additional copies .....0.25
Duplicate copy of certificate of occupancy .....10.00
(8)
Board of adjustment applications (building or electrical). A flat fee of $75.00 shall be included with each board
of adjustments or housing and building application.
(9)
Expiration of permits:
a.
All permits issued by the building official shall expire one year from the date of issuance or as restricted by the
Building Code. Extensions of up to 90 days after the expiration date may be granted for each permit. The request
for extension must be in writing to the building official and must show just cause. A fee of $30.00 shall be
assessed for each 90-day extension.
b.
A permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for a one-time extension, provided he can show good and
satisfactory reason, and beyond his control the work cannot be commenced within the six-month period from the
issue date. In order to renew work on a permit after it has expired, the permittee shall pay a fee in accordance
with subsection (3) above. Permittee shall pay a new, full permit fee in cases of change in contractor.
(c)
Electrical permit fees.
(1)
New construction:
One and two family dwellings, per square foot under roof .....0.05
All other occupancies .....As set forth in the unit cost schedules in subsection (b)(3) above.
(2)
Repair/addition to existing construction: As set forth in the unit cost schedules in subsection (b)(3) above.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
98/543
Various fees:
Meter loops:
First .....12.00
Additional .....6.00
Load centers (regardless of voltage):
Up to 60 amp .....7.00
Up to 100 amp .....14.00
Up to 150 amp .....22.00
Up to 200 amp .....30.00
Over 200, per 100 amp over 200 amp .....4.50
Openings:
One to ten .....5.50
11 to 20 .....10.00
21 to 40 .....17.50
41 to 60 .....22.50
61 to 80 .....26.50
81 to 100 .....28.50
101 to 200 .....46.00
201 to 300 .....58.00
301 to 400 .....66.50
Over 400, for each 25 over 400 .....4.00
Motor and generator wiring:
One-eighths to one H.P. or K.W. .....4.00
Two to four H.P. or K.W. .....7.00
Five to ten H.P. or K.W. .....10.50
11 to 15 H.P. or K.W. .....13.50
16 to 20 H.P. or K.W. .....16.50
21 or over H.P. or K.W. .....20.00
Fraction horsepower motors can be grouped for their total horsepower and paid for as one unit.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
99/543
Temporary construction meter .....15.00
Temporary power to building .....18.00
Outside electrical signs .....15.00
Electrical window signs .....15.00
Neon borders, window or outside .....15.00
Sign boards, regular permit .....5.50
Rectifiers .....13.50
Smoke detectors, each .....4.00
For inspection purposes smoke detectors may be grouped in a ratio of five detectors to one inspection provided
that all detectors are ready for inspection at the same time and are located in the same structure.
Motion picture machines .....12.00
Electric stoves, ranges, dryers, water heaters .....12.00
X-ray machines .....12.00
Vent hoods/bath fan/exhaust fan .....4.00
Dishwashers/trash compactors .....4.00
Disposals/ceiling fans .....4.00
Electric heat:
One to 15 K.W. .....5.50
16 to 25 K.W. .....9.50
Special circuits such as window air conditioners:
20 to 30 amp .....6.50
30 to 60 amp .....8.50
Special equipment per 1,000 watts .....3.00
Festoon or temporary decorative lights:
Outdoor sales and display lights:
Meter loop .....12.00
Each circuit .....12.00
Each 50 Lamps .....3.00
Inspections (each) .....15.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
100/543
As per conditions of subsection (a)(9) above .....20.00
Reinspections (each) .....25.00
As per conditions of subsection (a)(10) above .....15.00
(4)
Examinations:
Renewal fee:
Master electrician .....35.00
Journeyman electrician .....20.00
Specialist refrigeration electrician .....15.00
Supervising air conditioning electrician .....15.00
Air conditioning electrician .....15.00
Air conditioning maintenance electrician .....15.00
Specialist sign electrician .....15.00
Maintenance electrician .....15.00
Examination:
Supervising air conditioning electrician .....30.00
Air conditioning electrician .....25.00
Air conditioning maintenance electrician .....25.00
Specialist sign electrician .....25.00
Homeowner:
Examination fee .....25.00
(5)
Temporary power requirements. Before any power is supplied to the permanent distribution system of a building
under construction, written notice must be submitted to this office noting the length of time the temporary power
will be needed before the final electrical inspection is made, the understanding that the structure will not be
occupied until after the final inspection, and that the party submitting the request will assume liability of any
damage incurred as a result of disconnection of power from the building as a result of a violation of this
ordinance. The time limit on temporary power being furnished to the building will be determined on the basis of
need, not to exceed 30 days. An extension of time may be granted only by special permission.
(6)
Expiration of permits as per conditions of subsection (a)(22) above.
(7)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
101/543
Minimum permit shall be $30.00.
(8)
Work with no permit. In case it shall be discovered that any electrical work has been installed or put into use for
which no permit has been issued, the violator shall pay a fee equal to three times the permit fee which shall have
been paid for work done in violation thereof and no additional permits shall be granted until all fees have been
paid.
(d)
Plumbing permit fees.
(1)
New construction:
One- and two-family dwellings, per square foot under roof .....0.05
All other occupancies .....As set forth in the unit cost schedules in subsection (2) below
(2)
Repair/alterations/addition to existing construction:
Unit costs, each plumbing fixture outlet or appliance .....4.00
Shall include each water closet, urinal, bidet, sink, lavatory, basin, laundry sink, wash tray, dishwasher, garbage
disposal, ice maker, beer or soda fountain, bath tub, hot tub, shower, sauna, drinking fountain, wet bar, washing
machine, hose cabinet or hose rack, fire pump, sewer ejector, cooling tower, sill cock, dental unit, hub drain,
floor, area or roof drain, sand trap, grease trap, sump pump or any other plumbing element commonly known as
plumbing fixture.
Water service .....25.00
Lawn sprinkler service .....25.00
Water house piping .....12.00
Swimming and wading pools .....12.00
Renewal of soil, waste or vent lines (each branch or stack) .....5.50
Gas service (up to five meter openings) .....15.00
Gas house piping (up to five openings) .....15.00
Each additional opening .....3.00
Each gas-fired appliance .....13.00
Shall include each water heater, floor furnace, unit heater, vented wall furnace, commercial clothes dryer,
commercial range or oven, or other gas fired appliance not specifically mentioned excluding portable heating
stoves and space heaters
Domestic gas-fired appliance—Ranges, clothes dryer .....3.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
102/543
Renewal of gas-fired appliance vent .....5.00
Inspections (each) .....15.00
Reinspections (each), as per conditions of subsection (a)(16) above .....25.00
Investigative inspections (each), as per conditions of subsection (a)(14) above .....30.00
(3)
Expiration of permits as per conditions of subsection (a)(22) above.
(4)
Work located out of city limits shall be charged a surcharge of 50 percent of total permit charge.
(5)
Minimum fee for any permit shall be $30.00
(6)
Work with no permit. The penalty for failure to obtain a permit for work as called for in this Code shall be as
described in the penalty section of this Code, and in addition to any such fine or imprisonment as may be
imposed pursuant to said penalty section, the violator shall pay a fee equal to three times the permit fee which
shall have been paid for work done in violation hereof.
(e)
Heating/air mechanical permit fees.
(1)
New construction:
One- and two-family dwelling, per square foot .....0.05
All other occupancies .....As set forth in the cost schedules in subsection (2) below.
(2)
New commercial, replacements, repairs, alterations and additions.
Heating, ventilating, ductwork, air conditioning, boilers, and refrigeration systems shall be $30.00 for the first
$500.00 up to $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, of valuation of the installation plus $3.00 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof. (Boiler permits only issued with proof of special boiler license.)
Inspections (each) .....15.00
Reinspections (each) .....25.00
Investigative inspections (each) .....30.00
(3)
Minimum fee for any permit shall be $30.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
103/543
(4)
Expiration of permits as per condition of subsection (a)(22) above.
(5)
Penalties (working without a permit). Where work for which a permit is required by the 1991 Arkansas
Mechanical Code is started or proceeded prior to obtaining said permit, the fee herein specified shall be tripled;
however, payment of such triple fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of
the 1991 Arkansas Mechanical Code in the execution of the work nor from any penalties prescribed herein and
no additional permits shall be granted until all fees have been paid.
(f)
Minor repairs made by owner exempted.
(1)
No building, electrical, or plumbing permits shall be required for home repairs per existing housing structure
which occur within a 90-day period, when such repairs cost less than $2,500.00 and are repaired by the owner of
the structure. This provision shall apply to all homes regardless of whether or not they are homeowner occupied.
This provision of the Code is not meant to exempt any person from complying with state law.
(2)
However, a permit is still required for licensed bonded electrical contractors who must perform all work other
than branch circuits.
(g)
Special permit fees. All residential building, electrical and plumbing fees in the designated target area as
represented by Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 7421 shall be reduced by 75 percent of the permit fees
outlined in Ordinance No. 7240 when residential use shall compose more than 50 percent of the building.
(h)
Historic districts. The permit fees listed in this section shall not apply to work that is performed within any area
of the city designated as a local historic district.
(Ord. No. 7240, § 1, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 7299, § 1, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 7421, § 1, 12-26-01; Ord. No. 7568, § 1, 7-
28-03)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7240, § 1, adopted Aug. 23, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new § 18-
2 was at the editor's discretion.
Sec. 18-3. - Application requirements for residential permits.
(a)
Building permit required. No person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or any other organization of any
kind or character whatsoever shall build, construct, or erect any residence, as that term is defined herein, nor
remodel or construct, build, or erect any addition, as that term is defined herein, to any such residence without
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
104/543
first obtaining a building permit for such construction, building, erection, remodeling project or addition, as set
forth herein.
(b)
Definitions. As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Addition or remodel means any construction involving substantial changes, improvements, repairs or additions
to a residence.
Homebuilder means any person who in the pursuit of an independent business, undertakes to, or offers to
undertake, or submits a bid to, or contracts or undertakes to contract, or assumes charge, in a supervisory
capacity or otherwise, or manages the construction of a private residence on behalf of another person, or who, to
do similar work upon his own property with the intent to resell the private residence, employs members of one
or more building trades upon a single job or project or under a single building permit.
Person means any natural person, limited or general partnership, association, corporation or other organization
or entity, or any combination thereof.
Property owner means any person who assumes the responsibility of homebuilders for the purpose of
constructing their own personal single-family detached residence with the expressed intent of occupying said
structure.
Residence means any dwelling from one to four units in design, intended principally for residential purposes.
(c)
Applications for permit to include residential building contractor's license.
(1)
Homebuilders applying to the community planning department for the issuance of a building permit for the
construction of a residence, or for the construction of an addition or a remodeling project, with a value of
$20,000.00 or greater, shall include a copy of their current residential building contractor's license issued by the
state contractor's licensing board pursuant to the provisions of the Arkansas State Residential Licensing Law Act
950 of 1999 (A.C.A. § 17-25-501), as the same may be amended from time to time, together with the statement
of the applicant that the said license is currently in full force and effect.
(2)
A property owner who acts as a residential building contractor for the purpose of constructing his own personal
residence need not submit proof of a residential building contractor's license, provided that this person does not
construct more than one residence per calendar year.
(d)
Application for permit to include certificate of insurance.
(1)
All applications to the community planning department for the issuance of a building permit for the construction
of a residence, or for the construction of an addition or a remodeling project, with a value of $20,000.00 or
greater, shall include a certificate issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Arkansas that the applicant has procured and has in effect public liability and property damage insurance
covering the applicant's homebuilding operations in the sum of not less than $20,000.00 for injury or damage to
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
105/543
property and $50,000.00 for injury and damage, including death to any one person, and $100,000.00 for injury
or damage, including death to more than one person.
(2)
All applications to the community planning department for the issuance of a building permit for the construction
of a residence, or for the construction of an addition or a remodeling project requiring a permit, shall provide a
surety bond in the amount of $10,000.00 to the City of North Little Rock.
(Ord. No. 7383, § 1, 8-13-01)
Sec. 18-4. - Residential design standards.
(a)
Minimal single-family and duplex appearance standards.
(1)
The front door shall be located on the front third of the house.
(2)
New homes shall maintain a minimal dimension such that no elevation, the entire side view of a structure, is less
than 20 feet in width.
(3)
Roofs of single-family and duplex structures shall include a minimum 4:12 pitch with a minimum 12-inch eave,
excluding gutters. The eave is measured from the structure wall to the outside drip edge. This restriction does
not apply to manufactured homes in legally permitted zones.
(4)
The siding of homes shall be of customary design and materials, including exterior grade plywood panel,
hardboard, lumber, cedar shingles, other wood, vinyl, aluminum, steel, or masonry siding materials to be
consistent with the character of existing neighborhoods. Vertical ribbed or corrugated steel siding shall not be
allowed.
(5)
The foundation of homes shall be solid and continuous around the perimeter of the primary structure.
(6)
All elevations shall include windows, doors and other openings to present human scale and to be in keeping with
the residential character.
(b)
Site development features.
(1)
No more than 50 percent of the front yard shall be impervious or paved surfaces.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
106/543
Front yard driveway paving shall be of concrete or other solid masonry materials. Properties greater than one
acre in size may use asphalt with the first 50 feet of the drive being concrete. Gravel is not an approved
driveway material.
(3)
Decks over three feet in height shall be considered part of the primary structure and constrained by established
building line setbacks.
(4)
Retaining walls with hillside cuts shall meet established standards and procedures for approval as found in the
control of development and subdivision regulations.
(5)
The allowable height of a retaining wall is three and one-half feet in front and side yards and five feet in rear
yards. Rear yard retaining walls greater than three and one-half feet in height shall require a three-foot fence and
the combination of retaining wall and fence shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(c)
Residential accessory structure standards.
(1)
The size of accessory structures shall be no more than half that of the primary structures with a maximum of 850
square feet for lots below 10,000 square feet in size.
(2)
The pitch of accessory roofs shall be on a 2:12 or greater pitch.
(d)
[Apply to single-family and duplexes.] These residential design and appearance standards shall apply only to
single-family and duplex in residentially zoned areas, the exception as listed insubsection (a)(3), and shall serve
as an addition to the standards presently listed in the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 7672, §§ 1—4, 11-22-04)
Editor's note—
Ordinance No. 7672, §§ 1—4, adopted November 22, 2004 did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such
ordinance has been added as a new section 18-4 at the editor's discretion.
Secs. 18-5—18-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 18-36. - Standard Building Code adopted.
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration,
removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures,
including permits and penalties, a building code known as the Standard Building Code, 1988 edition, as
published by Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., save and except such portions as are in this
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
107/543
article deleted, modified or amended, of which not less than three copies have been and are now filed in the
office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this
article, and shall be controlling within the city
(Code 1980, § 9-16)
Cross reference— Amendment to code, § 18-479(c)
State law reference— Adoption of technical codes by reference authorized, A.C.A. § 14-55-207.
Sec. 18-37. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ordinance No. 7700, § 1, adopted March 28, 2005, repealed § 18-37, which pertained to fire districts and
derived from § 9-17 of the 1980 Code.
Sec. 18-38. - Special provisions for permits where property to be acquired by public agency.
(a)
No building permit shall be issued authorizing repair, construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building
or structure proposed to be or lying within the bounds of proposed public facilities, such as streets, schools,
highways, fire stations and other public buildings and areas which have been reserved for acquisition by a public
body or agency. Such reservation shall be indicated on the appropriate section of the municipal plan as is now or
may hereafter be in full force and effect. Nothing in this section shall apply to emergency repairs.
(b)
Upon application by any person for a building permit for a building or structure located or to be located within
the bounds of a proposed public facility as described in subsection (a), the director of community planning shall
deny the permit, notifying the applicant of the reason for denial; and the director shall, within seven days, notify
the public agency or body responsible for acquisition of the land in question of his action denying the building
permit.
(c)
The director shall issue the building permit as originally applied for if the public agency responsible for
acquisition of the property has not purchased, optioned or condemned the land within 90 days of the receipt of
notice from the director.
(Code 1980, § 9-18)
Sec. 18-39. - Amendments.
The Standard Building Code adopted by the provisions of this article is hereby amended in the following
respects:
Section 107.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
On all buildings, structures, alterations or work requiring a building permit, fees shall be paid as required at the
time of filing an application, in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) New construction type: Rate per square
foot
gross area
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
108/543
Single-family residence and duplex units (including carports, garages and
basements) .....
$ 0.02
Multiunit apartment buildings (including carports, garages and
basements) .....
0.03
Commercial and industrial buildings ..... 0.03
Institutional buildings ..... 0.03
Covered walkways, roofed patios, canopies and sheds ..... 0.01
Churches and schools ..... no charge
(2)
Additions and repairs to existing construction:
Cost of additional repairs Residential Commercial and
industrial
$50.00 or less no charge no charge
Over $50.00 to and including $1,000.00 $6.00 $10.00
Each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof 5.00 5.00
(3)
Demolition of buildings and structures:
Rate per
structure
Small storage building, garage or shed ..... $ 5.00
Residential, commercial and industrial buildings ..... 15.00
(4) Miscellaneous installations:
Underground tank—New or replacement ..... 12.50
Fuel pump—New or replacement ..... 7.50
Elevator—Passenger or freight ..... 15.00
Fences and retaining walls:
Residential ..... 15.00
Commercial ..... 25.00
(5) Other work. Buildings, structures, alterations and repairs for
residential, commercial or industrial not specifically covered
by the above schedule of fees shall be charged at the
following rates based on total construction costs:
a. One thousand dollars or less ..... 5.00
b. For a valuation over $1,000.00 up to and including
$15,000.00, the fee shall be $3.00 per $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
109/543
c. For valuation over $15,000.00 up to and including
$100,000.00, the fee shall be $45.00 for the first
$15,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof.
d. For a valuation over $100,000.00 up to and including
$500,000.00, the fee shall be $215.00 for the first
$100,000.00 plus $1.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof.
e. For a valuation over $500,000.00 up to and including
$1,000,000.00, the fee shall be $615.00 for the first
$500,000.00 plus $0.40 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof.
f. For a valuation over $1,000,000.00, the fee shall be
$815.00 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $0.15 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
(6) Inspection fee. Applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by an inspection fee calculated at the rate of
$0.04 per square foot (gross area covered by roof). Building
permits for repair, remodeling or other work shall be
accompanied by an inspection fee calculated on the basis of
$11.25 for the first $1,000.00 of cost, plus $6.00 for each
additional $1,000.00 of cost or fraction thereof.
(7) Measurement of area. The gross area under roof, canopy or
cover shall be the area charged for on square foot rate and
shall be measured to the outside dimensions of walls or
supports. Total area is to be shown on all building plans
submitted. Example: A 20-foot by 50-foot building under
roof measured out to out of walls shall contain 1,000 square
feet. A two-story building of the same dimensions shall
contain 2,000 square feet.
The board of adjustments and appeals referred to in section
113 of the Standard Building Code shall be known as the
building board of adjustments.
(8) Building moving fees:
Moving of buildings or structures that are up to ten feet in
width on city streets .....
no charge
Moving of buildings or structures that are ten feet in width or
larger on city streets .....
25.00
Inspection fee for inspection of buildings to be relocated
within the corporate limits .....
10.00
Inspection fee for inspection of buildings to be moved from
outside the corporate limits to within the corporate limits .....
25.00
(9) Reinspection fee. A reinspection fee of $5.00 will be charged
when an additional trip is made by the building inspector, due
to rejections, lockouts, insufficient information as to location
of building or structure, work not ready for inspection, or any
other cause due to negligence or failure on the part of the
applicant.
(10) Impervious surface permit fee. A fee of $0.03 per square foot
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
110/543
gross area will be charged when the applicant for a building
permit seeks to construct an impervious pavement surface.
This fee shall be applicable to R-3, R-4, R-5 over 2,000
square feet, and all commercial and industrial zones.
(Code 1980, § 9-19; Ord. No. 6938, § 1, 11-27-95)
Sec. 18-40. - Rehabilitation permits for buildings or houses condemned by city council.
(a)
No rehabilitation permit shall be issued without city council approval for any building or house that has been
condemned by city council, pursuant to Ark. Code Ann. § 14-56-203. This prohibition only applies to structures
condemned after the adoption of this section.
(b)
This section does not affect any existing city regulations regarding the need to obtain demolition permits.
(Code 1980, § 9-20; Ord. No. 7103, § 1, 3-9-98)
Cross reference— Condemned buildings, § 18-466 et seq.
State law reference— Authority to order the removal or razing of buildings, A.C.A. § 14-56-203.
Sec. 18-41. - Certificate of registration required with application for residential construction permit.
(a)
Applications to the director of community planning for the issuance under this article of a permit for
construction of a dwelling for one or more units in design, intended principally for residential purposes, shall
include a copy of such applicant's certificate of registration issued by the secretary of state pursuant to the
provisions of the Arkansas Homebuilders Registration Act (A.C.A. § 17-47-101 et seq.), as amended from time
to time, and a statement by such applicant that such certificate of registration is in full force and effect.
(b)
The requirements of this section shall be deemed to be independent of the requirements of any other ordinance
for the issuance of permits for such construction.
(Code 1980, § 9-6)
Sec. 18-42. - Privilege license required.
(a)
Information required. Any person who shall make application for a building permit from the city shall be
required to submit the following information to the city clerk:
(1)
The name of the person's builder, contractor, subcontractor, planner or any other pertinent subordinate; and
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
111/543
The privilege license tax number for such builder, contractor, subcontractor, planner or subordinate.
(b)
Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any persons not required by city ordinance or
resolution to pay a privilege license tax in connection with the construction of any building or structure within
the city.
(Code 1980, § 9-3)
Sec. 18-43. - City council approval of certain building plans required.
(a)
The city council wishes to give due consideration to the plans, drawings and specifications of all proposed
buildings to be constructed on any city or community development owned property.
(b)
Any plans, drawings and specifications of any building to be constructed on any city or community development
owned property shall be submitted for approval to the city councilmembers. No building permit shall issue for
any of such lands before approval of the plans, drawings and specifications is given by the city council.
(c)
If any purchaser of any city or community development owned property fails to substantially begin construction
within six months after the date of the deed, the sale shall be rescinded and the land shall revert to the city.
(Code 1980, § 9-4)
Sec. 18-44. - Application fee to board of adjustment; exemption.
Applications to the board of adjustment shall be accompanied by a fee of $75.00. Such fee shall not be assessed
against churches, schools and other charitable organizations in instances in which the general contractor
providing the services described by the application is not charging for its services.
(Code 1980, § 9-7)
Secs. 18-45—18-65. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR EXTERIOR REPAIRS
Sec. 18-66. - Work and material list; compliance with ordinance.
The building official shall issue no building permits for repair, remodeling or siding work unless the director of
community planning or his authorized deputy is furnished with a work and material list for the proposed project
and it is determined by them that such work and materials will, when completed, comply with all ordinances of
the city.
(Code 1980, § 9-26)
Sec. 18-67. - Repairs to substandard structure; conditions to be corrected before certain permits issue.
When exterior repairs are contemplated to a rehabitable but substandard structure and where such work only
partially rehabilitates, while the structure remains substandard after the completion of the work, the building
must first be found to be structurally sound by the director of community planning and any and all of the
following conditions shall be corrected before a permit will be issued for any siding work:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
112/543
(1)
Foundation shall be repaired when there are indications of uneven settlement, cracked foundations or out of
plumb corners.
(2)
Curtain walls of masonry material shall be installed if needed with adequate vents provided for the crawl space.
(3)
All joints shall be adequately caulked or flashed.
(4)
Appropriate methods of termite and decay protection shall be used and all wood showing indications of decay
and/or infestation must be replaced.
(5)
Gutters and downspouts shall not be loose or damaged and shall drain properly.
(6)
There shall be no indications of delamination in any plywood used.
(7)
The structure's roof shall not sag and must not give indication of leaks to the interior.
(8)
Exterior walls shall be plumb and without bulges.
(9)
All doors and windows shall be painted, reglazed and weatherstripped as needed.
(10)
Attic and crawl space shall be adequately vented and the vents must be screened.
(11)
All siding which is loose, cracked, split or warped shall be replaced and any indication of water leakage shall be
corrected.
(Code 1980, § 9-27)
Sec. 18-68. - Changes in work in progress; workmanship.
Where there are any changes in the work, including substitutions of materials, changes in the scope of
workmanship required or which may be proposed by the contractor, or found necessary or desirable as the work
progresses, such changes shall be approved by the director of community planning or his delegate before any
work incidental thereto is commenced. Workmanship shall be done in accordance with the standards of the
several trades known as "workmanlike manner."
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
113/543
(Code 1980, § 9-28)
Sec. 18-69. - Materials.
Materials shall be in good condition, and of standard grade unless otherwise stipulated in the specifications filed
with the director of community planning or his delegate and approved by him. Where the repair of existing
structural material is called for, the feature is to be placed in "equal to new" condition, either by patching or
replacement; all the damaged, loose or rotted parts shall be removed or replaced and the finished work shall
match the adjacent material in design and dimension.
(Code 1980, § 9-29)
Sec. 18-70. - Inspection.
Inspection of work requested in this article during normal working hours by authorized inspectors shall be
facilitated by the contractor, or owner, and the work shall be subject to the inspector's approval and acceptance.
(Code 1980, § 9-30)
Secs. 18-71—18-95. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Electric utility, § 106-81 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 18-96. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Apprentice means a natural person working or serving to learn or to be skilled in any branch of the electrical
business.
Electrical contractor means any person, member, or employee of a firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in
the business of installing, erecting, repairing, or contracting to install, erect, or repair electrical wires or
conductors to be used for the transmission of electric light, heat, power, or signalling purposes, or to install or
repair moulding, ducts, raceways or conduit for the reception or protection of such wires or conduits, or any
electrical machinery, apparatus, or systems to be used for electrical light, heat, power, or signalling purposes.
Electrical elevator contractor means any natural person engaged in the business of installing, repairing and
maintaining electrical equipment and apparatus from the main-line switch located in the penthouse or machine
room to control all electrical equipment and apparatus for elevators. The actual work shall be done by a qualified
master, journeyman or specialist elevator electrician.
Electrical refrigeration contractor means any person engaged in the business of installing, repairing or
maintaining electrical equipment in connection with refrigeration. The actual work shall be done by a master,
journeyman or specialist refrigerator electrician.
Electrical refrigeration repair contractor means any person engaged in the business of repairing or maintaining
electrical equipment in connection with refrigeration. The actual work shall be done by a qualified master,
journeyman or specialist refrigeration electrician.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
114/543
Electrical sign contractor means a person engaged in the business of manufacture, installation, erection and
repair of electrically illuminated or operated signs.
Homeowner means any person who owns or leases a residence within the city who desires to install, repair or
perform maintenance work on any electrical outlet, meter loops, light fixtures or motors or generators in such
residence.
Journeyman electrician means any individual who possesses the necessary qualifications, training, and technical
knowledge to install, maintain, and extend electrical conductors and equipment. He shall be capable of doing
such work in accordance with plans and specifications furnished him in accordance with standard rules and
regulations governing the work.
Maintenance electrician or industrial maintenance electrician means any individual who possesses the
necessary qualifications, training, and technical knowledge to maintain and extend electrical conductors and
equipment for electrical power and control systems on or within industrial, manufacturing, or similar type
facilities. He shall be capable of doing such work in accordance with standard rules and regulations governing
that work.
Master electrician means any individual who possesses the necessary qualifications, training, and technical
knowledge to plan, lay out, and supervise the installation, maintenance, and extension of electrical conductors
and equipment.
Specialist elevator electrician means any natural person engaged in the work of installing, repairing and
maintaining electrical equipment and apparatus from the main-line switch in the penthouse or machine room to
control electrical equipment for elevators.
Specialist refrigeration electrician means any natural person engaged in the business of servicing, maintaining,
repairing and installing electrical equipment in connection with refrigeration who does not make final
connections to electrical current unless there is an approved outlet of sufficient capacity available within 15 feet
of the machine to be connected.
Specialist sign electrician means any natural person engaged in the business of building, erecting, maintaining
and repairing electrically illuminated or operated signs, and gaseous tubing for illuminations, making all
connections on secondary side of transformers and primary connections only where there is a sign circuit or an
outlet of sufficient capacity available within 15 feet of the sign or transformer to be connected.
(Code 1980, § 9-101)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-97. - Scope.
Nothing in this article shall be construed or interpreted as applying to any person engaged in providing
communication facilities to the public through a central office operated by such person, or to a person engaged
in the generation of electric current for distributing electric energy for light, heat or power, or electrically
operated transportation.
(Code 1980, § 9-102)
Sec. 18-98. - National Electrical Code adopted.
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for electric wiring and apparatus
that edition of the National Electrical Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association, adopted by or
pursuant to the provisions of the Arkansas Electrical Code Authority Act (A.C.A. § 20-31-101 et seq.), and the
whole thereof, save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended by the terms of this chapter.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
115/543
(Code 1980, § 9-136; Ord. No. 6737, § 1, 8-9-93; Ord. No. 6984, § 1, 6-10-96)
State law reference— Adoption of technical codes by reference authorized, A.C.A. § 14-55-207.
Sec. 18-99. - Violations.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform electrical work in violation of any ordinance or any National
Electric Code that has been duly adopted by the city council.
(b)
Any person found to be in violation of subsection (a) above, shall be penalized as provided for in section 1-8 of
this Code.
(Ord. No. 7203, § 1, 3-8-99)
Secs. 18-100—18-130. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Subdivision I. - General Provisions
Sec. 18-131. - Enforcement generally.
It shall be the duty of the chief electrical inspector to see that all provisions of this article are fully complied
with, and to inspect all the electrical work done within the corporate limits and the city's service area not
inspected by another city for lighting, power or heating, and to keep proper and permanent records of such
inspections. The chief electrical inspector shall report the result of inspections to the general or electrical
contractor or to the owner or occupant of the building or structure in or on which the electrical work is being
done or has been done, shall cause to be corrected any deviation from the requirements of this chapter, or issue
approval in writing when such requirements are found to be satisfied.
(Code 1980, § 9-103)
Sec. 18-132. - Inspection; tests; condemnation of violations.
It shall be the duty of the chief electrical inspector or his authorized assistants to inspect all interior wires and
wiring and all electrical apparatus conducting or utilizing electrical current for any purpose whatsoever within
the city and the city's service area not inspected by another city. He shall be empowered to make such tests as he
may deem necessary to ascertain the condition of such wiring or appliances and he will have the right to remove
or compel the removal of any obstructions such as lath, plastering, ceiling or flooring which may hinder a full
and complete inspection of such wires or apparatus. He may remove or compel the removal of conductors which
are enclosed in conduit or otherwise inaccessible for complete inspection. When such conductors or appliances
are not in accordance with the requirements of this article, or are found to be unsafe to life or property, he shall
have the right to condemn such conductors or appliances as provided in this article.
(Code 1980, § 9-104)
Sec. 18-133. - Right of entry; suspension of work.
The chief electrical inspector, or his authorized assistants, shall have the right to enter any building, manhole,
subway or premises in the discharging of his duties or for the purpose of making any inspection or tests of any
electrical apparatus contained therein. He shall have the power to make arrests for the violation of any of the
provisions of this article and to compel the suspension of any electrical work being done in a manner prohibited
by this article.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
116/543
(Code 1980, § 9-105)
Sec. 18-134. - Interference with inspector.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the chief electrical inspector or any of his
authorized assistants in the discharge of their duties under this Code.
(Code 1980, § 9-106)
Sec. 18-135. - Reinspections.
The chief electrical inspector is hereby empowered to inspect or reinspect at his option, all interior wiring and
apparatus conducting or using electrical current for light, heat or power, and when such conductors or apparatus
are found to be unsafe to life or property, he shall notify the person owning, using or operating them, to place
such conductors or apparatus in a safe and secure condition within 48 hours, or within such further time as the
inspector shall determine is necessary.
(Code 1980, § 9-107)
Sec. 18-136. - Appeals.
(a)
Whenever the chief electrical inspector refuses or rejects an electrical installation due to the mode or manner of
the electrical construction, the contractor, owner of such building, or a duly authorized agent may appeal such
decision to the board of electrical examiners and supervisors if he claims that:
(1)
The provisions of this article do not apply; or
(2)
This article has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted.
(b)
A notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with the board within 30 days after the decision has been
rendered by the inspector. The inspector or the board of electrical examiners and supervisors may limit the time
for such appeals to a shorter period if, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, the electrical installation is
unsafe or dangerous. Notice of appeals forms shall be provided by the inspector.
(c)
The board of electrical examiners and supervisors shall reach a decision on every appeal without unreasonable
or unnecessary delay. Such decision shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every
decision shall be filed in the office of the chief electrical inspector and shall be open to public inspection for a
period of not less than two weeks. A certified copy of the decision of the board shall be sent by mail or
otherwise to the appellant. The decision of the board may be to uphold, to reverse, or to modify the decision of
the inspector. Should the board decide to modify the decision of the inspector because the enforcement thereof
would do injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this article and the public interest, this
modification shall specify in what manner such modification is to be made, the conditions upon which it is to be
made, and the reason for the modification.
(d)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
117/543
Every decision of the board of electrical examiners and supervisors shall be final, subject to such remedy as any
aggrieved party might have at law or equity.
(Code 1980, § 9-108)
Sec. 18-137. - Civil liability.
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibilities of any person owning, operating
or installing electrical wires, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment, for the damage to property or
persons injured by any defect therein, nor shall the city or any agent thereof be deemed to assume any such
liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this article or the certificate of inspection issued by the chief
electrical inspector.
(Code 1980, § 9-109)
Secs. 18-138—18-160. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Permits and Inspections
Sec. 18-161. - Permit required.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, repair, replace or perform any electrical work in the city without a
permit from the city.
(b)
When a project consists of more than one structure, each separate structure shall have a separate electrical
permit. For purposes of determining whether separate permits are needed, buildings not having a common attic
space, connected only by a canopy, walkway or similar connection, shall be deemed to be separate buildings.
(Code 1980, § 9-161)
Sec. 18-162. - Permit application.
An application for an electrical permit shall be made to the department of community planning and shall give the
exact address by street and number, approximate date inspection is desired, the name of master electrician in
charge of work, a complete description of the extent of the installation. A special notation must be made on
permits that include the use of aluminum cable or conductor. All applications for permits shall be accompanied
by the required inspection fee.
(Code 1980, § 9-162)
Sec. 18-163. - Persons eligible for permits.
Permits to perform electrical work shall be issued by the chief electrical inspector only to persons holding
licenses according to the provisions of this article or homeowners who have been qualified as provided in this
article.
(Code 1980, § 9-164)
Sec. 18-164. - Fees.
All applications for electrical permits shall be accompanied by the inspection fees as provided for in this section.
All repair/remodeling inspections shall be charged by the fixture as follows. A minimum fee of $5.00 shall be
required for each permit:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
118/543
Openings/outlets Fee
1 to 10 .....$ 4.00
11 to 20 .....7.20
21 to 40 .....12.80
41 to 60 .....16.80
61 to 80 .....19.20
81 to 100 .....21.00
101 to 200 .....36.00
201 to 300 .....46.00
301 to 400 .....59.00
Over 400 outlets, add $2.50 for each 25 or fraction thereof.
Meter loops:
First loop .....7.00
Each additional .....3.00
Motor and generator wiring:
Up to 1 hp .....2.75
2 to 4 hp .....5.50
5 to 10 hp .....7.00
11 to 15 hp .....10.00
Motor and generator wiring:
16 to 20 hp .....12.00
21 and over .....15.00
Miscellaneous:
Rough, each trip .....3.00
Finish, each trip .....3.00
Slab, each trip .....3.00
Old job .....5.00
Reinspection fee .....10.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
119/543
Outside electric signs .....5.00
Electric window signs .....5.00
Neon borders, window and outside .....3.00
Signboards: Regular permit charge.
Rectifiers .....3.00
Motion picture machine .....7.50
Electric stoves, ranges, dryers or hot water heaters .....7.00
X-ray machines .....5.00
Overhaul electrical wiring .....5.00
Venthood .....2.50
Dishwashers .....2.50
Disposals .....2.50
Trash compactors .....2.50
Construction meter .....7.00
Temporary power to building .....10.00
Electric central heat:
1 to 15 kw .....4.00
16 to 25 kw .....7.00
Load centers:
Up to 60 amps .....5.00
Up to 100 amps .....10.00
Up to 150 amps .....15.00
Up to 200 amps .....20.00
Over 200 amps, each 100 amps .....3.00
Exhaust fan .....2.50
Ceiling fan .....2.50
Mobile home hookups .....10.00
Special circuits for plug-in equipment, such as window air conditioners:
20 to 30 amp .....4.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
120/543
40 to 60 amp .....7.00
Festoon or temporary decorative wiring fee to be $5.00 for meter loop, $1.00 each circuit, and $1.00 for each 50
lights.
For outdoor sales and display lots, the above rules shall apply.
For special equipment or apparatus for which no inspection fees are fixed by this article, a charge of $1.00 per
1,000 watts or less consumed by such equipment or apparatus shall be made.
When a temporary electrical construction meter is desired during the course of construction or alteration of a
building, a temporary permit will be issued at the regular permit fee.
In case the electrical inspector, who works under the cognizance of the director of community planning, is
required to make more than one trip for the purpose of inspecting any work on account of violation of rules,
wrong address or any other irregularities caused by the master electrician or his agents, a charge of $5.00 for
inside city limits and $10.00 for outside city limits shall be made for each additional trip.
A surcharge of 50 percent shall be charged on all permits done outside the city limits.
Inspection fees for all new construction shall be charged at the rate of $0.04 per square foot (gross area under
roof).
On installations where several persons are concerned with the installation of electric conductors or appliances,
each party shall be required to pay the fees as established for such work.
(Code 1980, § 9-163)
Sec. 18-165. - Rough inspection.
Before any interior electrical wiring shall be concealed from view, or in case such wiring is in conduit, before
such wiring is in conduit, before such conduits shall be concealed from view, the person installing such wiring
shall give a written notice to the chief electrical inspector who shall, as soon as possible after the receipt of such
notice, inspect such work. No such work shall be concealed from view before the expiration of 24 hours from
the receipt of such notice, unless the chief electrical inspector or his authorized assistant shall make his
inspection and approve such work, before the expiration of such 24 hours.
(Code 1980, § 9-165)
Sec. 18-166. - Special provisions for buildings under construction.
Before any electric current is supplied to the permanent distribution system of a building under construction,
written notice shall be submitted to the office of the department of community planning noting the length of time
the temporary power will be needed before the final electrical inspection is made, and the structure shall not be
occupied until after the final inspection, and that the party submitting the request will assume liability of any
damage incurred as a result of disconnection of power from the building as a result of a violation of this article.
The time limit on temporary power being furnished to the building will be determined on the basis of need, not
to exceed 30 days. An extension of time may be granted only by special permission.
(Code 1980, § 9-166)
Sec. 18-167. - Final inspection.
Before any electrical current shall be used upon any electrical wiring of any character, written notice shall be
served upon the chief electrical inspector, who shall as soon as possible make a final inspection of such wiring,
and if such installation has been constructed in accordance with the requirements of this article, he shall issue a
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
121/543
certificate of inspection, which shall contain a general description of the installation and the date of such
inspection. No current shall be used prior to the issuance of such certificate, provided that the chief electrical
inspector may issue a temporary permit for the use of electrical current during the course of construction or
alteration of a building.
(Code 1980, § 9-167)
Sec. 18-168. - Inspection of completed work not previously inspected.
If it shall be discovered that any electrical work has been installed or put into use, for which no application for
inspection has been made, there shall be a charge of $5.00 which shall be in addition to the regular inspection fee
covering such work, and no additional permits shall be granted until all fees have been paid.
(Code 1980, § 9-168)
Sec. 18-169. - Clearance to furnish current.
It shall be unlawful for any person operating in the city to furnish current to any new building, tent, structure or
outdoor wiring of any kind, nature or description without first obtaining a clearance from the chief electrical
inspector stating that such wiring is approved and a permit has been issued for the use of current.
(Code 1980, § 9-169)
Secs. 18-170—18-190. - Reserved.
Subdivision III. - Board of Electrical Examiners and Supervisors
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies, § 2-486 et seq.
Sec. 18-191. - Established.
There is hereby established a board to be known as the board of electrical examiners and supervisors.
(Code 1980, § 9-121)
Sec. 18-192. - Composition; qualifications of members; selection committee; terms of office; removal; filling of
vacancies.
(a)
The board of electrical examiners and supervisors shall be composed of six persons with five of them having the
following qualifications:
(1)
One member shall be the chief electrical inspector;
(2)
One member shall be an electric contractor licensed to do business in the city whose business is located in the
city;
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
122/543
(3)
One member shall be a qualified journeyman electrician;
(4)
One member shall be a representative of the state fire prevention bureau; and
(5)
One member shall be a member of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers.
(b)
The mayor shall appoint one alderman from each ward to serve as a committee which shall recommend to the
city council members for the board of electrical examiners and supervisors, which committee will serve at the
mayor's pleasure.
(c)
A person meeting the qualifications of a board member and recommended by the committee established under
this section must be approved by three-fourths of the duly elected aldermen to serve as a board member.
(d)
The term of board members, other than the chief electrical inspector, shall be for three years.
(e)
Any member of the board of electrical examiners and supervisors may be removed by the city council for
incompetency, inefficiency or dereliction of duty by a majority vote of the duly elected members of the council.
(f)
Vacancies on the board of electrical examiners and supervisors for any unexpired term shall be filled in the same
manner as is provided for in this section for the original appointment of board members. When a vacancy occurs
for any other reason, the member appointed to fill the vacancy will serve for a full three-year term when
appointed, and any member may succeed himself for three additional terms.
(Code 1980, § 9-122; Ord. No. 6775, § 2, 1-10-94; Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 1-28-02)
Sec. 18-193. - Officers and procedural rules.
The chief electrical inspector shall be the secretary of the board of electrical examiners and supervisors, and
shall keep a full and complete record of all acts and business of such board. At the board's first meeting, it shall
select one of its members as chairman and promulgate such rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings
as may be appropriate.
(Code 1980, § 9-123)
Sec. 18-194. - Powers and duties.
The board of electrical examiners and supervisors shall have the power and duty to:
(1)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
123/543
Examine the qualifications of all persons who are engaged in the business of contracting electric wiring work or
installing electric wiring, lighting fixtures or apparatus operating at a potential of 30 volts or more.
(2)
Act on appeals of unsuccessful test applicants according to the procedures set forth in its rules and regulations.
(3)
Act on appeals from decisions of the chief electrical inspector.
(4)
Perform such other functions as may be provided by ordinance.
(Code 1980, § 9-124)
Sec. 18-195. - Quorum; meetings; records.
A quorum of the board of electrical examiners and supervisors shall consist of four-fifths of its members and
business shall not be transacted without a quorum. The board shall meet at least once a month and may hold
special meetings upon call of its chairman or three-fifths of its members. The books, papers and records of the
board shall at all times be open to the public and subject to inspection.
(Code 1980, § 9-125)
Sec. 18-196. - Rules and regulations; list of licenses.
The board of electrical examiners and supervisors shall adopt such rules and regulations for the examination of
all applicants for license and for the conduct of the business of the board, as may be necessary, not in conflict
with the laws of the state, the provisions of this article or any ordinance which may be passed and shall have the
power to change and amend such rules and regulations, subject to this limitation. A copy of any rules and
regulations adopted before becoming effective must be approved by the city council and filed with the city clerk.
A complete list of all licenses issued, renewed or revoked shall be on file in the office of the executive director
and general manager of the electric department and the chief electrical inspector.
(Code 1980, § 9-126)
Secs. 18-197—18-260. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICIANS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.
State Law reference— State regulation of electricians, A.C.A. § 17-25-101 et seq.; restrictions on local
examinations, A.C.A. §§ 17-25-302, 17-25-305.
Subdivision I. - General Provisions
Sec. 18-261. - Special provisions for homeowners.
Any person owning or leasing a residence within the city who desires to install, repair or perform maintenance
work on any outlet, meter loops, light fixtures, or motors or generators within the residence in which such person
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
124/543
resides shall be examined by the board of electrical examiners and supervisors to determine that he is qualified
to perform the work. Such person shall pay an examination fee of $5.00.
(Code 1980, § 9-186)
Sec. 18-262. - Apprentice electricians.
An apprentice shall perform the actual work of installing, repairing or maintaining electrical wiring or
equipment only under the direct supervision of a master, journeyman, maintenance, specialist sign, specialist
refrigerator or specialist elevator electrician. There shall not be more than one apprentice under the supervision
of each licensed electrician. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a license for an apprentice.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(a))
Sec. 18-263. - Electrical refrigeration contractors.
An electrical refrigeration contractor shall be entitled to install, maintain and replace electrical equipment and
make necessary connections to refrigerators; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for such a contractor to
make a final connection to electrical current unless there is an approved outlet of sufficient capacity available
within 15 feet of the machine to be connected.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(d))
Sec. 18-264. - Electrical refrigeration repair contractors.
An electrical refrigeration repair contractor shall not be entitled to make electrical wiring installation in
connection with refrigeration for light or power, neither can he make installation connections to commercial or
domestic units, except domestic units of the portable plug-in type.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(b))
Sec. 18-265. - Electrical sign contractors.
An electrical sign contractor shall be entitled to install the tubing for illumination or interior gaseous tube
lighting and to make final connection between the transformer secondary wiring and the tube electrode. The
primary connection to transformers and signs can be made provided there are sign circuits or outlets of sufficient
capacity available within 15 feet of the sign or transformer to be connected. The actual work shall be done by a
qualified master, journeyman or special sign electrician.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(e))
Sec. 18-266. - Journeyman electrician, qualifications.
A journeyman electrician shall be capable of doing work in accordance with plans and specifications furnished
to him in accordance with standard rules and regulations governing such work. He shall have had at least four
years' experience installing wires, conductors and electrical equipment used inside of buildings for the
transmission of electrical current for electrical light, heat or power purposes.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(f))
Sec. 18-267. - Maintenance electrician, qualifications.
A maintenance electrician shall have had at least two years' experience in the installation or maintenance of
electrical wiring and equipment.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(g))
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
125/543
Sec. 18-268. - Master electrician, qualifications.
A master electrician shall be a person of not less than 21 years of age and a person of good moral character. He
must be a graduate electrical engineer from a recognized university or college, with at least one year actual
experience installing wires, conductors and electrical equipment used inside of buildings for the transmission of
electrical current for light, heat or power purposes, or have had at least six years' experience, two years of which
were as an electrician installing wires, conductors and electrical equipment used inside of buildings for the
transmission of electrical current for electrical light, heat or power purposes.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(h))
Sec. 18-269. - Specialist elevator electrician, qualifications.
A specialist elevator electrician shall have had at least two years' experience in the installation, maintenance and
repair of electrical equipment for elevators.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(i))
Sec. 18-270. - Specialist refrigeration electricians.
A specialist refrigeration electrician shall not make a final connection of electrical equipment to electrical
current unless there is an approved outlet of sufficient capacity available within 15 feet of the machine to be
connected. He shall have had at least two years' experience in the installation, maintenance and repair of
electrical equipment in connection with refrigeration.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(j))
Sec. 18-271. - Specialist sign electrician, qualifications.
A specialist sign electrician shall have had at least two years' experience in the work of building or erecting,
maintaining and repairing electrically illuminated or operated signs and gaseous tubing for illumination.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(k))
Secs. 18-272—18-300. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - License
Sec. 18-301. - Required.
(a)
Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall do any electrical work covered by this article, or
hold himself out as licensed to do electrical work, or engage in the electrical business or any branch of the
electrical industry, without a license issued by the board of electrical examiners and supervisors.
(b)
Subsection (a) shall not prohibit a person who has had four or more years' electrical experience from making
necessary repairs or alterations or installations on his premises, or require railroad electricians to have a city
license to perform their duties for the railroad as electricians.
(c)
The city may recognize the licenses of master or journeymen electricians from other municipalities in the state
provided the following criteria are met:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
126/543
(1)
An electrical examining board has been duly appointed by each local governing body to examine the
qualifications of applicants for electrician's license equivalent to those required by this article.
(2)
A regular system of inspection of electrical construction is maintained by the municipality to assure compliance
with the National Electrical Code and provisions equivalent to this article.
(3)
The installation of electrical materials, devices, equipment or related items conforms to the requirements of the
National Electrical Code except as modified in this article.
(4)
The governing body has given written notice to the city that the conditions stipulated within this article are
acceptable. A local code which meets the approval of participating member cities may be accepted in lieu of this
article.
(5)
Written verification of license has been given by the electrical inspector of the applicant's home town to the chief
electrical inspector.
(6)
The examining board of each local government has the authority to refuse or revoke the license of any person to
operate within their jurisdiction when that person does not display the skill, knowledge or craftsmanship deemed
necessary to properly comply with the accepted standards.
(7)
That cooperation of examining boards of associating member cities will assure that action will be taken by the
city where the license holder has his primary license if violation of accepted standards are to the degree that
remedial action is warranted.
(Code 1980, § 9-181)
Sec. 18-302. - Examination.
(a)
Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall be issued a license pursuant to this division unless
he passes an examination upon his qualifications which has been prepared and conducted by the board of
electrical examiners and supervisors.
(b)
Persons desiring to take the examination required by this section shall make written application to the secretary
of the board of electrical examiners and supervisors at least 15 days prior to the examination and pay the
required examination fee. Such person shall exhibit his receipt for such fee to the secretary prior to taking the
examination.
(c)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
127/543
The board of electrical examiners and supervisors shall fix the time and place for the examination, and if the
examination reveals that the applicant has a reasonable knowledge of the natural and practical laws and
functions of electricity, the safe, correct and approved manner of installing devices, apparatus and
instrumentalities for electric light, heat, power and signaling purposes, and the ordinances of the city governing
the installation of electrical devices, apparatus and instrumentalities, then the board shall issue to such person the
license for which he has applied, which license shall indicate thereon his qualifications and the fact that he has
successfully completed and passed the examination given by the board for his particular type of electrical work.
(d)
No examination is required of anyone who possesses a state electrician's license issued pursuant to the
provisions of A.C.A. tit. 17, ch. 25 (A.C.A. § 17-25-101 et seq.) for work within the scope of that license. The
board may grant a license, without examination, to a person who has successfully passed an examination and has
been licensed by another electrical examining board within the state which the board considers to be a competent
electrical examining board, provided such person possesses the necessary qualifications for the license and all
necessary fees have been paid.
(Code 1980, § 9-182)
Sec. 18-303. - Fees.
(a)
Fees for licenses and examinations required in this division shall be as indicated in this section.
Classification Examination
fee
Renewal
fee
Journeyman electrician $10.00 $ 5.00
Maintenance electrician 7.50 3.00
Master electrician 15.00 7.50
Specialist elevator contractor 5.00 2.00
Specialist refrigeration electrician 7.50 3.00
Specialist sign electrician 7.50 3.00
(b)
All persons, except those who are to take the master electrician's examination, shall be allowed to work if they
have paid their fees and filed their license applications.
(c)
Electrical contractors, electrical refrigeration contractors, electrical refrigeration repair contractors and electrical
sign contractors shall pay a license fee as provided in section 98-83 of this Code.
(Code 1980, § 9-183)
Sec. 18-304. - Electrical contractor's business; requirements of master electricians.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
128/543
Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contractor may apply for and be issued a license upon
satisfying the board of electrical examiners and supervisors that he is either a master electrician or employs a
master electrician as his superintendent or manager, and shall execute the bond provided in this article.
(b)
Before any person shall engage in the business of electrical contracting, the name, residence and place of
business of such person shall be registered in a book to be kept for that purpose by the secretary of the board of
electrical examiners and supervisors, a copy of which shall at all times be kept on file in the office of the office
manager of the electric department. In such book shall also be recorded the name of the master electrician
managing or supervising the business of such person as superintendent or manager and the date on which such
person qualified as a master electrician under the terms and provisions of this article. Every removal of place of
business or change in name of the organization or change in the licensed master electrician in charge of the
business shall require immediate notice thereof to the secretary of the board, who shall make the proper changes
in the record book required by this section. Every electrical contractor shall promptly report to the secretary of
the board of the death, resignation or discharge of his or its master electrician; and if another master electrician is
not secured within three days after the next succeeding examination held therefor by the board, the license of
such contractor shall be suspended until a new licensed master electrician is employed.
(c)
No licensed master electrician can represent more than one firm at a time. The actual work shall be done by a
qualified master or journeyman electrician.
(Code 1980, § 9-185(c))
Sec. 18-305. - License expiration and renewal.
All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall expire on December 31 of each year, and all duly licensed
persons who apply for renewal of such licenses within 60 days after the expiration date thereof shall be granted a
new license without further examination, upon the payment of the required fee. If such renewal is not applied for
on or before January 30 after the expiration of the license, the applicant shall be reexamined by the board and
shall be required to pay the required examination fee. If January 30 falls on a nonworking day, final date for
payment shall be the next regular working day.
(Code 1980, § 9-184)
Sec. 18-306. - Bond of electrical contractors.
Every person doing business in the city as a licensed electrical contractor shall file with the superintendent of the
electric department a bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00 with a recognized insurance company authorized to do
business in the city as surety. The bond and surety shall be approved by the city attorney, the condition of such
bond being to the city for the use of itself, or any citizen of the city damaged by improper electrical work; and
conditioned further that the principal shall strictly comply with the ordinances of the city governing such work;
that the principal will do or suffer no work to be done without a permit; and that the principal will report work
done for inspection by the electrical inspection department, in conformity with all laws and ordinances of the
city.
(Code 1980, § 9-187)
Sec. 18-307. - Display of license.
Every person licensed under this division shall display such license in his place of business.
(Code 1980, § 9-190)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
129/543
Sec. 18-308. - License transfer or assignment.
No license issued pursuant to this division shall be assignable or transferable.
(Code 1980, § 9-189)
Sec. 18-309. - Misuse of license; misrepresentation.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this division to alter, transfer, lend or rent his license
certificate or use a license not his own. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be
licensed under this division or to wrongfully use a license issued by the board of electrical examiners and
supervisors.
(Code 1980, § 9-191)
Sec. 18-310. - License suspension or revocation.
A license issued pursuant to this division may be suspended or revoked by the board of electrical examiners and
supervisors for any violation of this article or any ordinance governing the installation or inspection of electrical
work, or any rules and regulations promulgated by the board, after a hearing to be held at the convenience of the
board.
(Code 1980, § 9-188)
Secs. 18-311—18-340. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Sec. 18-341. - Energy efficiency code adopted.
The city council hereby formally adopts the 1979 Arkansas Rules and Regulations for Energy Efficiency
Standards for New Building Construction, as adopted by the state department of energy.
(Code 1980, § 9-5)
State law reference— Adoption of technical codes by reference authorized, A.C.A. § 14-55-207.
Secs. 18-342—18-365. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING AND GAS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) ---
Cross reference— Water system, § 106-121 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, § 106-156 et seq.
Plumbing and gas generally, A.C.A. § 17-31-101 et seq.; municipal plumbing regulations, A.C.A. § 11-54-1001
et seq.; local regulation of plumbing and gas standards, A.C.A. § 17-31-204.
Sec. 18-366. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Gas fitter means any person who engages in the business of gas fitting and the installation of gas piping.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
130/543
Plumbing means and includes:
(1)
All piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with the water supply, drainage and gas systems
within a building or structure and to a point three to five feet outside the building or structure.
(2)
The construction and connection of any water supply or drainage system used for the purpose of filling, filtering
or draining a fixed or permanent type swimming pool constructed for private, public or commercial use.
(3)
Water service piping from a point three to five feet outside the building structure to the water meter or other
water utility terminal and the connecting of domestic hot water storage tanks, water softeners, and water heaters
within the water supply system.
(4)
Water pressure systems other than the public utilities system.
(5)
A plumbing and drainage system so designed and vent piping so installed as to keep the air within the system in
free circulation and movement, and to prevent within a margin of safety unequal air pressures of such force as
might blow, siphon or affect trap seals or retard the discharge from plumbing fixtures, or permit sewer air to
escape into the building.
(6)
The construction and installation of gas piping materials done in any building, structure or on any property.
(Code 1980, §§ 9-206, 9-207)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
State law reference— Similar definition of plumbing, A.C.A. § 17-31-101.
Sec. 18-367. - Enforcement and inspections.
The director of community planning and his agents shall enforce the provisions of this article. Such persons shall
have the authority to enter all buildings in the performance of their duties between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:30 p.m. each day. Such person shall inspect and test all plumbing and gasfitting work for compliance with all
ordinances and laws.
(Code 1980, § 9-209)
Sec. 18-368. - State plumbing and gas codes adopted; copies on file.
(a)
The Sixth Edition, 1991, of the Arkansas State Plumbing Code is hereby adopted by reference.
(b)
The Arkansas State Gas Code, Second Edition, 1991, is hereby adopted by reference.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
131/543
(c)
Three copies of each publication adopted in this section are on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Code 1980, § 9-207)
State law reference— State plumbing and gas standards, A.C.A. §§ 17-31-103, 17-31-204(b); authority to
adopt technical codes by reference, A.C.A. § 14-55-207.
Sec. 18-369. - Copper tubing or plumbing in new construction.
It shall be required that in any new construction project all copper tubing or plumbing, whether hot or cold,
situated underneath concrete slabs must be encased in plastic or have a plastic sheath or covering, and that such
plastic covering should protrude six inches above the concrete slab.
(Code 1980, § 9-214)
Sec. 18-370. - Permits required; fees.
(a)
Before beginning any plumbing or gasfitting work within the city or outside the city limits, wherever the
structure is to be connected to the city water main, the city sewer main, and/or Arkansas-Louisiana Gas main,
the person installing such work shall apply to the plumbing inspector and city clerk and obtain a permit to do
such work. A permit shall be issued to homeowners to do plumbing or gasfitting in their own home or residence,
provided the individual does the work himself. However, in the case of a meter permit for water service, the
permit may be issued to either a homeowner, as above described, building contractor or licensed and bonded
plumbing contractor.
(b)
Applications for permits required by this section shall be made on suitable forms provided by the plumbing
inspector and city clerk and shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the following schedule:
(1)
New construction inside city. Inspection fees for all new construction inside the city limits shall be charged at the
rate of $0.04 per square foot (gross area under roof).
(2)
Repair/remodeling inside city. All repair/remodeling inspection fees inside the city limits shall be charged by the
fixture as follows:
Inspection .....$ 6.00
Reinspection .....10.00
Water closets .....3.00
Bathtubs .....3.00
Lavatories (washbasins) .....3.00
Sinks (kitchen, bar, slop, tray, etc.) .....3.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
132/543
Washer connections .....3.00
Drains (floor, roof, refrigeration, etc.) .....3.00
Drinking fountains .....3.00
Showers .....3.00
Urinals .....3.00
Dishwashers .....3.00
Disposals .....3.00
Water heaters .....5.00
Floor or wall furnaces .....5.00
Unit heaters .....5.00
Vent hall furnaces .....5.00
Central heating furnaces .....7.00
Direct fired heaters .....7.00
Boilers .....7.00
Cooling towers .....3.00
Sill cocks .....3.00
Hose racks .....3.00
Standpipes .....3.00
Fire pumps .....3.00
Sand or grease traps .....3.00
Sprinkler systems (lawn or fire) .....7.00
Swimming pools .....7.00
Water service .....7.00
Water house piping .....7.00
Gas service .....7.00
Gas house piping .....7.00
Extra gas outlets .....1.50
Slab inspection .....6.00
Rough inspection .....6.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
133/543
Final inspection .....6.00
Commercial dryer .....5.00
Commercial range .....5.00
Domestic dryer .....1.50
Domestic range .....1.50
Conventional burner .....7.00
Gas inspections .....6.00
Gas reinspections .....10.00
(3)
Outside city limits. A surcharge of 50 percent shall be charged on all permits for plumbing or gas work done
outside the city limits.
(c)
The fees set out in this section shall be tripled for work performed without a permit. An additional fee of $5.00
inside the city or $10.00 outside the city shall be charged for each additional trip on the part of the plumbing
inspector caused by the negligence of the plumber or owner.
(Code 1980, § 9-210)
State law reference— State licensing of plumbers and gasfitters, A.C.A. § 17-31-301 et seq.
Sec. 18-371. - Bond required of master plumber or gasfitter.
Every master plumber or gasfitter doing business in the city shall execute and deliver to the city a bond with a
surety bonding company in the sum of $1,000.00 to indemnify the city or any citizen for any damage caused by
the failure of such master plumber or gasfitter to comply strictly with the provisions of this article. No plumbing
or gasfitting permit shall be issued to any master plumber or gasfitter unless such bond has been delivered to the
city and is in full force and effect.
(Code 1980, § 9-211)
Sec. 18-372. - Inspections and tests.
There shall be two tests and inspections of plumbing or gas systems made by the director of community
planning or his agents, who shall be notified by the master plumber when the work is ready for inspection, as
follows:
(1)
The soil and vent pipes must be tested by water from the end of the pipe to its termination above the roof, or ten
pounds of air test in the presence of the director of community planning or his agents. Such tests shall include all
drains, soil and vent lines, the lead branches, traps and ferrule joints.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
134/543
When all plumbing has been installed complete, the director of community planning or his agents shall be
notified by the master plumber that the work is ready for final inspection. The director of community planning or
his agents shall make a final inspection and, if the work complies with the rules and ordinances, issue a
certificate of acceptance. The master plumber shall be present at the final inspection and shall see that the
premises are open and available to the director of community planning or his agents. If the work does not
comply with all the ordinances, the director of community planning or his agents shall notify the master plumber
at once to rectify such work. The director of community planning or his agents shall be notified when the work
has been rectified and ready for reinspection.
(Code 1980, § 9-213)
Sec. 18-373. - Other regulations.
(a)
Water heaters. Water heaters shall not be installed in any location where flammable vapors are likely to be
present, unless the design, operation and installation are such to eliminate the probable ignition of the flammable
vapors. Water heaters installed where flammable vapors are likely shall be installed so that all burners and/or
ignition devices are located not less than 18 inches above the floor. All other gas appliances shall be installed per
manufacturer's instructions.
(b)
Gas meters. Gas meters shall be located at least three feet from any source of ignition.
(c)
Downstream from a water closet. When fixtures, open site drains, floor drains and other openings to the drainage
system discharge downstream from a water closet, each fixture discharging downstream shall be vented
individually, with exception of another water closet which shall be otherwise vented in accordance to other
sections of this Code.
(d)
Wet venting. Wet venting shall be limited to the same floor only.
(e)
Water services. All water services on new construction (residential and/or commercial) shall be installed under
the footing.
(f)
Gas shut off for fireplaces. All fireplace units with log lighters shall have a log lighter valve, or appliance valve,
installed on the outside of the fireplace unit.
(g)
Closets on three-inch drain. No more than two water closets shall drain into a three-inch DWV drain line.
(h)
Reduced pressure zone (RPZ) valves. All reduced pressure zone (RPZ) valves, either lawn sprinkler or structural,
shall be installed as close as possible to the structure being served. At no time shall it be installed in a right-ofway.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
135/543
(i)
Lawn sprinkler. All lawn sprinkler systems shall be protected by an RPZ valve.
(j)
Double compartment sinks. All double compartment sinks shall have a "P" trap installed for each compartment.
(k)
Gas pipe grounding. When gas pipe is installed new and/or repaired, the installer or repair person shall be
responsible for the proper grounding of the gas pipe system.
(Ord. No. 7743, § 1, 9-26-05)
Secs. 18-374—18-400. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING CODE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) ---
Cross reference— Ratproofing, § 54-66 et seq.; closing of vacant property, § 66-1.
Sec. 18-401. - Standard Housing Code adopted.
(a)
There is hereby adopted by reference that publication known as the Standard Housing Code, 1994 Edition. Three
copies of such publication are on file in the office of the city clerk.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the publication adopted in subsection (a). A
person in violation of the Standard Housing Code shall be punished by a fine as stated in NLRC § 1-8. Said fines
may be enforced by either criminal or civil court actions.
(Code 1980, § 15-1; Ord. No. 7032, § 1, 2-24-97; Ord. No. 7103, § 2, 3-9-98)
State law reference— Authority to adopt technical code by reference, A.C.A. § 14-55-207.
Sec. 18-402. - Amendments.
The housing code adopted in this article is hereby amended as follows:
Section 103.2.2(3) is amended to read as follows:
(3) Allow 30 days' time to correct major violations and 45 days to correct minor violations. The 30-day time
limit to correct major violations may be reduced by order of the housing official if a violation is a life safety
violation. The 45-day time limit to correct minor violations may be extended by the housing official by no more
than 90 days; and
Section 103.2.4 is amended to read as follows:
When a residential building is to be demolished, it shall be done so in accordance with the provisions of the
Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, the North Little Rock Municipal Code, and the laws of the State of
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
136/543
Arkansas.
(Code 1980, § 15-1.1; Ord. No. 7103, § 3, 3-9-98)
Sec. 18-403. - Enforcement.
The director of community planning and his delegates shall enforce the provisions of this article.
(Code 1980, § 15-2)
Sec. 18-404. - Restrictions on utility services to residential buildings declared unfit for human habitation and
buildings or houses condemned by city council.
(a)
The applicable governing body shall not provide or permit another to provide public or private utility services,
such as water, gas or electricity, to any building or house that has been condemned by the city council pursuant
to Ark. Code Ann. § 14-56-203.
(b)
Subsection (a) of this section shall not preclude the temporary use of such utility services as may be deemed
necessary during construction, repair or alteration. The director of the department of community planning shall
be responsible for making the determination as to when such temporary services may be necessary.
(Code 1980, § 15-3; Ord. No. 7103, § 4, 3-9-98)
Sec. 18-405. - Appeals.
The city's board of adjustments and appeals shall serve as the housing board of adjustments and appeals under
the housing code adopted in this article.
(Code 1980, § 15-4)
Sec. 18-406. - Re-inspection fees.
(a)
A $30.00 re-inspection fee is hereby imposed on owners or managers of housing units that are found to be in
violation of North Little Rock's Housing Code, after the initial and first follow-up inspections.
(b)
Funds collected under such fee shall be used to help offset costs the city endures in re-inspecting rental housing
units that are found to be in violation of North Little Rock's Housing Code.
(Ord. No. 7112, §§ 1, 2, 4-27-98)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7112, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 27, 1998, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 18-
406 was at the editor's discretion.
Secs. 18-407—18-430. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - SWIMMING POOLS
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
137/543
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) ---
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 54.
Sec. 18-431. - Standard Swimming Pool Code adopted.
(a)
There is hereby adopted by reference that publication known as the Standard Swimming Pool Code, 1991
Edition, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the publication adopted by reference in
subsection (a).
(Code 1980, § 9-226)
State law reference— Authority to adopt technical code by reference, A.C.A. § 14-55-207.
Sec. 18-432. - Enforcement.
The director of community planning and his agents shall enforce the provisions of this article and the publication
adopted by reference in section 18-431.
(Code 1980, § 9-227)
Secs. 18-433—18-465. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - CONDEMNATION OF BUILDINGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (8) ---
State Law reference— Authority to order the removal or razing of buildings, A.C.A. § 14-56-203.
Sec. 18-466. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Removal means and includes, but is not limited to, removing all material and debris whenever it becomes
necessary to demolish any building that has been condemned and found to be a nuisance by resolution of the city
council.
(Code 1980, § 9-237)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-467. - Keeping buildings declared nuisance prohibited.
It shall be and it is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to own, keep or maintain any house, building
and/or structure within the corporate limits of the city which constitutes a nuisance and which is found and
declared to be a nuisance by resolution of the city council.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
138/543
(Code 1980, § 9-238)
Sec. 18-468. - Authorized.
Any house, building and/or structure which is found and declared to be a nuisance by resolution of the city
council will be condemned to ensure the removal thereof as provided in this article.
(Code 1980, § 9-239)
Sec. 18-469. - Description of condemned building.
The resolution of the city council condemning any house, building and/or structure which constitutes a nuisance
will include in such resolution an adequate description of the house, building and/or structure; the name or
names, if known, of the owner or owners thereof; and shall set forth the reason or reasons such house, building
and/or structure is or has been condemned as a nuisance.
(Code 1980, § 9-240)
Sec. 18-470. - Copy of resolution of condemnation to be sent to owner.
After a house, building and/or structure has been found and declared to be a nuisance and condemned by
resolution as provided in this article, a true or certified copy of such resolution will be mailed to the owners
thereof, if the whereabouts of such owners thereof be known or if their last-known address be known; and a
copy thereof shall be posted at a conspicuous place on the house, building and/or structure. If the owners of such
house, building and/or structure be unknown or if their whereabouts or last known address be unknown, the
posting of the copy of the resolution as provided in this article will suffice as notice.
(Code 1980, § 9-241)
Sec. 18-471. - Destruction or removal by city.
If the house, building and/or structure constituting a nuisance has not been torn down and removed, or such
nuisance otherwise abated, within 30 days after posting the true copy of the resolution condemning such house,
building and/or structure at a conspicuous place thereon, then the house, building and/or structure constituting
the nuisance will be torn down and/or removed by the building inspector or his duly designated representative.
(Code 1980, § 9-242)
Sec. 18-472. - Notices; publishing, mailing and delivery.
(a)
The city's code enforcement officers shall be responsible for publication, mailing or delivery of all notices
required to condemn structures as public nuisances.
(b)
The city code enforcement officers are hereby required to list each individual code violation for which a
particular property is being condemned, to provide a copy of the list to the property owner, and to keep a copy of
the list in the code enforcement officers' files.
(Code 1980, § 9-242.1; Ord. No. 5236, § 1, 8-26-96)
Sec. 18-473. - Disposition of condemned buildings; sale authorized.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
139/543
The building inspector or any other person designated by him to tear down and remove any such house, building
and/or structure constituting a nuisance will ensure the removal thereof and dispose of the same in such a
manner as deemed appropriate in the circumstances and to that end may, if the house, building and/or structure
shall have a substantial value, sell such house, building and/or structure, or any saleable material thereof, by
public sale to the highest bidder for cash, ten days' notice thereof being first given by one publication in some
newspaper having a general circulation in the city, to ensure its removal and the abatement of the nuisance.
(Code 1980, § 9-243)
Sec. 18-474. - Disposition of proceeds of sale of condemned buildings.
All the proceeds of the sale of any condemned house, building and/or structure, or the proceeds of the sale of
saleable materials therefrom, and all fines collected from the provisions of this article shall be paid by the
persons collecting the same to the city treasurer. If any such house, building and/or structure, or the saleable
materials thereof, be sold for an amount which exceeds all costs incidental to the abatement of the nuisance,
including the cleaning up of the premises by the city, plus any fines imposed, the balance thereof will be
returned by the city treasurer to the former owners of such house, building and/or structure constituting the
nuisance.
(Code 1980, § 9-244)
Sec. 18-475. - Lien on property for net costs.
If the city has any net costs in the removal of any condemned house, building or structure, the city shall have a
lien on the property as provided by A.C.A. §§ 14-54-903 and 14-54-904.
(Code 1980, § 9-244.1)
Sec. 18-476. - Penalty for violation of article.
A penalty as provided by section 1-8 is hereby imposed against the owners of any house, building and/or
structure found and declared to be a nuisance by resolution of the city council 30 days after such house, building
and/or structure has been so found and declared to be a nuisance; and each day thereafter such nuisance be not
abated constitutes a separate and distinct offense, provided the notice as provided in section 18-470 has been
given within ten days after such house, building and/or structure has been by resolution found and declared to be
a nuisance.
(Code 1980, § 9-245)
Sec. 18-477. - Court action authorized.
If it is deemed advisable by the city council that a particular house, building and/or structure be judicially
declared to be a nuisance by a court having jurisdiction of such matters, the city council is hereby authorized to
employ an attorney to bring such an action for such purpose in the name of the city; and the only notice to be
given to the owners of any such house, building and/or structure sought to be judicially declared to be a nuisance
will be that as now provided for by law in such cases in a court of equity or chancery court. When any such
house, building and/or structure has been declared judicially to be a nuisance by a court of competent
jurisdiction, a penalty as provided in section 1-8 is hereby imposed against the owners thereof from the date such
finding is made by the court; and each day thereafter such nuisance is not abated constitutes a separate and
distinct offense. If the owner of any such house, building and/or structure judicially found to be a nuisance fails
or refuses to abide by the orders of the court, the building inspector or other persons referred to in section 18-471
will take such action as provided in section 18-473, and section 18-474 will be applicable to such owner. The
provisions contained in the immediately preceding sentence apply independently of any action as may be taken
by the court judicially declaring the nuisance.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
140/543
(Code 1980, § 9-246)
Sec. 18-478. - Restrictions on renting or leasing property that has been declared unfit for human habitation or
condemned by city council.
(a)
After housing, building, or structure has been declared unfit for human habitation by a housing official pursuant
to Section 309 of the Standard Housing Code the owner or manager of the house, building, or structure shall
obtain a letter of compliance from the housing official of the city prior to renting, leasing or leasing with option
to purchase, the subject property to any other individual or entity.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager of a house, building or structure which is declared unfit for human
habitation by a housing official pursuant to Section 309 of the Standard Housing Code or is condemned by city
council pursuant to Ark. Code Ann. § 14-56-203 to rent, lease or lease with option to purchase said property to
another individual or entity. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00 for
each day that the violation is unlawfully continued.
(Ord. No. 6985, § 1, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 7103, § 5, 3-9-98)
Sec. 18-479. - Notice to property owners prior to their real property being administratively condemned.
(a)
Thirty days notice shall be given to the property owner of any structure prior to that structure being
administratively condemned by the North Little Rock Code Enforcement Department. This notice shall be given
by posting such notice on the structure to be condemned or by mailing such notice to the last known address of
the property owner.
(b)
This 30-day notice requirement shall not apply to structures that are being condemned due to damage caused by
fire or storm or due to immediate health or safety concerns for the public relating to the conditions of the
structure. Before this exception applies and a structure is condemned without the abovementioned 30-day notice
the code enforcement department must document the condition of the property with photographs.
(c)
Section 309.4 of the Standard Housing Code, as adopted by Ordinance No. 7103 [Code section 18-36], is
amended to read as follows:
309.4
Vacating of Condemned Buildings and Utility Services to Condemned Structures.
Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, as so designated and placard by the
housing official, shall be vacated within seven (7) days after notice of such condemnation has been given by the
housing official to the owner and/or occupant of the building. On the eighth (8th) day after said condemnation
the code enforcement department shall notify all utility services that no such services shall be provided to the
dwelling or dwelling unit. After utilities services are cutoff no further services shall be made available until a
rehabilitation permit is obtained or until the director of code enforcement notifies utilities that services may be
provided to the dwelling or dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 7067, §§ 1, 2, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 7491, § 1, 11-12-02)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
141/543
Sec. 18-480. - Rehabilitation of a building or structure previously condemned.
(a)
Permit required. Every person desiring to rehabilitate a building or structure previously condemned by city
council shall submit a written request to rehabilitate with the Director of the North Little Rock Code
Enforcement Department. The request to rehabilitate shall include a listing of the improvements and deadlines to
which the person and North Little Rock Code Enforcement Department agree for accomplishing such
improvements and shall be signed by the person so requesting and the director. The request to rehabilitate shall
include the following statement:
I understand by affixing my signature hereto that I agree to post a surety bond or letter of credit with the city
clerk prior to, yet on the same date, I submit this request to rehabilitate in the amount of $5,000.00. Said bond or
letter of credit is remedial in nature and is posted with the sole intention to provide the City of North Little Rock
with a source of funds to cover the city's costs in the event I fail to comply with the terms as stated above and
applicable provisions of the North Little Rock Code.
I understand and agree that, in the event I fail to comply with the terms of the request to rehabilitate as stated
herein within 45 days of receipt of the request to rehabilitate by the director, the city will proceed with
destruction or removal of the building or structure and shall deduct their costs of such destruction or removal
from this sum. If any funds are remaining after said deduction of costs, the remaining funds shall be returned to
me. Any funds expended towards rehabilitation shall not be credited toward this amount nor paid by the city to
me.
The person submitting the request to rehabilitate shall affix his or her signature beneath.
(b)
Council approval required. Upon receipt of the surety bond or letter of credit and a request to rehabilitate, the
matter shall be submitted to the city council for approval.
(c)
Rehabilitation. In the event the building or structure is rehabilitated to the satisfaction of the director of code
enforcement and in compliance with the North Little Rock Code, the matter may be submitted to the city council
for consideration to "uncondemn" said property.
(d)
Failure to rehabilitate. In the event the building or structure is not rehabilitated to the satisfaction of the director
of code enforcement, the director may remove the structure from the rehabilitation schedule, proceed with
condemnation, and take steps to recover costs expended in accordance with this provision.
(Ord. No. 7490, § 1, 11-12-02)
Sec. 18-481. - Out-of-state owners of rental property.
(1)
Privilege license required. It shall be unlawful for an owner of any structure within the city limits to rent, lease
or allow another to occupy any structure within the city limits without first obtaining a privilege license as is
currently required pursuant section 98-67 of this Municipal Code.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
142/543
Registered agent certificate. No out-of-state landlord (whether commercial or residential) shall be issued a
privilege license until the landlord shall obtain a registered agent certificate issued by the city clerk.
(3)
Obtaining certificate.
(a)
In order to obtain a registered agent certificate the out-of-state owner, at no cost, shall provide the name and
street address of the owner. A post office box number shall not be acceptable as an address; however, a preferred
mailing address such as a post office box number may be furnished to the clerk in addition to the street addresses
required in this subsection. Additionally, the out-of-state owner shall provide the name and street address of a
local registered agent who shall continuously reside within Pulaski County who shall be a natural person upon
whom legal service can be made. A post office box number shall not be acceptable as an address; however, a
preferred mailing address such as a post office box number may be furnished to the clerk in addition to the street
addresses required in this subsection.
(b)
If the out-of-state owner owns multiple properties within North Little Rock, the owner may obtain a single
registered agent certificate for all properties by providing the required information concerning each property to
the city clerk.
(4)
Agent of owner.
(a)
The registered agent shall be an agent of the owner(s) upon whom any process, notice, citation or demand
required or permitted by law to be served upon the owner(s) may be served.
(b)
Service shall be accomplished in accordance with the Arkansas Rules for Civil and Criminal Procedure.
(5)
Enforcing authority. The director of code enforcement is directed to assure all those subject to the requirements
of this chapter comply with such requirements.
(Ord. No. 7498, §§ 1—5, 11-25-02)
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; electricians, § 18-261 et seq.; closing of vacant property, § 66-1;
peddlers and solicitors, ch. 74; secondhand goods, ch. 82; paving contractor's bond, § 94-7; taxation, ch. 98;
special service vehicle permits, § 102-5; vehicles for hire, ch. 114.
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.; general authority
relative to businesses, A.C.A. § 14-54-1401 et seq.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
143/543
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. - Retail liquor businesses located within 1,200 feet of any church or school; prohibited.
(a)
No new permits shall be allowed creating the establishment of a retail liquor business within 1,200 feet of any
church or public or private school, with the distance to be measured from the edge of the property.
(b)
No existing permits for retail liquor businesses shall be allowed to be transferred to any location within 1,200
feet of any church or public or private school, with the distance to be measured from the edge of the property.
(Ord. No. 7457, § 1, 2, 6-10-02)
Sec. 22-2. - Distribution of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, etc.
Any pharmacy or business which includes a pharmacy in the City of North Little Rock shall participate in the
North Little Rock Police Department's program to establish an electronic record keeping system of transactions
involving the distribution of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine products by pharmacists
and registered pharmacy technicians that must be recorded and maintained pursuant to Act 256 of 2005. Any
such business that fails to participate in said program shall be in violation of this ordinance and may be punished
as provided for by North Little Rock Municipal Code Section 1-8.
(Ord. No. 7847, § 1, 8-14-06)
Secs. 22-3—22-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL UTILITY FEES
Sec. 22-36. - Gas company.
(a)
In addition to any fees or taxes being paid to the city by the Arkansas-Louisiana Gas Company, such company
shall pay a monthly meter fee to be computed by multiplying the average number of meters for the preceding
year by $0.85.
(b)
The Arkansas-Louisiana Gas Company shall remit to the city on or before March 25, 1977, and each month
thereafter, the monthly meter fee provided for in subsection (a).
(c)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter or change the terms or conditions of the present franchise
under which the gas company is operating.
(Code 1980, § 17-56(a), (b), (d))
Sec. 22-37. - Telephone company.
(a)
In addition to any fees or taxes now being paid to the city, Southwestern Bell Telephone Company shall pay a
quarterly fee to the city as follows: Southwestern Bell Telephone Company shall remit to the city on or before
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
144/543
March 30, June 30, September 30 and December 30 of each year the sum of $15,000.00.
(b)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter or change the terms or conditions to the present franchise
under which the telephone company is operating.
(Code 1980, § 17-57)
Secs. 22-38—22-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7454, §§ 1—7, adopted May 28, 2002, repealed the former art. III, §§ 22-61—22-66
and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art III, §§ 22-61—22-66, pertained to similar subject
matter and derived from Ord. No. 6810, §§ 1—6, adopted May 12, 1994.
Sec. 22-61. - Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market, unless otherwise
restricted by law.
(Ord. No. 7454, § 1, 5-28-02)
Sec. 22-62. - Definitions.
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer viewers at one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1)
Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
(2)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual
activities".
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
145/543
(1)
Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
(2)
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified
sexual activities"; or
(3)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by
the depiction of "specified anatomical activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult theaters means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment, which regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities".
Nudity or state of nudity means:
(1)
The appearance of the bare human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast.
(2)
A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of
the female breast.
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Residential district means any land within the city limits zoned as R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-T1, as
defined by this section.
Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and/or the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motion picture theater, or adult theater whose inventory, merchandise, or performances are characterized by a
preponderance of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Specified anatomical areas means:
(1)
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttock, and female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and
(2)
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
146/543
Specified sexual activities means:
(1)
Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(2)
Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy;
(3)
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
(Ord. No. 7454, § 2, 5-28-02)
Sec. 22-63. - Classification.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1)
Adult arcade.
(2)
Adult bookstores or adult video stores.
(3)
Adult cabarets.
(4)
Adult motion picture theaters.
(5)
Adult theaters.
Sec. 22-64. - Location of sexually oriented businesses.
(a)
A person commits an offense if he operates or allows to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zone not
classified as I-2 or I-3, or regardless of classification within 1,000 feet of:
(1)
A church or other religious facility;
(2)
A public or private elementary, secondary or post-secondary school;
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
147/543
A boundary of a residential zone or use;
(4)
A public park;
(5)
A hospital or other medical facility; or
(6)
Properties listed on the National Register of Historical Places or local historic districts as identified in the
Arkansas Historic Preservation Program.
(b)
A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of a sexually
oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business.
(c)
For the purposes of subsection (1), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where a
sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or
private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district,
residential lot, hospital or other medical facility, or properties listed on the National Historic Register or local
historic districts as identified by the Arkansas Historic Preservation Program.
(d)
For the purposes of subsection (2) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses
shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior
wall of the structure in which each business is located.
(Ord. No. 7454, § 4, 5-28-02)
Sec. 22-65. - Nonconforming sexually oriented business—Amortization.
(a)
Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on May 28, 2002, which is in violation of section 22-64 of
this article shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue from the
date of the passage of this article, unless sooner terminated for any reason or discontinued for a period of 90
days or more.
Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be
changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another
and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and
continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is
nonconforming;
(b)
A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
subsequent location of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
148/543
district or residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to an
ongoing sexually oriented business, not to a sexually oriented business that has been terminated for any reason
or discontinued for a period of 90 days or more subsequent to the location of the church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot.
(Ord. No. 7454, § 5, 5-28-02)
Sec. 22-66. - Enforcement.
(a)
Any person violating any part of this article, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(b)
If the violation is, in its nature, continuous in respect to time, the penalty for allowing the continuance thereof is
a fine not to exceed $250.00 for each day that the same is unlawfully continued.
(c)
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of section 22-64 of this
article will be subject to a suit for injunction under Arkansas law as well as prosecution for criminal violations.
(Ord. No. 7454, § 6, 5-28-02)
Secs. 22-67—22-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - HOME DAYCARE AND DAYCARE CENTERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 7647, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 26, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code.
Therefore, such ordinance has been added as a new article IV at the editor's discretion.
Section 22-81. - Requirements for home daycares.
That the following are requirements for home daycares operating in the City of North Little Rock:
Home daycares:
(1)
Keeping more than four children (excluding family members) in a 24-hour period constitutes a home daycare.
(2)
All home daycares shall be the full-time residence of the caregiver.
(3)
All home daycares shall be operated in a single family home. Home daycares shall not be permitted in duplex or
apartment units.
(4)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
149/543
The number of children cared for in a home daycare (including the caregiver's own children) shall not exceed ten
children.
(5)
The lot on which a home daycare is to be operated shall be a minimum of 50 feet in width.
(6)
All home daycares shall provide a minimum of 600 square feet of hard surface parking (asphalt or concrete)
with a minimum driveway width at the street of 18 feet.
(7)
All home daycares shall conform to all applicable building and fire regulations.
(8)
All home daycares shall be licensed by the Arkansas Department of Human Services, and a copy of the license
will be furnished to the city clerk of revenue office upon application for a business license.
(9)
Playground area must be grass or an approved soft surface (concrete, gravel or asphalt not allowed).
(10)
All home daycares shall provide a six-foot fence around the play area.
(11)
All home daycares shall apply for a special use and obtain a North Little Rock business license.
(12)
Home daycares are prohibited in all R-1 and R-2 zoning classifications unless special use permit is granted.
(Ord. No. 7647, § 1, 7-26-04)
Sec. 22-82. - Requirements for daycare centers.
The following are requirements for daycare centers operating in the City of North Little Rock:
Daycare centers:
(1)
All daycare centers shall be reviewed by the planning commission through the site plan review process.
(2)
All daycare centers shall conform to all applicable building and fire regulations.
(3)
All daycare centers must be licensed by the Arkansas Department of Human Services, and a copy of the license
furnished to the city clerk or revenue office upon application for a business license.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
150/543
(4)
All daycare centers shall obtain a business license.
(5)
Playground area must be grass or an approved soft surface (concrete, gravel or asphalt not allowed).
(6)
All daycare centers shall be properly zoned or be granted a special use permit.
(7)
All daycare centers shall provide a six-foot fence around the play area.
(Ord. No. 7647, § 2, 7-26-04)
Secs. 22-83—22-90. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - ADULT DAY CARE FACILITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 7660, § 1, adopted September 13, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code.
Therefore, such ordinance has been added as a new article V at the editor's discretion.
Sec. 22-91. - Requirements.
That the following are requirements for adult day care facilities operating in the City of North Little Rock:
(1)
Definitions:
Adult day care program. A group program designed to provide care and supervision to meet the needs of four or
more functionally impaired adults for periods of less than 24 hours, but more than two hours per day in a place
other than the adult's own home.
Adult day health care program. A program which provides organized and continuing therapeutic, rehabilitative
and supportive health and social services and activities to meet the needs of four or more functionally impaired
adults for periods of less than 24, but more than two, hours per day in a place other than the adult's own home.
(2)
Governing laws: Adult day care facilities located in the City of North Little Rock shall operate according to the
laws of the State of Arkansas and guidelines set by the Arkansas Department of Human Services, Division of
Aging and Adult Services.
• Act 968 of 1985
• Arkansas Stats. Ann. § 82-2208
• Act 58 of 1969 as amended
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
151/543
• Act 28 of 1979 as amended
(3)
Requirements: In order to operate an adult day care facility in the City of North Little Rock, the owner/operator
must:
a.
Seek the approval of the North Little Rock Planning Commission and present a building and site plan for the
facility.
b.
Obtain approval from the planning commission that the facility has met all requirements and has the approval of
the commission for operation of the adult day care facility at the location requested.
c.
Obtain a letter from a licensed contractor stating that the facility complies with state plumbing and electrical
codes.
d.
Obtain a letter from the health department approving the facility.
e.
Obtain a letter of inspection from the fire department/marshal.
f.
Obtain a license from the department of human services, office of long term care. Owner/operator may be
exempt from this requirement if:
1.
The facility is operated two hours or less per day.
2.
The facility is operated by the federal government.
3.
The owner/operator cares solely for relatives or is their guardian.
4.
The facility cares for no more than three persons.
(4)
Staffing requirements: The adult day care facility must meet all staffing requirements as determined by the State
of Arkansas Department of Human Services, Division of Aging and Adult Services.
(5)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
152/543
Space requirements: The facility will have at least 40 square feet or space per participant. Space does not include
office space, bathrooms or storage, but may include dining rooms if they are used for other activities.
(6)
Parking requirements: Minimum parking requirements will be determined by the planning commission based on
each individual adult day care facility.
(7)
Accommodations for handicapped: The facility shall have ramps or other means of accessibility for handicapped
persons. All inside and outside stairs and ramps shall have handrails.
(8)
Transfer of license: The special use and/or privilege license issued to the adult day care provider shall not be
transferable where there is a change of ownership or when the program is moved to another location or facility.
The privilege license shall be renewed annually.
(Ord. No. 7660, § 1, 9-13-04)
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Emergency management, A.C.A. § 12-75-101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 26-1—26-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY CURFEWS AND SIMILAR MEASURES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Offenses involving public peace and order, § 66-66 et seq.; offenses involving public safety,
§ 66-136 et seq.
State Law reference— Local disaster emergencies, A.C.A. § 12-75-108.
Sec. 26-36. - Violations.
(a)
It shall be the duty of officers of the police department, and members of any agency of government acting in aid
of the local police during an emergency, to arrest any person violating a curfew order promulgated pursuant to
this article and detain such person in confinement until expiration of the curfew period. Such person shall then
be charged with violation of this Code and shall be permitted to make bail (or be released upon his recognizance
if the court so directs) to appear in the municipal court to answer to such charge.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
153/543
It shall be the duty of officers of the police department, and members of any agency of government acting in aid
of the local police during an emergency, to arrest any person acting in violation of the provisions of section 26-
40 of this article, and to detain such person in confinement until the time of expiration of the order prohibiting
the sale or other disposition of items therein mentioned. Such person shall then be charged with violation of this
Code and shall be permitted to make bond (or be released upon his recognizance if the court so directs) to appear
in the municipal court to answer such charge.
(Code 1980, § 10-20)
Sec. 26-37. - Curfew—Authorized; duration.
(a)
When a condition within the city which constitutes a civil disturbance, riot, insurrection, public disorder or
disaster arises or is imminent, the mayor is hereby authorized to declare, by proclamation, a state of public
emergency, and to order a curfew for such time applicable to the city or such areas thereof as he may deem
warranted by such emergency.
(b)
The curfew order authorized by this section may exempt from its application any person whose presence or
services the mayor considers necessary for the public peace, welfare and safety. Any such persons shall be
specified in the order.
(c)
The curfew order shall not extend more than 48 hours from the time it becomes effective, except that the mayor,
with the approval of a majority of the members of the council, may extend such curfew order for successive
intervals of 48 hours duration (or less) as continuance of the emergency may warrant.
(Code 1980, § 10-16)
Sec. 26-38. - Same—Publication; notice to public.
Publication of the proclamation and order of curfew shall be made by posting a copy thereof at the main
entrance of the city hall building, and by causing information concerning the issuance of the proclamation and
order to be made available to local news media including the press, radio and television broadcasters. However,
posting of the copy of the proclamation and order at the city hall entrance as provided in this section shall be
deemed notice to all persons affected by the curfew.
(Code 1980, § 10-17)
Sec. 26-39. - Same—Obedience required.
Except for officers and employees of the United States, the state, county, and city (or of any other subdivision of
government) engaged in the performance of their official duties, it shall be unlawful for any person to be upon or
about public ways, buildings or places within the area and during the time to which the curfew order is
applicable. Such curfew order may except from its application any person or persons therein specified whose
presence or services the mayor may consider necessary to the public peace, welfare and safety.
(Code 1980, § 10-18)
Sec. 26-40. - Authority of mayor to prohibit certain businesses.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
154/543
The mayor is hereby authorized, in conjunction with any curfew order (or independently of a curfew order,
under proclamation of a state of public emergency), to make an order prohibiting all persons from selling,
dispensing or making available, by barter, trade or otherwise, firearms and ammunition of every kind and
character, explosives of every kind and description, gasoline, naphtha, kerosene and other like flammable
substances, any and all types of alcoholic beverages including spirituous liquors, wine and beer, within the city
or the area or areas thereof to which such order is made applicable. The time during which such order may be
effective may be of the same duration as that established for a curfew or any extension of a curfew, in like
manner as provided in section 26-37 of this article.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to do or perform any act prohibited by an order made pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
(Code 1980, § 10-19)
Chapter 30 - COURTS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-1. - Fine to defray costs of incarcerating prisoners.
(a)
That the North Little Rock District Court is hereby authorized and directed to levy an additional $5.00 fine to
each defendant who pleads guilty or nolo contendere to, is found guilty of, or forfeits bond for any misdemeanor
or traffic violation in said court.
(b)
That the revenue from the additional fine levied shall be used to defray the city's costs of incarcerating prisoners.
(Ord. No. 7691, §§ 1, 2, 2-28-05)
Editor's note—
Ordinance No. 7691, §§ 1, 2, adopted February 28, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such
ordinance has been added as a new section 30-1 at the editor's discretion.
Secs. 30-2—30-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Legal department, § 2-366 et seq.
State Law reference— Municipal courts, A.C.A. § 16-17-101 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 30-36. - Record of fees collected.
The clerk of the municipal court and the police department shall make and keep a monthly record of the fees and
costs collected under this article and remit such fees and costs in the usual manner, to the city treasurer, and such
fees and costs shall be used to assist in defraying the expenses of the municipal court.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
155/543
(Code 1980, § 19-5)
Sec. 30-37. - Additional costs for policemen's pension fund.
(a)
In addition to all other costs as are now or as may hereafter be provided by law, for each defendant as costs upon
each judgment of conviction and upon each plea of guilty in misdemeanor cases in the municipal court where an
arrest of the defendant was made by an officer of the city there shall be taxed and collected the sum of $1.00.
(b)
All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the treasury of the city and shall be paid over to
the custodian of the policemen's pension and relief fund and credited by him on his records to such fund.
(Code 1980, § 19-3)
State law reference— Authority for above costs, A.C.A. § 16-92-110.
Sec. 30-38. - Probation supervision fee—Traffic division.
There is hereby authorized a probation supervision fee for probationers in the municipal court, traffic division, in
an amount not to exceed $50.00, which may be imposed by the municipal judge or, in his discretion, waived in
lieu of community service work.
(Code 1980, § 19-6)
Sec. 30-39. - Same—Criminal division.
There is hereby authorized a probation supervision fee for probations in the municipal court, criminal division,
in an amount not to exceed $20.00 per month, which may be imposed by the municipal judge or, in his
discretion, waived in lieu of community service work.
(Code 1980, § 19-7)
Secs. 30-40—30-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC DEFENDER
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-151 et seq.
Sec. 30-61. - Position created.
There is hereby created the position of public defender for the city.
(Code 1980, § 19-21)
Sec. 30-62. - Qualifications; selection.
(a)
Any person appointed as public defender shall be a qualified elector and licensed to practice law in the state.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
156/543
(b)
The municipal judges shall submit the names of those persons who in their opinion are qualified to serve as the
public defender, and the appointment shall be confirmed by written resolution by the city council. In the event of
a vacancy in the office of public defender and if the municipal judges fail to submit names to the city council to
fill the vacancy within ten days after a vacancy exists, then the mayor shall make the appointment of the person
to serve as public defender and the appointment must be confirmed by the city council.
(Code 1980, § 19-22)
Sec. 30-63. - Exemption from civil service.
The public defender shall not be subject to any civil service law, rules or regulations.
(Code 1980, § 19-23)
Sec. 30-64. - Duties.
The public defender shall maintain records regarding the conduct of his office and the performance of his duties
pursuant to procedures which may be established by the municipal judges and shall represent indigent
defendants before the municipal courts of the city.
(Code 1980, § 19-24)
Sec. 30-65. - Persons eligible to obtain services of public defender.
Any person desiring to obtain the service of the public defender shall affirm in writing that he is without funds or
assets with which to employ private counsel; the affirmation shall further provide in bold print that a false
statement as to the financial status of that person shall be punishable by imprisonment of not less than 30 days
nor more than one year with a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00. The affirmation certificate
shall be provided by the public defender to the indigent person and upon execution of such certificate the
affirmation shall be a permanent part of the indigent person's record.
(Code 1980, § 19-25)
Chapter 34 - ELECTIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Referendum petitions, § 2-1; city council, § 2-46 et seq.; mayor, § 2-181 et seq.
State Law reference— Elections generally, A.C.A. § 7-1-101 et seq.; municipal elections, A.C.A. § 14-43-201
et seq.
Sec. 34-1. - Wards.
There shall be four wards in the city, as follows:
(1)
Ward I. Ward I shall include the following territory:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
157/543
The western boundary proceeds from the corner of Pike Avenue and West 13th, north on Pike Avenue to Camp
Robinson Road, thence continues north to West 47th Street. The northern boundary thus proceeds east on 47th
Street until it becomes McCain Boulevard, ending where McCain Boulevard intersects Highway 67-167. The
southern boundary begins at this point and proceeds southwest along Jacksonville Boulevard to East 13th Street,
thence to West 13th Street, thence west to Pike Avenue.
(2)
Ward II. Ward II is bounded on the south and east by the city limits and a northwestern boundary runs from the
southern end of Pike Avenue north to West 13th Street, thence east to Jacksonville Boulevard and following
Jacksonville Boulevard ends at the intersection of Highway 67-167 and 43rd Road.
(3)
Ward III. Ward III is bounded on the south, west and north by the city limits. The eastern boundary follows
Camp Robinson Road from its northernmost point to West 50th, thence west to Pike Avenue and south to the
city limits.
(4)
Ward IV. Ward IV is bounded on the north and east by the city limits, with the west boundary proceeding south
on Camp Robinson Road from its most northern point to West 50th Street, thence west to Pike Avenue and south
to Camp Robinson Road, thence north on Camp Robinson Road to West 47th Street. Beginning at the southern
boundary proceed east on 47th, which becomes McCain Boulevard and continues to proceed east to Highway
67-167 and thence northwest to 43rd Road.
(Code 1980, § 2-16)
Editor's note—
The above section as written incorporates the order rendered in In re: The Redistricting of the Wards of the City
of North Little Rock, Arkansas, Case No. 78-480. (Circuit Court, Pulaski County, Second Division, March 3,
1978.)
State law reference— Wards generally, A.C.A. § 14-43-303 et seq.
Chapter 38 - EMERGENCY SERVICES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 38-1. - Service charge for 911 emergency telephone system.
(a)
A service charge of five percent shall be levied on the basic tariff rate approved by the state public service
commission on all telephone access lines of any telephone system within the corporate limits of the city for
proper funding of a 911 public safety communications center.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
158/543
The service charge levied in this section shall be collected by any telephone service supplier who provides
telephone access service within the corporate limits of the city at such times as all service suppliers establish
appropriate billing and collection procedures.
(c)
Amounts collected from the service charge levied in this section shall be remitted to the finance director of the
city no later than 60 days after the close of each calendar quarter.
(d)
The service suppliers shall be entitled to retain as an administrative fee, an amount equal to one per cent of the
service charge levied in this section.
(e)
All 911 revenue remitted to the city shall be accounted for separately from other city revenues and any increase
accrued by deposit or investment shall be credited to the 911 account.
(f)
911 revenues may be expended for only such expenditures as are allowed by the Arkansas Public Safety
Communications Act of 1985 (A.C.A. § 12-10-301 et seq.). These expenditures shall be recommended and
budgeted by the office of emergency services and approved by the city council in accordance with normal
finance procedures and the city's budgetary process. The 911 account shall reimburse the general fund of the city
for those approved expenditures.
(Code 1980, § 17-58)
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 98.
State law reference— Authority for above fee, A.C.A. § 12-10-318.
Secs. 38-2—38-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 58.
State Law reference— Alarm systems, A.C.A. § 17-33-101 et seq.
Sec. 38-36. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged, designed or used to signal the
occurrence in the city of a burglary, robbery or other criminal offense, fire emergency or medical emergency
requiring urgent attention, and to which police, fire or emergency medical personnel are expected to respond.
Alarm systems include those through which public safety personnel are notified indirectly by way of third
persons who monitor the alarm systems and who report such signals to the fire or police department and those
designed to register a signal which is so audible, visible, or in other ways perceptible outside a protected
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
159/543
building, structure or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood beyond the zoning lot where the signal is
located who in turn may notify the police or fire department of the signal. "Alarm systems" does not include
those alarms affixed to automobiles; furthermore, such term does not include auxiliary devices installed by
telephone companies to protect telephone equipment or systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the
use of an alarm system. Alarms in separate structures are to be counted as separate systems even though owned
by the same person or entity.
False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by the police or fire department when a situation
requiring a response by the police or fire department does not in fact exist. "False alarm" does not include an
alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject
to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user. Alarms resulting from the following conditions are not
considered false alarms:
(1)
Criminal activity or unauthorized entry;
(2)
Telephone line malfunction verified in writing to the city by at least a first-line telephone company supervisor;
(3)
Electrical service interruption, verified in writing to the city by local power company;
(4)
Communication to the police or fire department before a unit is dispatched to investigate clearly indicating that
the alarm resulted from authorized entry, authorized system test, or other noncriminal cause; or
(5)
An alarm caused on the reasonable but mistaken belief that a burglary, robbery or other criminal offense, fire
emergency, or medical emergency is in progress.
(6)
Activation of a lighting or audible device not connected by telephone or other means to alert law enforcement
personnel or third parties contracted to notify law enforcement personnel. However, should the repeated or
habitual activation of such a device unreasonably and consistently falsely deploy and thereby annoy neighboring
property owners, the chief of police may in writing to the property owner, declare such a device to be a false
alarm for the purposes of this section.
Subscriber means any person or entity who or which purchases, leases, contracts for, or obtains an alarm system.
(Code 1980, § 21-101; Ord. No. 7051, § 1, 6-9-97)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 38-37. - Response to alarms; inspection of alarm system.
(a)
Whenever an alarm is activated in the city thereby requiring an emergency response to the location by the police
or fire department and the police or fire department does respond, the police or fire department personnel on the
scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall determine whether
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
160/543
the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm signal was a
false alarm.
(b)
If the police or fire department personnel at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be
false, the officers shall make a report of the false alarm.
(c)
The chief of police or fire department or his designee shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the
premises to which a response has been made, and he may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any
reasonable time thereafter.
(Code 1980, § 21-102)
Sec. 38-38. - Excessive false alarms; fine assessment.
(a)
In the first instance that an alarm system produces three false alarms in any calendar month, the chief of the
involved department shall provide written notice of the fact, which shall be given by certified mail or delivery to
the subscriber, asking the subscriber to take corrective action in regard to false alarms and informing the
subscriber of the false alarm fine schedule provided in this section. On subsequent instances of more than three
false alarms within a single calendar month, the chief of the affected department shall bill the subscriber by
certified mail or delivery in accordance with the fine schedule in this section.
(b)
Subscribers installing a new system or making substantial modifications to an existing system shall be entitled to
a grace period during which alarms generated by such system shall be deemed nonfalse alarms. The grace period
shall cease 30 days after installation of or modification to an alarm system.
(c)
Upon any alarm system producing a fourth, fifth or sixth false alarm in a calendar month, a fine of $25.00 per
false alarm shall be charged to the subscriber. The following fine schedule shall be used for each additional false
alarm.
(1)
Seventh, eighth and ninth false alarms in a calendar month, a fine of $50.00 per false alarm shall be assessed.
(2)
Ten or more false alarms in a calendar month, a fine of $100.00 per false alarm shall be assessed.
(d)
Refusal or failure of any subscriber to pay any fine assessment as provided for in this section shall be punished
as provided in section 1-8. If the subscriber is a firm, corporation, partnership or other entity, the principal or
employee directly responsible for the operation of the enterprise at the location from which the false alarm was
initiated shall be responsible for the payment of any fine assessments levied in accordance with this article.
(Code 1980, § 21-103)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
161/543
Sec. 38-39. - Decisions final.
All decisions made pursuant to this article are final.
(Code 1980, § 21-104)
Secs. 38-40—38-55. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - AMBULANCE SERVICES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 114.
Sec. 38-56. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Advanced life support (ALS) means a level of emergency service provided by an emergency medical technicianparamedic
(EMT-P) trained at the level of advance life support, including resuscitation techniques such as
intubation, intravenous access, and cardiac monitoring.
Ambulance means any motor vehicle equipped with facilities to convey infirm or injured persons in a reclining
position.
Ambulance contractor or contractor means the public or private ambulance company, if any, that contracts with
the city to provide ambulance services to the city operating alone or pursuant to any interlocal agreements
approved by the city council with other municipalities and counties.
Ambulance control center means the facility designated by the city and the contractor from which all
ambulances are dispatched and controlled.
Ambulance district means any of the geographic subdivisions of the city and other contracted areas established
for ambulance service planning and evaluation purposes by the contractor.
Ambulance service area means that area which is contained within the boundaries of the municipal limits of the
City of North Little Rock and the area of those jurisdictions participating by interlocal agreement in the
contractor's system.
Ambulance patient means any person who is ill, infirm, injured or otherwise incapacitated, bedridden or helpless
and requires or requests ambulance service or helicopter rescue service to or from a hospital, physician's office,
nursing home or other health care facility.
Ambulance personnel means paramedics and emergency medical technicians.
Ambulance run means a patient transport by ambulance on a for-hire fee for service or prepaid capitation basis.
Ambulance service means any business or service established to transport patients from one place to another
within the city or other contracted areas by an ambulance.
Arkansas Emergency Physicians' Foundation or AEPF, Inc. means the nonprofit professional and charitable
organization composed of licensed physicians, a majority of whom are regularly engaged in the full-time
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
162/543
professional practice of emergency medicine. This term may apply to this organization, or any similar
organization, or a separate board created by the city.
Base station physician means a physician licensed under the Arkansas Medical Practices Act (A.C.A. § 17-93-
201 et seq.), and certified by the AEPF, Inc., or the American College of Emergency Physicians, or operating
under the supervision of such a physician.
Basic life support (BLS) means a level of emergency service provided by an emergency medical technician
(EMT) that includes basic techniques such as bleeding control, simple airway maneuvers, and administration of
oxygen.
Dispatcher means any person who works in the ambulance control center and dispatches ambulances.
Driver means any person who is certified by the license officer to drive ambulances in the city.
Emergency medical technician or EMT means any person certified by the state as an emergency medical
technician.
Exclusive franchise means the exclusive right to engage in all emergency and non-emergency intracity patient
transports and intercity and intracounty patient transports originating from within the City of North Little Rock
or the contractor's operating area as established by interlocal agreement.
First responder means any person capable of providing qualified first responder emergency care as required by
the AEPF, Inc.
Intercity patient transport means an ambulance run which transports a patient from a point within the city to
another city, or from another city to a point inside the city.
Intracity patient transport means an ambulance run which transports a patient from one point to another within
the city.
Life-threatening emergency means any situation posing immediate threat to human life as determined in
accordance with AEPF, Inc. protocols.
Medical audit means an official inquiry into the circumstances involving an ambulance run or request for
service.
Medical control means medical direction given ambulance personnel by a base station physician through direct
voice contact.
Medical protocol means any diagnosis-specific or problem-oriented written statement or standard procedure, or
algorithm, approved by the AEPF, Inc. as the normal standard used to determine level of response, pre-arrival
instruction, and of pre-hospital care for that given clinical condition.
Non-life threatening emergency means an emergency situation which does not pose an immediate threat to
human life as determined in accordance with AEPF, Inc. protocols.
Paramedic means a person certified by the state as a paramedic.
Response time means the actual elapsed time between receipt of notification at the EMS control center than an
ambulance is needed at an identifiable location and the arrival of an ambulance at that location.
Run code 1-presumptive designation means any ALS ambulance service request designated as a time critical,
life-threatening emergency situation by a dispatcher as designated in accordance with AEPF, Inc. telephone and
dispatch protocols.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
163/543
Run code 2-presumptive designation means any ALS ambulance service request designated by the dispatcher as
an emergency medical condition for which prompt response is appropriate for medical and humanitarian
reasons, but which apparently involves no immediate threat to human life of a time-critical nature as designated
in accordance with AEPF, Inc. telephone and dispatch protocols.
Other run codes-presumptive designation means any ambulance service request for ambulance transportation of
a person whose apparent condition cannot appropriately be designated as either code 1 or 2 as designated in
accordance with AEPF, Inc. telephone and dispatch protocols. This includes routine non-emergency transports.
The response to this ambulance service request may be either ALS or BLS, as designated in accordance with
AEPF, Inc. telephone and dispatch protocols.
Senior paramedic in charge means that individual among the certified personnel on board an ambulance unit
who is not the driver and who is a paramedic currently certified under state law, and who is designated by his
employer or immediate supervisor as the individual in command of the ambulance and its operation.
Special use permit means a permit issued by the license officer to hospitals serving the public for the provision
of specialized mobile intensive care services to clinically defined patient populations (such as neonatal
transport), and permits issued pursuant to section 38-64.
System status management means the formal and orderly process of continuously locating ambulance units
available for dispatch among post locations throughout the geographic area being served to maintain the best
possible readiness configuration at all times.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 1, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 7788, § 1, 2-27-06)
Sec. 38-57. - Penalty.
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in
section 1-8. Each day that any violation of, or failure to comply with, this article is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense under this section and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. Each ambulance run unlawfully performed shall be considered a separate offense. Each hour of
illegally rendered standby services shall be considered a separate offense. Each incident of willful falsification of
data by a licensee shall be considered a separate offense. Each ambulance run for which records are willfully
omitted shall be considered a separate offense. Each instance of willful participation in the committing of an
offense by an individual working as a paramedic, EMT, or dispatcher shall also be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 2, 8-26-96)
Sec. 38-58. - Purpose and general intent.
(a)
Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to outline standards of production and performance and to enter into an
agreement to establish a regulated ambulance service system that can provide each ambulance patient with the
best possible chance of survival without disability or preventable complication.
(b)
General intent. It is the intent of the city council that:
(1)
Exclusively is mandatory because it is neither fair nor financially feasible to require a high level of emergency
performance from one ambulance company while simultaneously allowing other ambulance companies to select
certain preferred nonemergency business.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
164/543
(2)
Substantive regulation requiring clinical excellence and citywide lifesaving response time performance cannot
reasonably be imposed on an unsubsidized ambulance company without simultaneously granting that ambulance
company an exclusive contract to furnish all ambulance service, both emergency and nonemergency, to residents
of the city.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 3, 8-26-96)
Sec. 38-59. - Operation on fee or for-hire basis.
Except as provided in section 38-58 and section 38-60, no person, or entity, public or private, shall operate an
ambulance to transport the sick, injured or infirm on a fee or for-hire basis, regardless of whether an emergency
or routine nonemergency patient transport, upon any street within the city or other contracted areas.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 4, 8-26-96)
Sec. 38-60. - Exemptions.
(a)
This article does not apply to any intercity patient transport in which the ambulance run does not originate in the
city by an ambulance from the destination city.
(b)
An ambulance service license shall not be required for ambulance services which are:
(1)
Owned and operated by an agency of the United States government.
(2)
Rendering requested assistance to ambulance currently licensed in cases of disaster or major emergency too
great for local resources, or in response to provisions of a written mutual aid agreement approved by the
ambulance authority.
(3)
Engaged in intercounty or intercity patient transport to or from facilities within the city and its franchise area
extended by interlocal agreement but originating anywhere outside the city and its franchise area.
(4)
Rendering ambulance services under contract with the authority.
(5)
Private companies which use an ambulance solely for the transportation of their employees for illness or injury
sustained while performing their work.
(6)
Operating a privately owned ambulance designed especially for the transportation of the infirm or physically
handicapped where the ambulance is used solely for the benefit of the owner and not for hire on a fee for service
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
165/543
or prepaid basis.
(7)
Ambulances owned and operated by a licensed hospital and used exclusively for specialized mobile intensive
care or for institutional transfers of their own admitted patients, or residents, provided such hospital shall apply
for and receive a special use mobile intensive care license or be eligible for grandfather licensing, as provided
for under section 38-64. Such special use permit is nontransferable by the hospital.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 5, 8-26-96)
Sec. 38-61. - Intracity ambulance service.
It shall be unlawful for any person, or entity, public or private, to operate an intracity ambulance service which
provides emergency or nonemergency prehospital care or patient transports except as specifically allowed
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 6, 8-26-96)
Sec. 38-62. - Control by board of directors.
The contractor is authorized to operate the city ambulance service system under the supervision and control of
the contractor's board of directors. Contractor shall allow the mayor to appoint two representatives to the board
to represent the city on the board.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 7, 8-26-96)
Sec. 38-63. - Standards of production and performance.
The contractor shall follow the following as minimum standards:
(1)
Equipment and management capability. Each and every ambulance and all on-board equipment utilized by the
contractor in performing services which are the subject of this article shall comply with applicable standards
required for licensure. The provider shall maintain the equipment and shall employ sufficient backup equipment
to ensure that a safe level of reserve equipment capacity is available to provide peak period ambulance coverage
even at times when unusual occurrences of equipment breakdown and routine equipment maintenance coincide.
(2)
Personnel. The contractor shall ensure:
a.
That two (2) persons certified under state law are on board each ambulance on ALS (code 1 or 2) ambulance
runs or available for dispatch, at least one (1) of which is certified as a paramedic, and the other of which is
certified as a paramedic or emergency medical technician (EMT).
b.
If only one (1) person on board is a certified paramedic, that person shall not function as the driver while the
patient is on board. Every BLS ambulance subject to regulation under this article is required to have on board
two (2) EMT's, one to drive and the other to attend. The contractor shall establish and maintain sufficient
management capability to ensure that equipment and personnel utilized are managed in an efficient and effective
manner to produce the desired clinical performance and response time performance on a routine basis.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
166/543
(3)
Clinical performance. The clinical performance of the contractor and its personnel shall be consistent with and
shall confirm to the operating procedures and medical protocols adopted by the AEPF, Inc. Where clinical
performance deficiencies are discovered, the contractor shall demonstrate an aggressive and effective effort to
correct the deficiencies in a timely manner.
(4)
Response time performance. Response time performance standards are as follows:
a.
Code 1 calls. (life threatening emergencies)
1.
The fire department shall furnish a diligent good faith effort to manage all available resources to achieve a fourminute
maximum response time for a trained first responder to a code 1.
2.
The contractor shall furnish a diligent good faith effort to maintain an eight-minute (8:59) maximum response
time for an advanced life support paramedic ambulance. The contractor shall employ enough personnel, acquire
enough equipment and manage its resources in the manner necessary to meet the eight-minute response time
standard on not less than 90 percent of all presumptively designated code 1 calls originating each month from
within the city limits.
3.
Where an ambulance unit is dispatched from a nontransporting first-response-only status its response time may
be counted as the contractor ambulance response time even though the patient was transported by a different
ambulance. In addition, the response time of a neighboring ambulance service responding by mutual aid request
may also be counted as the contractor's ambulance response time, provided the level of life support capability
furnished by the neighboring ambulance service is comparable to that required under this article, as determined
by the AEPF, Inc., and provided that reliance upon neighboring ambulance service operators is only an
occasional event and not a routine method of operation of the contractor.
b.
Code 2 calls (non-life threatening emergencies. The contractor shall establish a 12-minute (12.59) advanced life
support paramedic ambulance response time standard for code 2 calls on not less than 90 percent of all
presumptively designated code 2 calls originating each month from within the city limits.
c.
Other run codes (non-life threatening). The contractor's response to other run codes shall be reasonable, but in
every case where a conflicting demand for resources occurs, response to code 1 and code 2 calls shall take
precedence over requests for service requests. Furthermore, the contractor shall display sound judgment in
developing its system status management plans to preserve a safe level of emergency response capability at all
times by delaying response to requests for non-emergency service until additional ambulance units become
available whenever the number of remaining ambulance units available for dispatch falls below a reasonably
established safe level of emergency reserve capacity, as determined by historical demand analyses.
d.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
167/543
Retrospective designation. For purposes of this subsection, the designation of a run as code 1, code 2, or other
shall be made by the contractor's system status management personnel at the point of dispatch on a presumptive
basis and no retrospective alteration of such designation shall be allowed. However, runs originally designated
as code 2, or other may be retrospectively redesignated upward by the executive director, if the executive
director disputes the original designation, and the contractor's board requests a determination from the AEPF
who then reviews and determines that the original designation was improper, given the information available to
the EMS control center personnel at the time of the presumptive designation of the run code type.
e.
Exempt calls. Certain types of calls may be excluded as specified by the medical director and the executive
director on a standard form signed by both. Such records are maintained in the office of the operations manager.
f.
Community response time. In addition to the response time performance standard required under this section for
run code 1 and run code 2 calls, the contractor shall furnish and manage its resources in the manner necessary to
provide reliable emergency and nonemergency ambulance service throughout the entire city and shall perform
its system status management and system status planning operations so as to minimize the differences in the
respective average emergency-response-time performances among the various ambulance districts of the city to
the greatest practical extent. In addition, the contractor shall take such steps as necessary to reduce or eliminate
any continuing pattern of apparent discrimination in the average response time performance to any given
ambulance district or portion thereof.
(5)
Continuous physician medical control required. The contractor shall be responsible for ensuring that its field
personnel at all times have access to qualified medical control and direction concerning the care of patients in
the field by a base station physician or nurse. All medical control and direction shall be available by reliable
radio communications, according to the communications standards and applicable standards of medical control.
(6)
Refusal to render emergency care prohibited. It is a violation of this article to fail to respond to a call to provide
emergency ambulance service, to render first-aid treatment as is necessary, or to otherwise refuse to provide any
emergency ambulance services within the scope of the ambulance operations, provided that these services are
not required if the patient refuses to consent to treatment.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 8, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 7788, §§ 2, 3, 2-27-06)
Sec. 38-64. - Vehicle permits.
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to regulation by this article to operate an ambulance or helicopter
service unless a currently valid state vehicle permit has been issued.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 9, 8-26-96)
Sec. 38-65. - Patient management and management of scene.
Authority for patient management in a medical emergency shall be invested in the senior paramedic designated
by the contractor. Authority for the management of the scene of a medical emergency shall be vested in the
senior paramedic until appropriate public safety officials arrive on the scene and take control. The scene of a
medical emergency shall be managed in a manner described to minimize the risk of death or health impairment
to the patient and to other persons who may be exposed to the risks as a result of the emergency condition, and
priorities shall be placed upon the interests of those persons exposed to the more serious risks to life and health.
Public safety officials shall ordinarily consult the senior paramedic in charge at the scene in the determination of
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
168/543
relevant risk factors. In the event a licensed physician appears on the scene and desires to assume direction and
control of patient care, the licensed physician may do so if the base station physician releases the paramedic
from responsibility for directing patient care and the physician who is on scene continues care in the ambulance
to the hospital.
(Ord. No. 7001, § 10, 8-26-96)
Chapter 42 - ENVIRONMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— City beautiful commission, § 2-556 et seq.; trash containers and waste materials at North
Little Rock Municipal Airport, § 14-141; health and sanitation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 106;
vegetation, ch. 110.
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.; environmental
law, A.C.A. § 8-1-101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 42-1. - Removal of uncut weeds, grass and other unsightly and insanitary articles.
(a)
Required. All property owners within the city are hereby required to cut weeds and grass, remove garbage,
rubbish and other unsightly and insanitary articles and things from their property, and to eliminate, fill up, or
remove stagnant pools of water or any other insanitary thing, place or condition which might become a breeding
place for mosquitoes, flies and germs harmful to the health of the community.
(b)
Action on noncompliance. If the owner of any lot or other real property within the city shall neglect or refuse to
remove, abate or eliminate any condition as may be provided for under subsection (a) of this section, after
having been given seven days' notice in writing to do so by the appropriate city official, the city is hereby
authorized to do whatever is necessary to correct the condition, including but not limited to entering upon the
property and having such weeds, rank grass or other vegetation cut and removed, or eliminating any insanitary
and unsightly condition, and charging the cost thereof to the owner of such premises, which shall constitute a
lien thereon. The abovementioned seven days' notice shall be calculated by counting the first day of the seven
day period as the day after written notice is given to the owner, by counting every calendar day, including
weekends and holidays, and by establishing the deadline to take the above required actions as 11:59 p.m. on the
seventh day.
(c)
Posting notice on premises. If the owner of any lot or other real property is unknown or such owner's
whereabouts is not known or such owner is a nonresident of this state, then a copy of the written notice referred
to in subsection (b) of this section shall be posted upon the premises, and before any action to enforce the lien
shall be had, the city clerk shall make an affidavit setting out the facts as to unknown address or whereabouts of
nonresidents. Thereupon, service of the publication, as provided for by law against nonresident defendants, may
be had, and an attorney ad litem shall be appointed to notify the defendant by registered letter addressed to his
last known place of residence if it can be found.
(d)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
169/543
Penalty. Violation of this section is prohibited and hereby expressly declared to be unlawful and punishable
under section 1-8 of this Code.
(Code 1980, § 14-4; Ord. No. 7144, § 1, 6-22-98)
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 110.
State law reference— Nuisance abatement, A.C.A. §§ 14-54-103(1), 14-54-901; lien for same, A.C.A. §§ 14-
54-903, 14-54-904.
Secs. 42-2—42-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; closing of vacant property, § 66-1.
State Law reference— Municipal authority relative to nuisances, A.C.A. § 14-54-901 et seq.
Sec. 42-31. - Defined.
For the purposes of this article, the word "nuisance" is hereby defined as any person doing an unlawful act, or
omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission,
condition or thing either:
(1)
Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
(2)
Offends decency;
(3)
Is offensive to the senses;
(4)
Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage any public or private
street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage;
(5)
In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or
(6)
Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the
property of others.
(Code 1980, § 20-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
170/543
Sec. 42-32. - Illustrative enumeration.
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private
property of any of the following items, conditions or actions is hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance;
provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
(1)
Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation.
(2)
Accumulations of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things.
(3)
Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin.
(4)
Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or
kept in such an insanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or
presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located.
(5)
All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises.
(6)
All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which
give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches.
(7)
The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death.
(8)
The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals,
creamery, industrial wastes or other substances.
(9)
Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or
federal law is conducted, performed or maintained.
(10)
Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground.
(11)
Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities.
(12)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
171/543
Grass or weeds that:
a.
Exceed eight inches in height in all residential districts; or
b.
Exceed eight inches in height on lots in all commercial zone districts and industrial zone districts on which a
structure is located; or
c.
Exceed 24 inches in height on lots in all commercial zone districts and industrial zone districts on which a
structure is not located;
d.
Except that the restrictions noted above will not apply to areas specifically designated or recognized by the city,
the state or the United States as agricultural, wetlands, open spaces, natural areas or wild flower areas.
(13)
Graffiti which means any inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted,
pasted or otherwise affixed to or on any structural component of any building, structure, or other permanent
facility regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component, or the nature of the inscription, to
the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner, or is otherwise deemed to be a public
nuisance.
(Code 1980, § 20-2; Ord. No. 7365, § 1, 4-23-01; Ord. No. 7368, § 1, 5-14-01; Ord. No. 7866, § 1, 10-9-06)
Sec. 42-33. - Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance.
(Code 1980, § 20-3)
Sec. 42-34. - Notice to abate.
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the health
officer or some other duly designated officer of the city shall give written notice to the owner or occupant of the
property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance.
(Code 1980, § 20-4)
State law reference— Notice to abate nuisance, A.C.A. §§ 14-54-902, 14-54-903.
Sec. 42-35. - Contents of notice to abate.
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this article shall contain:
(1)
An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the
circumstances.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
172/543
The location of the nuisance, if such nuisance is stationary.
(3)
A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
(4)
A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
(5)
A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the
prescribed time, the city will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person.
(Code 1980, § 20-5)
Sec. 42-36. - Service of notice to abate.
The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served the same as any other legal process may be served pursuant to law.
(Code 1980, § 20-6)
State law reference— Service of notice upon unknown or nonresident owners, A.C.A. § 14-54-902.
Sec. 42-37. - Abatement by city.
Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of
this article to abate the nuisance within seven days after having been served with such notice, the health officer
or other duly designated officer of the city shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of
costs incurred in the abatement thereof.
(Code 1980, § 20-7)
Sec. 42-38. - City's costs declared lien.
All costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this article shall constitute a
lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as
provided for by law. Such lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest
at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied.
(Code 1980, § 20-8)
State law reference— Lien, A.C.A. §§ 14-54-903, 14-54-904.
Sec. 42-39. - Article to be supplemental.
The provisions of this article shall be supplemental to all other ordinances and remedies available to the city.
(Code 1980, § 20-9)
Secs. 42-40—42-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - STORAGE OF ABANDONED BOATS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAILERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
173/543
--- (3) ---
Cross reference— Secondhand goods, ch. 82; traffic and vehicles, ch. 102.
State Law reference— Municipal authority relative to nuisances, A.C.A. § 14-54-901 et seq.; abandoned
vehicles, A.C.A. § 27-50-1101; removal of unattended or abandoned vehicles, A.C.A. § 27-50-1201 et seq.
Sec. 42-61. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandoned motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is left on public or private property, as defined in this
section, for a period of more than 72 hours, regardless of whether wrecked or inoperable, and regardless of
whether such vehicle bears a current registration and a current vehicle inspection sticker.
Boat means any vessel initially designed for the carrying of passengers or cargo upon the water, whether
currently seaworthy or not, and regardless of size or design, including, without limitation, barges, motorboats
whether inboard or outboard, canoes, rowboats, rafts and sailboats.
Code enforcement division means the code enforcement division of the department of community planning of
the city, its agents, and its designees.
Inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially
dismantled, incapable of operation by its own power upon a public street, or from which the wheels, engine,
transmission or any substantial part thereof has been removed, which lawfully has affixed thereto an unexpired
license plate and a current motor vehicle inspection certificate.
Major portion, as applicable to boats, motor vehicles and trailers, means any part thereof which is sufficiently
large to constitute a public nuisance as a harborage of snakes or rodents, or as otherwise defined by state or city
nuisance laws, and shall include, without limitation, the following: Truckbed, cab or cabin, chassis or frame,
axle, motor or engine, transmission, hull or pontoon, cargo compartment, seats, and portions of exterior parts or
panelling such as walls and roofs.
Motor vehicle means a vehicle or conveyance which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground,
and includes but is not limited to automobiles, buses, mopeds, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golfcarts,
campers, motor homes and trailers.
Police department means the chief of police of the city, his agents, and his designees.
Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not defined as
public property in this section.
Public property means any real property in the city which is owned by a governmental body and includes
buildings, parking lots, parks, streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements and other similar property.
Subject item is a comprehensive term which includes boats, motor vehicles, trailers and major portions thereof,
as defined in this section, which may become the subject of citation under this article.
Trailer means any freewheeling object designed or intended to be pulled or towed behind a motor vehicle,
regardless of whether wrecked or inoperable, and regardless of whether currently inspected and/or registered,
including without limitation the following: Boat trailers, camper trailers, cargo trailers, special trailers for items
such as golf carts or motorcycles, utility trailers, and farm implements.
Wrecked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired
license plate and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which is wrecked,
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
174/543
dismantled, partially dismantled, incapable of operation by its own power on a public street, or from which the
wheels, engine, transmission or any substantial part thereof has been removed.
(Code 1980, § 21-56)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 42-62. - Abandonment regulated.
No person shall abandon or leave any subject item, including a wrecked or inoperable subject item, whether
attended or not, upon any public property within the city for a period of time in excess of 72 hours. The presence
of any subject item, or parts thereof, on public property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be
abated in accordance with the provisions of this article. This section does not apply to subject items parked or
stored on public property by the city or any of its departments.
(Code 1980, § 21-57)
Sec. 42-63. - Parking and storage regulated.
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any subject item of any kind,
which is wrecked or inoperable, whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city, except that,
with respect to an inoperable motor vehicle, such vehicle may be parked, stored or left on such property for a
period of time not to exceed 72 hours, after which time such inoperable motor vehicle shall constitute a nuisance
subject to removal after three days following proper notice as provided for by section 42-65. The presence of
such subject items on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
(Code 1980, § 21-58)
Sec. 42-64. - Exceptions.
(a)
The provisions of sections 42-62 and 42-63 of this article shall not apply to:
(1)
Any subject item parked or stored within a building or enclosed garage on private property.
(2)
Any subject item held in connection with a business enterprise lawfully licensed by the city for the servicing and
repair of subject items and properly operated in an appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning ordinances
of the city.
(3)
Subject vehicle within a carport that is being actively repaired on at least a weekly basis. Subject vehicle and its
parts when not being repaired shall be neatly covered with an opaque cover.
(b)
Subject vehicle not defined as an inoperable vehicle or wrecked vehicle except for not having a current license
or safety inspection may be stored in a covered carport.
(Code 1980, § 21-59; Ord. No. 6894, § 1, 5-22-95)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
175/543
Sec. 42-65. - Notice of compliance.
(a)
Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department or code enforcement division that any nuisance as
described in section 42-62 appears to exist on public property, such division shall cause a written notice to be
affixed to subject item, declaring the existence of the nuisance and ordering whoever has an interest in the
subject item to comply with this article by removing the subject item within 72 hours of receipt of the notice.
Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department or code enforcement division that any nuisance as
described in section 42-63 appears to exist on private property or utility rights-of-way or on public property,
such division shall cause a written notice to be affixed to subject item, declaring the existence of the nuisance
and ordering whoever has an interest in the subject item to comply with this article by removing the subject item
within three days of receipt of the notice. Additionally, if such nuisance is found to exist on private property, in
addition to the foregoing notice, a copy of such notice shall be delivered to the owner or occupant of the
property. If a copy of the notice cannot be delivered to such owner or occupant, a copy of the notice shall be left
at the property, with a duplicate copy sent to the owner or occupant of the property by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
(b)
The notice described in subsection (a) shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this
section; and the notice shall advise that upon the failure to comply with the notice of removal, the police
department or code enforcement division shall undertake such removal, with the cost of removal to be levied
against the owner of the subject item. The notice shall also advise the person to whom the notices are applicable
of his right to contest the determination of the police department or code enforcement division that a violation
under this article exists by requesting a hearing before the board of adjustment and review and that, if such a
hearing is desired, the request can be made by filing a written request with such board. A request for hearing
must be made within the time for removal set forth in this section.
(Code 1980, § 21-60)
Sec. 42-66. - Hearing.
Upon receiving a request for hearing pursuant to section 42-65, the board of adjustment and review shall set the
hearing before the next regular meeting of the board. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the person
requesting the hearing and to the police department or code enforcement division. No other notices are required.
A request for a hearing under this section stays all enforcement proceedings until an order of the board is
entered.
(Code 1980, § 21-61)
Sec. 42-67. - Determination by board.
The board of adjustment and review shall determine either that there exists a nuisance as defined in this article or
that there does not exist a nuisance as defined in this article. With reference to hearings under this article, the
board of adjustment and review has no authority and is not authorized to modify or vary the terms and
conditions contained in this article.
(Code 1980, § 21-62)
Sec. 42-68. - Issuance of order by board.
The board of adjustment and review shall issue a written order, either finding the existence of a nuisance or
finding that a nuisance does not exist. It shall state in its order the findings of fact on which it based its decision,
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
176/543
and the order shall indicate the vote of the board. The city clerk shall place each such order on the next city
council agenda to be read as correspondence.
(Code 1980, § 21-63)
Sec. 42-69. - Removal of subject item.
Within the time for removal set forth in the notice for removal, or within 48 hours of the date on which an order
is entered by the board of adjustment and review affirming the determination of the police department or code
enforcement division, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked or inoperable subject item and the owner or
occupant of the private property on which the subject item is located, either or all of them, shall cause the
removal of the subject item. If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the notice, the police
department or code enforcement division shall have the right to take possession of the subject item and remove it
from the premises. In the event of removal and disposition of the subject item, the owner of the subject item
shall be liable for the expenses incurred in so doing.
(Code 1980, § 21-64)
Sec. 42-70. - Notice of possession.
The police department or code enforcement division, after taking possession of subject item pursuant to this
article, shall furnish notice in accordance with this section by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
registered owner of subject item at his last known address within 15 days of the date on which possession of
subject item is taken, with a copy of the notice to the owner or occupant of the property from which subject item
is taken.
(Code 1980, § 21-65)
Sec. 42-71. - Information furnished to the state.
(a)
The police department or code enforcement division shall also contact the motor vehicle division of the state
department of finance and administration in instances when the subject item is a motor vehicle required to be
titled or registered with such department under the laws of the state, and such other agencies and departments of
government in this and other states as are reasonably necessary to ascertain the names and addresses of other
persons with record interest in the subject item, including lienholders. Such other persons shall be given notice
in the same manner as stated in section 42-65
(b)
Notice under this section shall contain the following information:
(1)
Year, make, model and serial number of subject item.
(2)
The name and address of the last known registered owner of the subject item, if available.
(3)
The registration number and the title registration number of subject item, if available.
(4)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
177/543
The date on which subject item was removed.
(5)
The location from which subject item was removed.
(6)
The location at which subject item is being stored.
The notice shall also advise the persons to whom it is given that the person who is entitled to possession of
subject item may reclaim it upon payment to the city of all charges incurred by the city in the removal and
storage of subject item; except that if such reclamation is not made within 30 days after the date of the notice,
the right to reclaim subject item, as well as all rights, title and interest of such person in subject item, shall be
deemed to be waived, and such person shall be deemed to have consented to the disposition of subject item by
the city.
(Code 1980, § 21-66)
Sec. 42-72. - Publication of notice authorized.
If unable to identify properly the last registered owner of any subject item, or if unable to obtain with reasonable
certainty the names and addresses of the owner or other interested parties, including lienholders, it shall be
sufficient notice to publish the notice described in section 42-71 once in one newspaper of general circulation in
the city. Such notice by publication may contain multiple listings of subject items.
(Code 1980, § 21-67)
Sec. 42-73. - Copy of notice sent to state.
A copy of any notice required in section 42-71, as well as a copy of any certificate of sale issued under this
article by the city, or its designee, shall be forwarded to the motor vehicle division of the state department of
finance and administration.
(Code 1980, § 21-68)
Sec. 42-74. - Appraisal of removal subject items.
Upon the removal of any subject items pursuant to the provisions of this article, the police department or code
enforcement division shall obtain an appraisal of the subject item within ten days of its removal. If the appraised
value of the subject item is less than $250.00, upon the execution of an affidavit by the police department or
code enforcement division stating that notification has been given to the owner and other interested persons
pursuant to sections 42-65 and 42-70 of this article and describing the subject item, including license plate
number and name of owner, if known, and the location of the subject item and the appraised value of the subject
item, the police department or code enforcement division may summarily dispose of the subject item and
execute a certificate of sale after the passage of 30 days from the date of the notice required in sections 42-70
and 42-71. If the notice has been published, disposition may take place after 30 days from the date of
publication. If the appraised value exceeds $250.00, the subject item shall be disposed of at a public sale in
accordance with the provisions of sections 42-75 through 42-77 of this article; however, no subject item shall be
sold at public sale prior to 30 days from the date on which notice is given pursuant to sections 42-70 and 42-71.
(Code 1980, § 21-69)
Sec. 42-75. - Notice of sale.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
178/543
If it is necessary that the subject item be sold at public sale, at least 21 days prior to the sale the police
department or code enforcement division shall cause a notice to be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, which notice shall state:
(1)
The sale is of subject item in the possession of the city by virtue of seizure pursuant to this article.
(2)
A description of subject item, including make, model, license number, title number, subject item identification
and any information which will accurately identify the subject item.
(3)
The terms of the sale.
(4)
The date, time and place of the sale.
The police department or code enforcement division shall also cause a copy of this notice to be mailed to the last
known registered owner of subject item and to the owner or occupant of the property from which the subject
item was taken (unless they are one and the same), and to any other persons known to the police department or
code enforcement division to be interested in the subject item.
(Code 1980, § 21-70)
Sec. 42-76. - Sale.
On the date, time and place set forth in the notice required by section 42-75, subject item shall be sold to the
highest and best bidder, provided that any subject item which cannot be sold for an amount equal to the costs of
the sale and other charges owed may be summarily disposed of in the manner set forth in section 42-73. At the
time of payment of the purchase price, the police department or code enforcement division shall execute a
certificate of sale for subject item in duplicate, the original of which to be given to the purchaser and a copy to
be retained by the police department or code enforcement division. Any certificates of sale issued under this
section shall not guarantee title or purport to give any title to subject item greater than that which is possessed by
the city. Should the sale be invalid for any reason, the liability of the city shall be limited to the return of the
purchase price upon return of subject item.
(Code 1980, § 21-71)
Sec. 42-77. - Proceeds of sale to be held 30 days.
Proceeds of any sale pursuant to this article, after payment of all the costs of the auction, including notice and
publication costs, and the expenses of the city in towing and storing the subject item, shall be held in suspense
by the city for a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of the funds, during which time, upon presentation of
proper evidence of ownership of the disposed subject item to the police department or code enforcement
division, the owner of the subject item may recover back from the city such proceeds, less the costs and
expenses as stated in this section. After 30 days, the proceeds may be distributed to the general fund of the city.
(Code 1980, § 21-72)
Sec. 42-78. - Redemption of subject item by owner.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
179/543
The owner of any subject item which has come into possession of the city under the provisions of this article
may redeem subject item after its removal but prior to its disposition upon presentation of proper evidence of
ownership and payment to the city of all charges incurred regarding towing, storing and expenses of sale, if any.
This right of redemption shall expressly terminate upon disposition of subject item.
(Code 1980, § 21-73)
Sec. 42-79. - Adoption of state law by reference.
As an alternative to the procedure set forth in this article regarding abandoned vehicles on public or private
property, A.C.A. §§ 27-50-1101 and 27-50-1102 are hereby incorporated by reference into this article as if fully
set forth herein. If the police department or code enforcement division, in their discretion, shall pursue a remedy
pursuant to A.C.A. §§ 27-50-1101 and 27-50-1102, they are directed to comply completely and fully with such
provisions.
(Code 1980, § 21-74)
Chapter 46 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Alarm systems, § 38-36 et seq.
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.; fire prevention,
protection and safety generally, A.C.A. § 20-22-201 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 46-1—46-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Departments and similar agencies, § 2-326 et seq.; board of civil service commissioners for
police and fire departments, § 2-531 et seq.
State Law reference— Fire departments, A.C.A. § 14-53-101 et seq.
Sec. 46-36. - Created.
There is hereby created a fire department.
(Code 1980, § 12-16)
State law reference— Fire department required, A.C.A. § 14-53-101.
Sec. 46-37. - Composition.
The fire department shall consist of one chief who shall be known and designated as the "chief of the fire
department of the city," and as many subordinate officers and employees as the city council may direct.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
180/543
(Code 1980, § 12-17)
Sec. 46-38. - Chief, powers and duties.
(a)
The chief of the fire department shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office, and shall not engage in
any other business which will require any part of his time from his official duties, and he shall be subject to call
at all hours. Any chief of the fire department who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to removal for neglect of duty.
(b)
The chief of the fire department shall have charge of all the matters pertaining to the fire department and shall
have control and supervision over all officers and men belonging to such department; he shall have absolute
control and direction of the entire department in case of fire and shall place and direct the duties of different
employees of the department.
(c)
The chief shall be the fire warden for the city.
(d)
The chief shall as frequently as possible have drills of the men and apparatus, and shall, at frequent intervals,
inspect the quarters of each company and see that the quarters and apparatus are kept in the best possible
condition.
(Code 1980, § 12-18)
Sec. 46-39. - Inspections; right of entry; interfering with inspectors.
The chief of the fire department or any member of the fire department appointed by him shall have the right and
may enter any building, dwelling, erection, structure or place for the purpose of inspecting the same or in the
performance of any duty pertaining to the fire department, at any proper time and in a proper manner. It shall be
unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder and retard the chief of the fire department or any fireman in any
manner in the performance of his duties or to refuse to observe any lawful directions given to him.
(Code 1980, § 12-20)
Secs. 46-40—46-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
Cross reference— Fire extinguishers required at North Little Rock Municipal Airport, § 14-262; buildings and
building regulations, ch. 18.
Sec. 46-81. - Arkansas Fire Prevention Code—Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference for the purpose of governing conduct and conditions conducive to the
creation of fire and explosion hazards, that standard known as the Arkansas Fire Prevention Code, 2002 edition,
three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
181/543
(Code 1980, § 12-31; Ord. No. 7228, § 1, 6-28-99; Ord. No. 7537, § 1, 4-14-03)
State law reference— Adoption of technical code by reference authorized, A.C.A. § 14-55-207.
Sec. 46-82. - Same—Amendments.
The Fire Prevention Code adopted in this article shall be as follows:
Section 603.11.1 in volume II shall be amended to read:
Buildings 50 feet or more in height or containing more than two stories shall be provided with a class III
standpipe system.
Section 603.11.2 in volume II shall be amended to read:
Group R - hotels, dormitories and motels two stories or more in height shall be provided with a class III
standpipe system.
Section 2002.2 in volume II shall be amended to read:
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, offer for sale, sell at retail,
set off, ignite or otherwise explode any firecrackers or other fireworks by whatever name called within the city
limits; provided that the use of fireworks for public display shall be allowed upon the approval of the fire
marshal after all of the provisions of NfiPa 1123 are met and all necessary permits have been issued. Every such
use or display shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired so as not to be hazardous to property
or endanger any person.
No parent or guardian of a minor shall furnish money or a thing of value to a minor for the purchase of fireworks
or encourage, act in conjunction with or in any manner instigate or aid a minor in the commission of having,
keeping, storing, selling, offering for sale, giving away, using, transporting or manufacturing fireworks within
the corporate limits of the city. The violation of this section shall be an offense regardless of whether or not the
minor shall be charged or found guilty of the offense. The commission of the offense by the minor on the
property under the control or owned by the parent or guardian shall be prima facie proved that the parent or
guardian aided the minor.
The fine or penalty for violating this provision, upon conviction in municipal court, shall not be less than $25.00
nor more than $500.00.
(Code 1980, § 12-31.1; Ord. No. 7167, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 7228, § 1, 6-28-99; Ord. No. 7295, § 1, 8-14-00;
Ord. No. 7327, § 1, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 7385, § 1, 8-13-01)
Sec. 46-83. - Same—Definitions.
(a)
Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code adopted in this article, it shall be held to
mean the city.
(b)
Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code adopted in this article, it shall be
held to mean the city attorney.
(c)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
182/543
Wherever the words "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" are used in the fire prevention code adopted in this
article, they shall be held to mean the fire marshal.
(Code 1980, § 12-32)
Sec. 46-84. - Enforcement; establishment and duties of bureau of fire prevention.
(a)
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city,
which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire
department. The police department shall have concurrent enforcement jurisdiction with the fire marshal over
violations of chapter 20 of the fire prevention code adopted in this article.
(b)
The fire marshal shall be in charge of the bureau of fire prevention and his position shall be considered a job
assignment to be filled by appointment by the chief of the fire department. Appointment to this position shall in
no way affect an individual's civil service rating or his rate of pay.
(c)
The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as assistant fire marshal and
deputy fire marshal of fire prevention as shall from time to time be necessary, and said individuals are hereby
authorized to carry a weapon and make arrests for violation of laws relating to arson and other unlawful burning
provided that such individuals are qualified to do so pursuant to A.C.A. § 14-53-112. These positions will also
be considered job assignments and shall in no way affect the individual's civil service rating or rate of pay.
(d)
A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the mayor. It shall contain all
proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein.
The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in his judgment, shall
be desirable.
(Code 1980, § 12-33; Ord. No. 6962, § 1, 3-25-96)
Sec. 46-85. - New materials, processes or occupancies which require permits.
The mayor, the chief of the fire department and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies
which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The fire marshal
shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
(Code 1980, § 12-34)
Sec. 46-86. - Modification of code by fire marshal.
The fire marshal shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application,
in writing, by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the fire marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall
be furnished the applicant.
(Code 1980, § 12-35)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
183/543
Sec. 46-87. - Appeals.
Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the
code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire
marshal to the building and housing board of adjustments and appeals within 30 days from the date of the
decision appealed.
(Code 1980, § 12-36)
Sec. 46-88. - Penalty for violations.
(a)
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted in this article, or fail to comply
therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation
of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or
permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an
order as affirmed or modified by the housing board of adjustment and appeals or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time; when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b)
The application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
(Code 1980, § 12-37)
Chapter 50 - FLOODS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 50-1. - Passage of wide objects through seawall.
(a)
Vehicles, equipment or other objects of which the overall width exceeds eight feet shall not pass through
openings in the seawall without a permit issued by the chief of police.
(b)
The chief of police, along with the director of public works, is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations relative to ingress and egress through the seawall.
(Code 1980, § 11-1)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
184/543
Sec. 50-2. - Cuts in seawall.
(a)
The seawall located on the north bank of the Arkansas River shall be cut only where there is a dedicated street
on each side of the seawall.
(b)
No person shall cut the seawall without a permit from the director of public works and paying a permit fee of
$100.00.
(c)
The director of public works may promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the
provisions of this section and shall adopt such rules and regulations as will ensure that the cuts permitted can be
closed adequately and promptly whenever the conditions of the Arkansas River indicate rising waters which may
cause flood damage. The director shall coordinate the work with the Corps of Engineers.
(Code 1980, § 11-2)
Secs. 50-3—50-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18.
State Law reference— Flood loss prevention, A.C.A. § 14-268-101 et seq.; local measures to prevent flood loss
authorized, A.C.A. § 14-268-104; penalty for violation, A.C.A. § 14-268-103.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 50-36. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this
article or a request for a variance.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flood to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard
boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the
FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
185/543
Critical feature means any integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the
flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
Elevated building means a nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or
V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground
level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water, and (ii)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the
magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE or V, "elevated
building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from:
(1)
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2)
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The
report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway
map.
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized,
appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce
the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of
associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes.
These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source
(see definition of flooding).
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
186/543
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried
out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to
the proposed walls of a structure.
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance
with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such
as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or floodresistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render
the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of section 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers,
and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the
term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood
insurance rate map are referenced.
New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (PL 97-348)) includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started, or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose
of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
187/543
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
a state inventory of historic places.
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement
would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.)
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4)
or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929
(or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
(Code 1980, § 11-19)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 50-37. - Findings of fact.
The city council hereby finds and determines that:
(1)
The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(2)
These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in
flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise unprotected from
flood damage.
(Code 1980, § 11-16)
Sec. 50-38. - Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1)
Protect human life and health;
(2)
Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
188/543
(3)
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense
of the general public;
(4)
Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5)
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6)
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a
manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7)
Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Code 1980, § 11-17)
Sec. 50-39. - Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1)
Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive
increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2)
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
(3)
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved
in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4)
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5)
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Code 1980, § 11-18)
Sec. 50-40. - Lands to which this article applies.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
189/543
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Code 1980, § 11-20)
Sec. 50-41. - Compliance.
No structure or land shall be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of
this article and other applicable regulations.
(Code 1980, § 11-23)
Sec. 50-42. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and
engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of North Little Rock, Arkansas," dated
December, 1986, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and
FBFM), and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
(Code 1980, § 11-21)
Sec. 50-43. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another regulation conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Code 1980, § 11-24)
Sec. 50-44. - Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1)
Considered as minimum requirements;
(2)
Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3)
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Code 1980, § 11-25)
Sec. 50-45. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and
flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazards, or uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Code 1980, § 11-26)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
190/543
Secs. 50-46—50-70. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 50-71. - Floodplain administrator—Designated.
The city engineer is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of
this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining
to floodplain management.
(Code 1980, § 11-27)
Sec. 50-72. - Same—Duties and responsibilities.
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1)
Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
(2)
Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3)
Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article.
(4)
Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(5)
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the
floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6)
Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the soil and
water conservation commission, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7)
Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(8)
When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 50-42, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article.
(9)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
191/543
When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new
construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-
30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(Code 1980, § 11-28)
Sec. 50-73. - Development permit—Required.
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
(Code 1980, § 11-22)
Sec. 50-74. - Same—Application and approval.
(a)
Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by
him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions
and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location of the
foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1)
Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially
improved structures;
(2)
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
(3)
A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure
shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 50-102(2);
(4)
Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development;
(5)
Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 50-72(1).
(b)
Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1)
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
192/543
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
(3)
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4)
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5)
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6)
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and
repair of streets, bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
(7)
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8)
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9)
The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use;
(10)
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(Code 1980, § 11-29)
Sec. 50-75. - Variance procedures.
(a)
The appeal board as established by the city shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this article.
(b)
The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c)
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision to the courts of competent
jurisdiction.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
193/543
(d)
The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e)
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in
the remainder of this article.
(f)
Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, provided the relevant factors in section 50-74(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g)
Upon consideration of the factors noted in this section and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
article (section 50-38).
(h)
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
(i)
Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1)
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2)
Variances shall only be issued upon:
a.
A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b.
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
c.
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
194/543
(3)
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to
be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(j)
Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1)
The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met; and
(2)
The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood
and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Code 1980, § 11-30)
Sec. 50-75.1. - Appeal and variance board.
That the North Little Rock Board of Adjustment and Appeals is hereby designated as the board to hear all
appeals made pursuant to section 50-75.
(Ord. No. 7272, § 1, 2-14-00)
Secs. 50-76—50-100. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 50-101. - General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1)
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2)
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage;
(3)
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(4)
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
195/543
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(5)
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system;
(6)
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7)
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(Code 1980, § 11-31)
Sec. 50-102. - Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 50-
41, section 50-72(8) or section 50-103(c), the following provisions are required:
(1)
Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard
of this subsection as proposed in section 50-74(a)(1) is satisfied.
(2)
Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the
base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood
level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the
specific elevation in relation to mean sea level to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by
the floodplain administrator.
(3)
Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a.
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
196/543
b.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
c.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4)
Manufactured homes.
a.
Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b.
All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with subsection (1).
c.
Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE on
the community's FIRM be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is at or above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
(Code 1980, § 11-32)
Sec. 50-103. - Standards for subdivision proposals.
(a)
All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with
sections 50-37, 50-38 and 50-39 of this article.
(b)
All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall
meet development permit requirements of section 50-73; section 50-74; and the provisions of this division.
(c)
Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 50-42 or section 50-72(8) of this article.
(d)
All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
197/543
(e)
All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(Code 1980, § 11-33)
Sec. 50-104. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 50-42 are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow
may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
(1)
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
(2)
All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
a.
Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
b.
Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(3)
A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the
standards of this section, as proposed in section 50-74(a)(1), are satisfied.
(4)
Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures.
(Code 1980, § 11-34)
Sec. 50-105. - Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 50-42 are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
198/543
Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development, unless certification by a professional registered engineer or architect is provided demonstrating
that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge.
(2)
If subsection (1), above, is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division.
(Code 1980, § 11-35)
Chapter 54 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; swimming pools, § 18-431 et seq.; environment,
ch. 42; removal of uncut weeds, grass and other unsightly and unsanitary articles, § 42-1; closing of vacant
property, § 66-1; solid waste, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 106; vegetation, ch. 110.
State Law reference— Public health and welfare generally, A.C.A. § 20-2-101 et seq.; general health powers of
municipalities, A.C.A. §§ 14-54-103(1), 14-54-801 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 54-1. - Hospital commission.
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the North Little Rock Municipal Hospital Commission.
The hospital commission shall be composed of five members.
(Code 1980, §§ 14-16, 14-17(a))
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies, § 2-486 et seq.
State law reference— Power of city to create hospital commission, A.C.A. § 14-264; size of commission,
A.C.A. § 14-264-102.
Sec. 54-2. - Moving from or vacating building; sanitary conditions.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or renting any dwelling house, store or any building of any kind in
the city to move from such building without first putting such building and premises, including barns, sheds,
yards and alleys, in a proper sanitary condition.
(b)
Every such person moving from premises in the city shall be required to have the building property swept and all
paper, trash and similar refuse cleaned up and removed to the city dump or otherwise properly disposed of.
(Code 1980, § 14-3)
Sec. 54-3. - Minnow vats.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
199/543
(a)
Persons selling minnows or fish bait within the city shall operate and conduct such business under the direction
and regulations of the city health department. No permit shall be issued to any person to conduct such business
without first obtaining a written permit from the city health officer stating that the minnow vats to be used by
such person meet the requirements and regulations of the health department.
(b)
The city health department shall have the complete control and supervision of all minnow vats within the city
limits, and any person who shall permit their marketplace to become insanitary as deemed by the health
department shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Should such insanitary condition continue for longer than one
week after written notice to remedy such condition, then such marketplace shall be condemned and the operator
thereof shall automatically forfeit his license.
(Code 1980, § 14-2)
Sec. 54-4. - Handling of food in food service establishments.
After preparation of food in accordance with Sections 2-401, et seq., of the Arkansas Department of Health
Rules and Regulations Pertaining to Food Service Establishments, all persons engaged in the activity of food
service to the general public shall utilize sanitary protective devices and/or utensils so as to prohibit direct
manual contact with such food. Such protective devices and/or utensils shall be either disposable or shall be
cleaned and sanitized in accordance with the requirements of Sections 5-101, et. seq., of the Arkansas
Department of Health Rules and Regulations Pertaining to Food Service Establishments, relating to personnel.
This provision shall be in addition to Sections 3-201, et seq., of the Arkansas Department of Health Rules and
Regulations Pertaining to Food Service Establishments, relating to personnel.
(Ord. No. 6833, § 1, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 6878, § 1, 2-27-95)
Secs. 54-5—54-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING PROHIBITIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Library, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94.
State Law reference— Smoking in public, A.C.A. § 20-27-701 et seq.
Sec. 54-36. - Smoking prohibited in public places generally.
(a)
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Employee means any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for monetary compensation or
profit.
Employer means any person, partnership or corporation, including a municipal corporation, who employs the
service of more than four persons.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
200/543
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which
employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to work areas,
employee lounges, conference rooms and employee cafeterias. A private residence is not a place of employment.
Smoke or smoking means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind or any other
lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting or emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any
kind.
(b)
Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to smoke in the following places:
(1)
Those portions of any building, structure or other enclosed facility open to the general public for the primary
purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage production, musical recital or a similar performance, exclusive
of sports events other than in an area which serves as a lobby.
(2)
Any room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly wherein public business is being conducted and which
is open to members of the general public either as participants or as spectators, except that the prohibition
contained in this subsection (b)(2) shall not apply within a contiguous area containing 50 percent or less of a
room, chamber or place of meeting or public assembly if the entity having management and control of the
premises has designated and identified such area as a "smoking permitted area" by appropriate signs; provided
that no division of that area of such room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly set aside for the use by
the general public shall be made on a front area versus rear area basis; and further provided that where such
premises as above provided have a seating capacity of fewer than 50 seats, the contiguous area to be set aside for
use as a smoking permitted area by the entity having management and control of the premises shall be 25
percent or less of the total area set aside for use by the general public.
(3)
Those areas within the buildings or structures of any hospital or within 100 feet of any public entrance to any
hospital. Exception: Any area within 100 feet of any public entrance to any hospital that has been designated by
the hospital as an outdoor smoking area shall be exempt under section 54-36(b)(3).
(4)
Any retail food marketing establishment, including grocery stores and supermarkets, which employ 25 or more
employees, full-time and/or part-time, in a single store location, except those areas of such establishments set
aside for the serving of food and drink, restrooms and offices and areas thereof not open to the public.
(c)
Posting of signs. The person having the authority to manage and control in any area designated as a nonsmoking
area pursuant to subsection (b) shall post or cause to be posted and prominently displayed and shall maintain "no
smoking" signs in conspicuous locations within such areas. All such signs shall clearly and conspicuously recite
the phrase "no smoking" and/or use the international no smoking symbol and shall cite city ordinances. The
signs shall be posted not less than five feet nor more than eight feet above floor level and shall be sufficient
number in location to cause the message of at least one of the signs to be clearly visible, legible and readable.
(d)
Other agency cooperation. All federal, state, county, school and special districts and officials are urged to enact
and enforce provisions similar to the provisions contained in this section.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
201/543
(e)
Exceptions. The prohibitions set forth in subsection (b) shall not apply to private enclosed offices occupied
exclusively by smokers even though such an office may be visited by nonsmokers; or to those portions of
restaurants, bars or hotels where food or alcoholic beverages are served to the public.
(f)
Implementation. Those persons responsible shall implement the provisions of this section in a manner consistent
with all applicable state or federal statutes, rules or regulations.
(g)
Violations.
(1)
It shall be unlawful to willfully mutilate or destroy any signs required by this section.
(2)
It shall be unlawful to smoke in any area posted as a nonsmoking area.
(Code 1980, § 21-17; Ord. No. 6834, § 1, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 7392, § 1, 8-27-01)
Sec. 54-37. - Smoking prohibited in city buildings; exception; penalty.
(a)
Smoking in city buildings is hereby prohibited, except in designated smoking areas.
(b)
A fine not to exceed $25.00 will be levied against violators of this section.
(c)
As used in this section:
City buildings means those structures solely owned by the city and exclusively occupied by city employees.
Designated smoking area means those areas specifically designated by city department heads for city employees
to smoke in.
Smoking means a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lit tobacco product. This term shall also include and
prohibit the use of any tobacco product, be it chewed, dipped, or in any way placed in direct contact with the
mouth.
(d)
Each building occupied by city employees shall have a designated smoking area. These areas shall meet all fire
department regulations and be an enclosed area with a closed door and adequate ventilation. If no such enclosed
area is available in the building, then smoking shall only be allowed outside of the building.
(Code 1980, § 2-15.1)
Sec. 54-38. - Smoking on Central Arkansas Transit conveyances.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
202/543
(a)
Declared public nuisance; prohibited. The use of tobacco or other noxious materials for smoking, either by pipe,
cigarette, cigar or any other method, upon any public conveyance operated by the Central Arkansas Transit
system within the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be deemed prohibited as offensive and
injurious to the health and comfort of the public using such conveyances.
(b)
Posting of warning. A warning that tobacco smoking is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
be prominently posted and displayed in each Central Arkansas Transit system public conveyance operated
within the city.
(Code 1980, § 21-15(a), (c))
Secs. 54-39—54-65. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - RATPROOFING
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
Cross reference— Housing code, § 18-401 et seq.
Sec. 54-66. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Business building means any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy:
(1)
For transaction of business;
(2)
For rendering professional service;
(3)
For amusement;
(4)
For display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise; or
(5)
For the performance of work or labor.
The term includes hotels, roominghouses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets,
restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other
structures on premises used for business purposes.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
203/543
Occupant means the person that has the use of or occupies any business building or a part or fraction thereof,
whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of a vacant business building or any vacant portion of a business
building, the owner, agent or other person having custody of the building shall have the responsibility of an
occupant of a building.
Owner means the actual owner of the business building, whether an individual, partnership or corporation, or the
agent of the building or other person having custody of the building or to whom rent is paid. In case of business
buildings leased with a clause in the lease specifying that the lessee is responsible for the maintenance and
repairs, the lessee will be considered in such cases as the "owner" for the purpose of this article.
Rat harborage means any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats.
Rat-stoppage or ratproofing means any form of ratproofing to prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings
from the exterior or from one business building to another. This consists essentially of the closing of all openings
in the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations that may be reached by rats from
the ground either by climbing or by burrowing, with material impervious to rat gnawing; provided, however, that
drive-in type grocery markets may operate with an open front, provided such open front faces upon a paved or
blacktop parking lot, that all merchandise sold or displayed in such building shall be in packaged containers, that
all meats be prepackaged under sanitary conditions, and that no open containers of candy or cookies shall be
displayed in such building.
(Code 1980, § 14-36)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 54-67. - Garbage accumulations as rat harborage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or permit to accumulate any garbage, rubbish or trash in
any building or premises in the city so that such accumulation shall or may afford food or harborage for rats.
(Code 1980, § 14-45)
Sec. 54-68. - Lumber and similar materials as rat harborage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, and on all open
lots and alleys in the city, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones or similar materials that may be permitted to
remain thereon, unless such materials shall be placed on open racks that are elevated not less than 18 inches
above the ground, and evenly piled or stacked so that those materials will not afford harborage for rats.
(Code 1980, § 14-46)
Sec. 54-69. - Business buildings to be in rat-free condition.
All business buildings in the city shall be ratproofed, freed of rats and maintained in a ratproof and rat-free
condition under the direction and supervision of the health officer.
(Code 1980, § 14-37)
Sec. 54-70. - Notice to ratproof.
Upon the receipt of written notice and/or order from the health officer, the owner of any business building
specified therein shall take immediate measures for ratproofing the building, and unless such work and
improvements have been completed by the owner in the time specified in the written notice, in no event to be
less than 15 days, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the health officer,
then the owner shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
204/543
(Code 1980, § 14-38)
Sec. 54-71. - Duty of owner or occupant to rid building of rats; city to act upon failure.
Whenever the health officer notifies the occupant of a business building that there is evidence of rat infestation
of the building, such occupant shall immediately institute appropriate measures for freeing the premises each
person occupies of all rats, and unless suitable measures for freeing the buildings of rats are instituted within
three days after receipt of notice and unless continuously maintained in a satisfactory manner until the building
is free from rats, the health officer is hereby authorized and directed to free the building of rats at the expense of
the owner thereof; the health officer shall submit bills for the costs thereof to the owner or occupant of the
building, and if such bills are not paid, the health officer shall certify the amount due from the owner or occupant
to the city attorney, and the city attorney shall bring suit to collect such amount.
(Code 1980, § 14-39)
Sec. 54-72. - Maintenance in ratproof condition.
The owners of all ratproofed business buildings shall maintain the premises in a ratproof condition and shall
repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in the ratproofing unless such breaks or leaks develop as a result of
natural deterioration of the buildings, in which event the owners shall repair such breaks or leaks as directed by
the health officer.
(Code 1980, § 14-40)
Sec. 54-73. - Inspections by health officer.
The health officer is empowered to make unannounced inspections of the interior and exterior of business
buildings, as in his opinion may be necessary to determine full compliance with this article. The health officer
shall make periodic inspections at intervals of not more than 45 days of all rat-stopped buildings to determine
evidence of rat infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks in their ratproofing. When any evidence is
found indicating the presence of rats or openings through which rats may again enter business buildings, the
health officer shall serve the owner or occupants with notices or orders to abate the conditions found.
(Code 1980, § 14-41)
Sec. 54-74. - Authority of health officer to prevent rat harborage.
Whenever conditions inside or under business buildings provide such harborage for rats that the health officer
deems it necessary to eliminate such harborage, he may require the owner to install suitable cement floors in
basements to replace wooden first or ground floors or require the owner to correct such other interior rat
harborage as may be necessary in order to facilitate the eradication of rats in a reasonable time and thereby to
reduce the cost thereof.
(Code 1980, § 14-42)
Sec. 54-75. - Removal of ratproofing.
It shall be unlawful under the provisions of this article for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility
company, plumber or any other person to remove the ratproofing from any business building for any purpose
and fail to restore such ratproofing in a satisfactory condition or to make any new openings that are not closed or
sealed against the entrance of rats.
(Code 1980, § 14-43)
Sec. 54-76. - Animal feed to be stored in ratproof containers.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
205/543
All food and feed kept within the city for feeding chickens, cows, pigs, horses and other animals shall be kept
and stored in rat-free and ratproof containers, compartments or rooms unless kept in a ratproof building.
(Code 1980, § 14-44)
Chapter 58 - LAW ENFORCEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Alarm systems, § 38-36 et seq.
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.; law
enforcement, A.C.A. § 12-6-101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 58-1—58-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Departments and similar agencies, § 2-326 et seq.; board of civil service commissioners for
police and fire departments, § 2-531 et seq.
State Law reference— Police departments, A.C.A. § 14-52-101 et seq.; law enforcement officer training and
standards, A.C.A. § 12-9-101 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 58-36. - Chief, powers and duties generally.
(a)
The chief of police shall attend all council meetings, shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office, and
shall not engage in any other business which will require any time from his official duties. He shall be subject to
call at all hours.
(b)
All officers and members of the police department shall be under the control and direct supervision of the chief
of police, who shall designate their duties. The chief of police shall be responsible to the mayor and the city
council for the proper enforcement of the city ordinances and state laws by the members of the police
department.
(c)
In addition to the daily statement and report required to be filed with the city clerk, the chief of police shall, on
or before the fifth day of each month, make and file in the office of the city clerk a complete statement for the
preceding month, showing all arrests made by the police department, the disposition of each case, and the
amount of fines, forfeitures, fees and costs collected.
(Code 1980, § 25-1)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
206/543
Sec. 58-37. - Bonds and forfeitures generally.
The chief of police, patrolmen and all persons connected with the police department are hereby prohibited from
accepting any forfeiture or bond from any person without first bringing such person to the police headquarters
and having the desk sergeant docket the case; no forfeit or bond shall be taken except by the chief of police or
desk sergeant. All forfeitures and bonds shall be, at the time taken, entered on the docket or record.
(Code 1980, § 25-3)
Sec. 58-38. - Minimum fine or bond acceptable.
The chief of police and the desk sergeant shall not accept any forfeiture from persons arrested by the police
department for less than the minimum fine fixed by ordinance for the offense charged, or bond for less than the
maximum fine fixed by ordinance for the offense charged.
(Code 1980, § 25-4)
Sec. 58-39. - Law enforcement officers' bill of rights.
The "Law Enforcement Officers Bill of Rights for All Sworn Law Enforcement Officers of the City of North
Little Rock" is hereby adopted by reference, as though set out in this article, to clarify and protect the individual
rights of members of the city's police department.
(Code 1980, § 25-6)
Sec. 58-40. - Purchase of service revolver by certain retirees.
(a)
Any city police officer with 20 years or more of service to the North Little Rock Police Department shall, upon
retirement from the police department, be awarded and allowed to purchase his service revolver at the city's cost.
(b)
The service revolver awarded to the retiring police officer shall be suitably inscribed with the officer's name and
his dates of service to the city police department.
(Code 1980, § 25-5)
Secs. 58-41—58-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY
Sec. 58-61. - Sale at auction.
The police department, under the direction of its chief, is hereby authorized and directed to dispose of at public
auction all unclaimed personal property rightfully coming into the hands of such department.
(Code 1980, § 25-16)
Sec. 58-62. - Notice of sale; redemption by owner.
After personal property has been rightfully held by the police department for a period of six weeks or longer, the
chief of police, if property remains unclaimed, shall advertise such property in some newspaper of general
circulation in the city once each week for three consecutive weeks, giving a time for the sale not earlier than five
days after the last publication, nor later than ten days thereafter, designating an easily accessible place for the
sale, and giving a complete list of unclaimed articles to be sold. The chief of police shall have the right to reject
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
207/543
any or all bids not satisfactory, and advertise for a later sale. All persons who properly identify any of the
property as their own before the sale shall have such property restored.
(Code 1980, § 25-17)
Sec. 58-63. - Redemption of proceeds of sale by owner of property; records to be kept by chief.
The chief of police shall deposit the receipts from sales of unclaimed property in the city treasury, to be kept in a
special account for a period of six months, and any person identifying as his own any of such property within
such six-month period shall, upon satisfactory proof, be paid by city warrant out of such special account the
amount for which the property sold. The chief of police, or someone designated by him, shall keep in a wellbound
book an accurate record and description of each piece of unclaimed property passing through the
department's hands, the price for which it sold, the date of sale, and the name and address of those who
purchased such property, as well as of those who identify and reclaim property before it is sold.
(Code 1980, § 25-18)
Sec. 58-64. - Disposition of unclaimed proceeds of sales.
All proceeds from sales of unclaimed property remaining in the special fund created by section 58-63 for a
period of six months shall, by the city treasurer, be transferred to the city's general fund, and no further payments
shall be made therefrom to those who thereafter claim ownership.
(Code 1980, § 25-19)
Secs. 58-65—58-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - STATEMENT OF RIGHTS
This statement of rights shall provide all law enforcement officers employed by the City of North Little Rock
with the protection of certain rights afforded other citizens and considered necessary for fundamental fairness
and good administration.
Sec. 58-71. - Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Complainant means the person or persons providing the information constituting the basis for official
departmental charges alleging improper conduct.
Formal proceeding means a proceeding heard before any officer, committee, or other body of city government
with the authority to take disciplinary action against a law enforcement officer.
Law enforcement officer means any public servant vested by law with a duty to maintain order or to make arrests
for offenses.
Official departmental charges means a written document from the chief of police, or other lawful authority,
notifying the accused law enforcement officer that charges of misconduct have been made and setting forth the
specifics of the alleged misconduct.
(Ord. No. 7861, § 1(Exh. A), 9-25-06)
Sec. 58-72. - Officer under investigation.
Whenever a law enforcement officer is under investigation for alleged improper conduct with a possible result of
termination, demotion, or other disciplinary action causing loss of pay or status, the following minimum
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
208/543
standards may apply:
(1)
No adverse inference shall be drawn and no punitive action taken from a refusal of the law enforcement officer
being investigated to participate in such investigation or be interrogated other than when such law enforcement
officer is on duty, or is otherwise fully compensated for such time spent in accordance with city and
departmental overtime policy and state and federal law.
(2)
Any interrogation of a law enforcement officer shall take place at the office of those conducting the
investigation, the place where such law enforcement officer reports for duty, or such other reasonable place as
the investigator may determine.
(3)
The law enforcement officer being investigated shall be informed, at the commencement of his or her
interrogation, of:
a.
The nature of the investigation;
b.
The identity and authority of the person or persons conducting the investigation; and
c.
The identity of all persons present during the interrogation.
(4)
During the interrogation of the law enforcement officer, questions will be posed by or through only one
interrogator at a time.
(5)
Any interrogation of a law enforcement officer in connection with an investigation shall be for a reasonable
period of time and shall allow for reasonable periods for the rest and personal necessities of such law
enforcement officer.
(6)
No threat, harassment, promise, or reward shall be made to any law enforcement officer in connection with an
investigation in order to induce the answering of any questions that the law enforcement officer has a legal right
to refrain from answering, but immunity from prosecution may be offered to induce such response.
(7)
All interrogations of a law enforcement officer in connection with an investigation against him or her shall be
recorded in full. The law enforcement officer shall be allowed to make his or her own independent recording of
his or her interrogation and have one witness of his or her choosing present. The witness must be an attorney or
a member of the police department that is in no way related to the matter under investigation.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
209/543
(8)
No formal proceeding which has the authority to administer disciplinary action against a law enforcement officer
may be held except upon official departmental charges.
(9)
Official departmental charges shall contain the specific conduct that is alleged to be improper, the date and the
time of the alleged misconduct, the witnesses whose information provided the basis for the charges, and the
specific rules, regulations, orders, or laws alleged to have been violated.
(10)
Any law enforcement officer under official departmental charges shall be entitled to a pre-disciplinary hearing
before the chief of police if the disciplinary action is being considered. At such hearing, the law enforcement
officer shall have the opportunity to have a person of his or her choosing present.
(11)
No formal proceeding which has authority to penalize a law enforcement officer may be brought except upon
charges signed by the person making those charges.
(Ord. No. 7861, § 1(Exh. A), 9-25-06)
Sec. 58-73. - Disclosure of property, income, etc. prohibited for promotion or assignment.
No law enforcement officer shall be required to disclose for the purposes of promotion or assignment, any item
of his property, income, assets, debts, or expenditures, or those of any member of such officer's household.
(Ord. No. 7861, § 1(Exh. A), 9-25-06)
Sec. 58-74. - Written notification of loss of pay or benefits.
Whenever a personnel action which may result in any loss of pay or benefits or status, such law enforcement
officer shall be notified of such pending action by written official departmental charges a reasonable time before
such action is taken except where exigent circumstances otherwise require.
(Ord. No. 7861, § 1(Exh. A), 9-25-06)
Sec. 58-75. - Penalty.
There shall be no penalty nor threat of any penalty for the exercise by a law enforcement officer of his rights
under this statement of rights.
Sec. 58-76. - Other legal remedy.
Nothing in this statement of rights shall disparage or impair any other legal remedy any law enforcement officer
shall have with respect to any rights under this statement of rights.
(Ord. No. 7861, § 1(Exh. A), 9-25-06)
Sec. 58-77. - Inquiries regarding performance or conduct.
The provisions found in section 58-72 shall neither be applied nor construed to limit inquiries by supervisors
regarding the performance or conduct of a law enforcement officer.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
210/543
(Ord. No. 7861, § 1(Exh. A), 9-25-06)
Chapter 62 - LIBRARY
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Public possession of containers of alcohol with broken seals, § 6-1; smoking prohibitions, §
54-36 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94.
State Law reference— Municipal libraries, A.C.A. § 13-2-501 et seq.
Sec. 62-1. - Established.
The city council, recognizing its duty and responsibility, has constituted and established a public library and
continues to maintain it in accordance with the provisions of A.C.A. tit. 13, ch. 2, subch. 5 (A.C.A. § 13-2-501 et
seq.), as amended.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.14)
Sec. 62-2. - Board of trustees.
The library board of trustees consists of seven members.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.16)
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies, § 2-486 et seq.
State law reference— Library board of trustees, § A.C.A. § 13-2-502.
Sec. 62-3. - Failure to return library property.
Any person who fails to return or pay the reasonable value of any property borrowed from the public library
within 45 days from the date of the posting, by registered or certified mail, of a notice addressed to such person
at the last address furnished the library, which notice may be given at any time after the date on which such
person should have returned the property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1980, § 21-3)
Chapter 66 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.; Arkansas
Criminal Code, A.C.A. § 5-1-101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 66-1. - Vacant property to be closed.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
211/543
When any business building or any other building standing within ten feet of any sidewalk or street in the city
becomes vacant and unoccupied, and the building is open, the chief of police shall so notify the owners, agent or
person having the building in charge, who shall close and fasten all doors, windows and openings to such
building and keep the building closed and fastened while building is unoccupied.
(Code 1980, § 21-6)
Cross reference— Housing code, § 18-401 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; nuisances, § 42-31 et seq.; health and
sanitation, ch. 54.
Sec. 66-2. - Boarding moving train.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than railway employees to board a moving train engine or cars within
the limits of the city.
(Code 1980, § 21-10)
State law reference— Theft of services, A.C.A. § 5-36-104.
Sec. 66-3. - Swimming in Arkansas River adjacent to Burns Park.
(a)
Swimming is hereby prohibited in the Arkansas River adjacent to Burns Park where posted.
(b)
As used in this section, "swimming" shall be defined as entering into, moving along, on or in the water by using
arms or legs.
(Code 1980, § 22-18(a), (c))
Sec. 66-4. - Entering the Arkansas River from the banks for the purpose of swimming.
(a)
Entering the Arkansas River from the bank of such river within the boundaries of the city for the purpose of
swimming is hereby prohibited.
(b)
As used in this section, "swimming" shall include all recreational activities such as walking, standing, wading,
floating or any other recreational movement which requires the use of arms and legs to stay afloat.
(Code 1980, § 22-19(a), (b))
Sec. 66-5. - Nonofficial use of the city's official emblem or logo.
Any use of the official logo or emblem of the city (shown in Exhibit A, on file with the city clerk) by anyone
other than an elected official or commission, department, or board of the city, must be accompanied by a plainly
visible disclaimer, stating that the logo or emblem is not being used in connection with official city business or
for official city purposes.
(Ord. No. 7148, § 1, 7-13-98)
Sec. 66-6. - Hotel, motel, inn and rooming house guest registers.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
212/543
(a)
All persons who let or rent out rooms for rent by day, night or week shall keep a record showing the signature of
the person so renting and occupants of such room written in ink with the street and home address of each and
every person temporarily residing in the building in which they may rent rooms.
(b)
Erasures and alterations on this list shall not be permitted to be made for any purpose and the names and
addresses shall be retained for a period of not less than one year.
(c)
Such register or list shall be open for police inspection by any proper officer at any time, and all persons renting
rooms shall report to the police any suspicious character who may apply for rooms and shall report all suspicious
acts of any person to whom rooms may have been rented.
(Ord. No. 7149, §§ 1—3, 7-13-98)
Secs. 66-7—66-36. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS
Sec. 66-37. - Disturbing grass areas of municipally owned property.
No person shall dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or
usefulness, of any area of municipally owned property.
(Code 1980, § 21-13)
State law reference— Malicious mischief, A.C.A. §§ 5-38-203, 5-38-204.
Sec. 66-38. - Injuring trees or plants on municipal property; attaching ropes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the
bark, or pick the flowers or seed of any plant located on municipally-owned property. No person shall attach any
rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant located on municipally owned property.
(Code 1980, § 21-12)
State law reference— Malicious mischief, A.C.A. §§ 5-38-203, 5-38-204; destruction of native growth, A.C.A.
§ 5-38-212.
Secs. 66-39—66-65. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Emergency curfews and similar measures, § 26-36 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 66-66—66-95. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - JUVENILE CURFEW
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
213/543
Sec. 66-96. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Juvenile or minor means any person under the age of 18 or, in equivalent phrasing often employed in this
division, any person 17 years of age or less.
Parent means any person having custody of a juvenile:
(1)
As a natural or adoptive parent;
(2)
As a legal guardian;
(3)
As a person who stands in loco parentis;
(4)
As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
Remain means to stay behind, to tarry, and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets, including the congregating of
groups (or of interacting minors) totalling three or more persons in which any juvenile involved would not be
using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home. To implement this
definition with additional precision and precaution, numerous exceptions are expressly defined in this division
so that this is not a mere prohibition of presence of juveniles. More and more exceptions become available with
increasing years and advancing maturity as appropriate in the interest of reasonable regulations.
Street means a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of
vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal
right-of-way, including but not limited to traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and
any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term "street" applies
irrespective of what it is called or formerly named, whether alley, avenue, court, road, or otherwise. The term
"street" shall also include shopping centers, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, public buildings, the common
areas of public housing developments, and similar areas that are open to the use of the public.
Time of night is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight
Savings Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the city, prima facie the time then observed in the
city police station.
Years of age continues from one birthday, such as the 17th, to (but not including the day of) the next, such as the
18th birthday, making it clear that 17 or less years of age be treated as equivalent to the phrase "under 18 years
of age."
(Code 1980, § 21-122)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 66-97. - Finding and purpose.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
214/543
The city council hereby finds there has been a significant breakdown in the supervision normally provided by
certain parents and guidance for juveniles under 18 years of age, resulting in juveniles being involved in a wide
range of unacceptable behavior including vandalism, noisy and rowdy behavior, breaking and entering, public
drinking and littering, harassment of residents, and more serious violent crimes including battery and murder.
(b)
The city council further finds that the offensive activities of juveniles are not easily controlled by existing laws
and ordinances because the activities are concealed whenever police officers are present, and that the
establishment of reasonable curfew regulations will enable the community to better control the free and
unobstructed access to the streets and public places by the majority of residents and will enable the police to act
reasonably and fairly to prevent the violation of laws and ordinances by juveniles.
(c)
The city council further finds and has determined that a curfew meets a very real local need and that curfew
ordinances in other communities have been a factor in minimizing juvenile delinquency. A curfew in this city is
particularly appropriate in view of the basic residential nature of the community and the sense of the community
that there is a proper time for the cessation of outdoor activities of juveniles. This attitude of the community is
reflected in the curfew hours declared by this division, which takes into consideration the danger hours for
nocturnal crime.
(d)
North Little Rock is basically a family community. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the
accepted norm by a substantial majority of the community. Legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have
had demonstrated effectiveness in many communities over the years. The city council has determined that as
parental control increases there is a likelihood that juvenile delinquency decreases and that there is a need for
nocturnal curfew for juveniles in the city and that the establishment of a curfew applicable to juveniles will
reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of parents and guardians over juveniles in their care and
custody.
(Code 1980, § 21-121)
Sec. 66-98. - Curfew hours established.
It shall be unlawful for any person 17 or less years of age (under 18) to be or remain in or upon the streets within
the city at night during the period ending at 5:00 a.m. and beginning:
(1)
At 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday nights; and
(2)
At 10:00 p.m. on all other nights.
(Code 1980, § 21-123)
Sec. 66-99. - Exceptions.
In the following exceptional cases a minor on a city street during the nocturnal hours prescribed for minors shall
not, however, be considered in violation of this division:
(1)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
215/543
When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
(2)
When accompanied by an adult at least 21 years of age who is not the parent and who is authorized by a parent
of such minor to take such parent's place in accompanying such minor for a designated period of time and
purpose within a specified area.
(3)
When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise
of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of such exercise, by first delivering to the person designated by the
chief of police to receive such information, at the police department on Pershing Boulevard, a written
communication, signed by the juvenile and countersigned by a parent of the juvenile, with their home address
and telephone number, specifying when, where, and in what manner the juvenile will be on the streets at night
(during hours when this division is otherwise applicable to such minor) in the exercise of a First Amendment
right.
(4)
In case of reasonable necessity for a juvenile remaining on the streets, but only after the juvenile's parent has
communicated to the person designated by the chief of police to receive such notifications the facts establishing
the reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a designated time for a described purpose, including
points of origin and destination. A copy of the communication, or of the police record thereof, duly certified by
the chief of police to be correct, with an appropriate notation of the time it was received and of the names and
addresses of the parent and juvenile, shall be admissible evidence.
(5)
When returning home from and within one hour after the termination of a school or city sponsored activity, or an
activity of a religious or other voluntary association, of which prior notice indicating the place and probable time
of termination has been given in writing to and duly filed for immediate reference by the person designated by
the chief of police on duty at the police station, thus encouraging, as in other exceptional situations, responsible
conduct on the part of juveniles involved in such activities and striking a fair balance for any conflicting
interests.
(6)
When engaging in the duties of bona fide employment or traveling directly, without undue delay or detour, from
home to the place of employment, or from the place of employment to the home.
(7)
When the minor is in a motor vehicle for the purpose of interstate travel, either through, beginning or ending in
the city.
(Code 1980, § 21-124)
Sec. 66-100. - Parental responsibility; police procedures.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for a parent of a juvenile to permit or allow the juvenile to be or remain upon any city street
under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this division. This
division is intended to hold neglectful or careless parents to a reasonable community standard of parental
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
216/543
responsibility through an objective test. It shall be no defense that a parent was indifferent to the activities or
conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile.
(b)
Police procedures shall be refined in light of experience and may provide that the police officer may deliver to a
parent or guardian thereof a juvenile under appropriate circumstances.
(c)
When a parent or guardian has come to take charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information has been
recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located or fails to
take charge of the juvenile, then the juvenile shall be released in accordance with state and federal law.
(d)
In the case of a first violation of this division by a juvenile, the police department shall, by certified mail or
direct service, send and/or deliver to a parent written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent
violation will result in full enforcement of this division, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of
applicable penalties.
(Code 1980, § 21-125)
Sec. 66-101. - Enforcement procedure.
(a)
If a police officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is on the streets in violation of this division, the officer
shall notify the juvenile that he is in violation of this division and shall require the juvenile to provide his name,
address and telephone number and how to contact his parent or guardian.
(b)
In determining the age of the juvenile believed to be in violation of this division, and in the absence of
convincing evidence, a police officer shall use his best judgment in determining age.
(Code 1980, § 21-126)
Sec. 66-102. - Penalties for division violations.
(a)
If, after the warning notice pursuant to section 66-100(d) of a first violation by a juvenile, a parent violates
section 66-101 (in connection with a second violation by the juvenile), this shall be treated as an offense by the
parent.
(b)
Any juvenile who shall violate any of the provisions of this division more than three times shall be reported by
the chief of police to the juvenile authorities as a juvenile in need of supervision, and the chief of police shall
refer the matter to the county prosecuting attorney and/or the state department of human services and/or other
appropriate authorities.
(Code 1980, § 21-127)
Secs. 66-103—66-135. - Reserved.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
217/543
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
Cross reference— Emergency curfews and similar measures, § 26-36 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 66-136—66-155. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
State Law reference— Weapons, A.C.A. § 5-73-101 et seq.
Sec. 66-156. - Discharging firearms.
Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the city.
(Code 1980, § 21-27)
Sec. 66-157. - Discharging air guns.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an air gun of any kind within the city, or for parents or guardians
of minor children to permit such. In case of wilful destruction of property with an air gun, the air gun may be
confiscated by the police.
(Code 1980, § 21-26)
Sec. 66-158. - Slingshots and beanshooters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or "flip shot" any slingshot or beanshooter.
(Code 1980, § 21-25)
Chapter 70 - PARKS AND RECREATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 94.
State Law reference— Municipal parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, etc., A.C.A. § 14-54-1301 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 70-1. - Parks and recreation commission.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
218/543
Created. There is hereby created pursuant to A.C.A. §§ 14-269-301, 14-269-302, the North Little Rock Parks
and Recreation Commission.
(b)
Composition. Pursuant to A.C.A. § 14-269-302(a), the parks and recreation commission is composed of seven
members. The members shall represent the interests of the entire city; however, each ward shall have at least one
resident at the time of each appointment to the commission. Therefore, at the expiration of each term of office, if
any ward shall lack representation, whether through expiration of term, death, removal, resignation, change of
residence from within the ward, alteration of ward boundaries, or any other reason, then the succeeding
appointee must reside within the unrepresented ward.
(Code 1980, §§ 22-45, 22-46)
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies, § 2-486 et seq.
State law reference— Parks and recreation commissions, A.C.A. § 14-269-301 et seq.
Secs. 70-2—70-36. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITY RULES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Public possession of containers of alcohol with broken seals, § 6-1.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 70-37. - Hours of operation.
(a)
Park hours; posting. All public park facilities in the city shall be opened to the public at sunrise and closed to
the public at 12:00 midnight. The posting of signs in appropriate places in the various public parks, stating the
opening and closing hours of the park facilities, shall be considered sufficient notice to the public of such hours.
(b)
Penalty for violation of section. Any person found in any public park between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
sunrise shall be fined in the amount of $50.00. This fine shall be in addition to any other penalty levied for
violation of any other city ordinance or state law and shall in no way be in place of any existing law.
(c)
Exemptions. The following persons are hereby exempted from the provisions of this section: Police officers,
firefighters and park employees in the lawful performance of their duties, and those persons registered in a
designated overnight camping area.
(Code 1980, § 22-4)
Sec. 70-38. - Parks declared bird sanctuaries.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
219/543
The entire areas embraced within the limits of any and all city parks of this city are hereby designated and
established as bird sanctuaries.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or
wildfowl or to rob birds' nests or wildfowl nests in city parks.
(c)
Exception. If starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that
in the opinion of the health department they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property, then in such
event officials of the health department shall, after giving three days' notice of the time and place of such
meeting, meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club, or humane society, or as
many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, to discuss possible solutions to the problem. If as a result of
such meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then such birds may be destroyed in
such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health department under the supervision of the
chief of the police department.
(Code 1980, § 22-2)
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10.
Sec. 70-39. - Facilities for public use only.
Permission or authority shall not be granted or extended to any person or private group to construct, erect or
build upon park property any structure, device or facility which is unrelated to and does not constitute what is
generally known as park and recreational facilities per se or facilities that cannot be enjoyed by the public in
general.
(Code 1980, § 22-3)
Sec. 70-40. - Use of pavilions.
No person, group, association or organization shall use any of the pavilion facilities located in any of the public
parks of the city without a reservation from the department of parks and recreation.
(Code 1980, § 22-7)
Sec. 70-41. - Use of restrooms.
No person over the age of five years shall use the restrooms and washrooms located in public parks designated
for the opposite sex.
(Code 1980, § 22-9)
Sec. 70-42. - Fires.
No fire shall be set in any public park except in a container suitable for outdoor cooking and provided such fire
is used only for that purpose. If a person provides his own container, it shall be of a type which will not leave
any burning substance or ashes in the public park and must be of a kind which will contain any fire so that no
public park property shall be exposed to flames. The director of parks and recreation may designate certain areas
within the public parks to be used solely for the purpose of an outdoor fire, commonly referred to as a "wiener
roast."
(Code 1980, § 22-10)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
220/543
Sec. 70-43. - Picnics.
(a)
No person in a public park shall picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose.
Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion
and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any direction
given to achieve this end.
(b)
It shall be unlawful to leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the
nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the public
park area by the picnicker to be disposed of elsewhere.
(Code 1980, § 22-12)
Sec. 70-44. - Operation of vehicles, restricted area.
No motor vehicle shall be operated in the public park except on designated streets and parking lots. No vehicle
whatsoever, whether motor driven or not, shall be allowed in any pavilion.
(Code 1980, § 22-13)
Sec. 70-45. - Alcoholic beverages in city parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverages
(including wine, beer or other spirituous liquors) of any kind whatsoever in a city park unless authorized by the
parks and recreation commission.
(Code 1980, § 22-14; Ord. No. 6811, § 1, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 7566, § 1, 7-28-03)
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6.
Sec. 70-46. - Merchandising, advertising and signs.
(a)
No person in a public park shall:
(1)
Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. This subsection shall not apply to any regularly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the parks and recreation commission.
(2)
Announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire.
(3)
Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person
erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a public
park.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
221/543
(b)
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the parks and recreation commission may
permit certain tasteful and dignified advertising at certain locations within Burns Park.
(Code 1980, § 22-16)
Sec. 70-47. - Operation of golf carts; occupancy limited.
(a)
It shall be a violation of the Code for a person under the age of 18 years to operate a golf cart powered by
electric or gasoline motor on the municipal golf course.
(b)
It shall be a violation of the Code for a person operating a golf cart at the municipal golf course to allow the cart
to be occupied by more than two persons, including the operator, regardless of size or age.
(Code 1980, § 22-20)
Secs. 70-48—70-75. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - BURNS PARK
Sec. 70-76. - Purpose.
The property known as Burns Park shall be maintained exclusively by the city for the purpose of providing park
and recreational facilities to the citizens and the visitors to the city.
(Code 1980, § 22-29)
Sec. 70-77. - Failure to pay entrance fee.
(a)
Prohibition. It is unlawful to willfully fail to pay the Burns Park entrance fee.
(b)
Enforcement. The police department shall be responsible for enforcing this section.
(Code 1980, § 22-34)
Sec. 70-78. - Wildlife sanctuary.
The following described land in Burns Park shall be and is hereby designated as a wildlife sanctuary:
An area bounded on the east by Interstate Highway 40, on the north and west by the existing park road, and on
the south by the existing park road running generally along the south line of Section 17, parts of which lie in the
SE¼ and SW¼, Section 17; SE¼, Section 18; NE¼, Section 19; and NW¼, Section 20, Township 2 North,
Range 12 West, containing 190 acres more or less, and more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the west end of state highway right-of-way west of the park road overpass (SE¼, SW¼, Section
17); thence in a westerly direction along the south side of the park road 3,300 feet, more or less, to the curve
turning south; thence in a southerly direction along the east side of the road, 1,600 feet, more or less, to the curve
turning east near the day camp; thence southeast 1,100 feet, more or less, taking in a segment of White Oak
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
222/543
Bayou; thence northeast 1,200 feet, more or less, to the north side of existing park and road north of Heilman
Cemetery; thence east along the north side of existing park road running parallel to the south line of Section 17,
to the west line of Interstate Highway 40; thence northwesterly along the interstate right-of-way to the point of
beginning.
(Code 1980, § 22-30)
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10.
Sec. 70-79. - Dogs.
(a)
The parks and recreation commission shall designate an area within Burns Park for the purpose of permitting
owners of sporting dogs and show dogs to train their animals.
(b)
No dogs of any kind shall be permitted in Burns Park for any purpose unless they are vaccinated for rabies and
have a current city dog license.
(c)
The parks and recreation commission is hereby authorized and directed to use the most expedient means
possible to remove any stray dog that becomes a nuisance in the Burns Park area.
(Code 1980, § 22-31)
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10.
Sec. 70-80. - Firearms.
No person shall be permitted to use loaded or unloaded firearms for any purpose in Burns Park.
(Code 1980, § 22-32)
Chapter 74 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.
State Law reference— Power of city to legislate on its municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.; authority
to license tax and regulate hawkers and peddlers, A.C.A. § 14-54-103(10); transient merchants, A.C.A. § 17-42-
101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 74-1. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Peddler means:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
223/543
(1)
A transient merchant as defined in A.C.A. § 17-42-103; or
(2)
An itinerant merchant as defined in A.C.A. § 17-42-202.
(Code 1980, § 23-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 74-2. - Exceptions to chapter.
Except for section 74-37, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1)
Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business.
(2)
Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling
goods, wares and merchandise according to law.
(3)
Bona fide residents of the state selling fruits, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl or farm products which were
produced on land within the state owned or controlled by such vendor.
(4)
Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which have their
principal place of activity within this city.
(Code 1980, § 23-2; Ord. No. 7835, § 1, 6-26-06)
Sec. 74-3. - Hours of business.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between 8:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific appointment with or invitation
from the prospective customer.
(Code 1980, § 23-6)
Secs. 74-4—74-34. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT
Sec. 74-35. - Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within this city without first obtaining a
permit to do so.
(Code 1980, § 23-18; Ord. No. 7835, § 2, 6-26-06)
Sec. 74-36. - Application.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
224/543
Applicants for a permit under this article shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate,
on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information:
(1)
The name and a description of the applicant;
(2)
The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
(3)
A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
(4)
If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship;
(5)
The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
(6)
The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured
or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery;
(7)
A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application,
which picture shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner;
(8)
A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any
municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
(9)
Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in
advance of final delivery;
(10)
The last five municipalities wherein the applicant has worked before coming to this city; and
(11)
Such other relevant information as may be required by the investigation of the applicant.
(Code 1980, § 23-19; Ord. No. 7835, § 3, 6-26-06)
Sec. 74-37. - Solicitation on or near a public street.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
225/543
It is unlawful for any person to solicit a donation or offer to sell any item or service:
(1)
On a public street;
(2)
Within ten (10) feet of a public street, if there is not a sidewalk along the public street; or
(3)
Between the public street and a sidewalk, if there is a sidewalk within ten (10) feet of the public street.
That permits issued by the City of North Little Rock allowing solicitation in a manner that is impermissible
under this section are hereby revoked July 1, 2006 at 12:01 a.m.
(Ord. No. 7835, §§ 4, 5, 6-26-06)
Note—This section is a verbatim restatement of A.C.A. § 5-67-107 with the word "public street" substituted for
"highway".
Sec. 74-38. - Privilege license prerequisite.
No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article unless the applicant shall have first obtained the
privilege license required by this Code for the activity such applicant wishes to engage in.
(Code 1980, § 23-20)
Sec. 74-39. - Driver's license.
At the time of filing his application for a permit required by this article, the applicant shall present his driver's
license, if he has one, to the city clerk.
(Code 1980, § 23-21)
Sec. 74-40. - Application fee.
At the time of filing the application for a permit under this article, a fee of $6.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to
cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein.
(Code 1980, § 23-22)
Sec. 74-41. - Service of process.
Before any permit shall issue under this article, there shall also be filed with the city clerk an instrument in
writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the city clerk his true and lawful agent,
with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on the behalf of such
applicant; service of summons in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed made when
served on the city clerk.
(Code 1980, § 23-27)
Sec. 74-42. - Investigation of applicant.
Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this article, the original shall be referred to the chief of police,
who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
226/543
necessary for the protection of the public good. The chief of police shall complete his investigation within one
week of receiving the application.
(Code 1980, § 23-28)
Sec. 74-43. - Denial.
If, as a result of investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory,
the chief of police shall endorse on the application his disapproval and his reasons for disapproval, and return the
application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit
shall be issued.
(Code 1980, § 23-29)
Sec. 74-44. - Issuance.
If, as a result of investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be
satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit addressed to the
applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return the permit along with the application to the
city clerk, who shall deliver the permit to the applicant.
(Code 1980, § 23-30)
Sec. 74-45. - Contents.
Each permit issued under this article shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the
name, address and photograph of the permittee, the class of permit issued and the kind of goods to be sold
thereunder, the date of issuance and the length of time the permit shall be operative, as well as the permit
number and identifying description of any vehicle used in such business.
(Code 1980, § 23-31)
Sec. 74-46. - Record.
The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued under this article.
(Code 1980, § 23-32)
Sec. 74-47. - Display.
Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this article and doing business within the city shall
display his permit upon the request of any person, and failure to do so shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
(Code 1980, § 23-33)
Sec. 74-48. - Duration.
Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in
no event shall any such permit be issued for a period of time in excess of 12 months.
(Code 1980, § 23-34)
Sec. 74-49. - Revocation.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city clerk for the violation by the
permittee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
227/543
(Code 1980, § 23-35)
Chapter 82 - SECONDHAND GOODS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; storage of abandoned boats, motor vehicles and trailers, § 42-61 et seq.
State Law reference— Authority to legislate on municipal affairs, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 82-1. - Storing junk on streets and sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store for commercial purposes any junk on the sidewalks, streets and other
public places of the city.
(Code 1980, § 16-1)
Secs. 82-2—82-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - JUNKYARDS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Scrap metal dealers, A.C.A. § 17-37-101 et seq.; junkyards near state roads, A.C.A. §
27-74-401 et seq.
Sec. 82-36. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Junk dealers and dealers in scrap materials means persons engaged in the business of buying, selling, bartering
or otherwise engaging in the traffic of scrap waste or junk metals, minerals, rags, fabrics, papers, hides, furs,
pelts and any or all other materials or property not specifically mentioned herein which is commonly dealt in by
such dealers; provided however, that any person operating a business for the storage and sale of nonferrous
metals shall not be considered a junk dealer or dealer in scrap materials, provided there shall not be any burning
of materials upon the premises nor shall there be any storage of metals or materials outside the building.
Junk or salvage yard means any place of business where used metal of any type, motor vehicle tires, batteries,
parts, rags, wastepaper and any other merchandise is accumulated in stacks and piles, either inside or outside of
buildings, for the purpose of buying and selling or for any other purpose; provided however, that any place of
business where nonferrous metals are stored inside a building is not a junk or salvage yard.
(Code 1980, § 16-16)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 82-37. - Fencing of junkyards.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
228/543
All junkyards shall be enclosed on all boundary lines with a suitable and substantial solid fence not less than
seven feet nor more than ten feet high, with proper screening to enclose the area from public view. The fence
shall be kept in a constant state of good repair, and no signs or other advertising matter shall be placed upon such
fence.
(Code 1980, § 16-17)
State law reference— Screening of junkyards located near state roads, A.C.A. § 27-74-405.
Secs. 82-38—82-65. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - PAWNBROKERS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 82-66. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Secondhand goods means any merchandise or property, other than vehicles subject to state titling laws, that has
been passed through a person outside the normal and usual distribution channels from manufacturer to
distributor, whether or not the property or merchandise has actually been used. Junk or scrap materials and
automobile parts and accessories are considered secondhand goods.
(Code 1980, § 16-30)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 82-67. - Compliance.
The failure on the part of any pawnbroker, owner or operator of a pawnshop or other dealer of secondhand goods
to comply with any or all provisions of this article, excepting those set forth in section 82-93, shall be deemed a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, the offender shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00.
Each day of noncompliance shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and punishment shall be rendered
accordingly. Failure to comply with section 82-93 shall be a violation of this Code and shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500.00.
(Code 1980, § 16-32)
Secs. 82-68—82-90. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - RECORDS AND REPORTS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Pawnshop records, A.C.A. § 12-12-103.
Sec. 82-91. - Electronic recordkeeping by pawn shops or pawnbrokers.
(a)
Each and every owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker doing business in the City of North Little
Rock, Arkansas shall within one year of the adoption of this section, maintain an electronic inventory tracking
system which is capable of delivery and transmission of all statutorily-required information via computer to the
entity designated by the North Little Rock Police Department.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
229/543
(b)
The owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker will be required to upload the information to the entity
designated by the North Little Rock Police Department within two business days of receipt of the goods
purchased (pawned).
(c)
The failure on the part of any owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker to comply with the provisions of
this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the offender shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $25.00 for each separate offense. Each day of noncompliance with this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. No. 7653, §§ 1—3, 8-9-04)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7653, §§ 1—3, adopted Aug. 9, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code. At the editor's discretion,
this ordinance has been treated as superseding § 82-91, Code 1980, § 16-26)
Sec. 82-92. - Delivery to chief of police.
Persons or businesses required to keep the records specified in section 82-91 shall deliver a copy of the records
for the past seven days to the chief of police, or his designee, typewritten and in a form approved by the chief of
police, by 9:00 a.m. on the first business day of each week.
(Code 1980, § 16-27)
Sec. 82-93. - Removal of property.
No property bought or received in pawn shall be sold, leased or otherwise removed from the pawnbroker or
dealer's place of business, except for redemption by the person who placed the property in pawn, for a period of
seven days after the record of acquisition as required in this division has been delivered to the chief of police or
his designee.
(Code 1980, § 16-28)
Sec. 82-94. - Inspection of records.
The records required to be kept in this division and all properties bought, received or held by any pawnshop
owner, pawnbroker, or other dealer of secondhand goods shall be open and accessible to any officer of the police
department for inspection or other official business at any and all times.
(Code 1980, § 16-29)
Sec. 82-95. - False or incorrect information.
No pawnbroker, owner or operator of a pawnshop, or other dealer of secondhand goods shall report any false or
incorrect information on the records and reports required in this division.
(Code 1980, § 16-31)
Secs. 82-96—82-125. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS AND GEMSTONE BUYERS
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
230/543
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
State Law reference— Buyers of precious metals, A.C.A. § 17-20-101 et seq.
Sec. 82-126. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Chief law enforcement officer of the city means the chief of police.
Silver means sterling silver.
(Code 1980, § 16-38(b))
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 82-127. - Exemptions from article.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1)
Transactions involving the sale or transfer of precious metals from one retail jeweler or licensed dealer under
this article to another retailer jeweler or licensed dealer under this article.
(2)
Transactions involving the sale or transfer of precious metals by a wholesale jeweler to a retail jeweler or
licensed dealer.
(3)
Transactions involving the acquisition of precious metals as a trade-in on any items where the amount allowed
as trade-in for the precious metal is less than 50 percent of the purchase price of the item purchased.
(4)
Transactions involving coins, regardless of whether or not such coins contain precious metals.
(5)
Any financial institution which is covered by federal or state deposit insurance.
(6)
Any person doing business under the laws of this state or the United States relating to any broker-dealer, or
commodity futures commission merchant or commodity trading advisor or agent of the same, duly registered
and regulated by the state securities department or the United States Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
(Code 1980, § 16-38(c))
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. § 17-20-102.
Sec. 82-128. - License required.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
231/543
No person, including a pawnbroker, shall engage in the business of buying gold, silver, platinum group metals,
or any article containing the same, referred to in this article as "precious metals," from the general public for the
purpose of reselling the same in any condition without first obtaining a license from the state police as provided
for by A.C.A. tit. 17, ch. 20 (A.C.A. § 17-20-101 et seq.).
(Code 1980, § 16-38(a))
Sec. 82-129. - Privilege license tax; application.
(a)
All persons engaged in the business of buying precious metals shall pay a privilege license as follows:
(1)
The aforementioned businesses shall pay the privilege tax of $250.00 per annum if such precious metal and
gemstone businesses are operating from a permanent and fixed location, are full-time locally operated businesses
within the city, and maintain a permanent business facility for such operations.
(2)
Such businesses operating from nonfixed locations, such as motel or hotel rooms, residential apartments or
booths, shall pay a license fee of $500.00 per day.
(b)
Any person engaging in the purchase of precious metals and gemstones and required to pay the tax provided in
subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section shall file an application form with the city clerk, listing each person
purchasing, selling, owning or controlling any interest in the business. The application form shall require a
statement made under oath that the applicants have not been convicted of a felony and are of good moral
character. The listed applicants shall be required to submit to a criminal record check made by the police
department.
(Code 1980, § 16-39)
Sec. 82-130. - Seller's proof of identification required; statement of seller.
Every person required to be licensed under this article shall require proof of identification of every seller from
whom precious metals or an article made from or containing a precious metal is to be purchased, and shall
require such seller to sign a statement on a form to be approved by the state police, stating that the seller is the
legal owner of such property or is the agent of such owner authorized to sell such property, and when and where
or in what manner such property was obtained. In addition, the buyer shall require the seller to place a legible
print of his right thumb as an identifying mark on a form to be approved by the state police. Provided, that when
a proposed transaction involves the buying of precious metal bulk bullion which appears to have been the result
of a meltdown of a former article containing a precious metal, the buyer must first inquire as to what was the
source of the item before the meltdown, and must notify the state police and the city police department and
obtain permission from both departments before consummating any agreement.
(Code 1980, § 16-40(a))
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. §§ 17-20-203, 17-20-204.
Sec. 82-131. - Purchase from minors.
Every person required to be licensed under this article shall, before purchasing any precious metal or article
made from or containing a precious metal, require the seller, if a minor, to present written authorization to sell by
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
232/543
the parent or legal guardian of such minor, which includes the relationship, address and telephone number of
such parent or guardian.
(Code 1980, § 16-40(b))
Sec. 82-132. - Prices to be posted; weighing.
Every person required to be licensed under this article shall post the prices per ounce that are currently being
paid for precious metals in full sight of the prospective seller, and such precious metals shall be weighed in full
sight of the prospective seller.
(Code 1980, § 16-40(c))
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. § 17-20-205.
Sec. 82-133. - Records.
Every person licensed under this article shall keep a record book obtained from or under the direction of the state
police, containing a comprehensive record of all transactions concerning precious metals. The record shall
include the name, address and telephone number of the seller, and a complete and accurate description of the
property purchased, including any serial numbers or other identifying marks or symbols, and the date and hour
of such transaction.
(Code 1980, § 16-41)
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. § 17-20-206.
Sec. 82-134. - Duty to retain goods.
(a)
All persons licensed under this article shall retain possession of precious metals or articles containing precious
metals, in an unaltered condition, for the period specified in this section. All gold and articles containing gold
shall be retained in possession for a period of three days. All other precious metals or articles containing other
precious metals shall be retained for a period of seven days. The period of retention shall begin on the date that
the acquisition of the precious metal is reported in writing to the chief law enforcement officer of the city. If the
chief law enforcement officer of the city has probable cause to believe that precious metals or an article made
from or containing a precious metal has been stolen, he may give notice in writing to the licensee to retain such
precious metal or article for an additional period of 15 days, and the licensee shall retain such property for the
additional 15-day period unless such notice is revoked in writing within the 15-day period.
(b)
All persons licensed under this article shall at least weekly deliver or mail to the chief law enforcement officer of
the city a copy of all entries in the record book required to be kept in section 82-133 during the preceding sevenday
period. All records and reports received by the chief law enforcement officer of the city shall be available
for inspection only by law enforcement officers for law enforcement purposes.
(Code 1980, § 16-42)
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. § 17-20-207.
Chapter 83 - SIGNS
FOOTNOTE(S):
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
233/543
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 7674, § 1, 2, adopted November 22, 2004, effective January 1, 2005, repealed
the former ch. 83, §§ 83-1—83-31, and Section 2(Exh. A) of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 83 as set out
herein. The former Ch. 83 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 7176, § 1, 11-9-98; Ord.
No. 7361, § 1, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 7397, §§ 1—3, 10-8-01; Ord. No. 7409, § 1, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 7410, § 1, 11-
26-01; Ord. No. 7429, § 1, 2-11-02; Ord. No. 7455, § 1, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 7459, § 1, 6-10-02; Ord. No. 7489, §
1, 10-28-02.
Sec. 83-1. - Purpose and intent.
(a)
The purpose of this chapter is to:
(1)
Control and coordinate the type, placement and physical dimensions of signs within the various zoning
classifications.
(2)
Recognize the commercial communication requirements to all sectors of the business community.
(3)
Encourage the innovative use of design.
(4)
Promote both renovation and proper maintenance.
(5)
Allow for special circumstances; and to guarantee equal treatment under the law through accurate record
keeping and consistent enforcement.
(6)
Promote public safety by assuring safe operation of motor vehicles on public rights-of-way within the planning
jurisdiction of the city.
(7)
Preserve, protect and enhance the value of property within the planning jurisdiction of the city by maintaining
and improving the aesthetics of the community.
(b)
These purposes shall be accomplished by regulation of the placement, erection, use, and maintenance of signs.
The use of signs is regulated according to the zoning classification in which it is located. The placement and
physical dimensions of signs are regulated primarily by type and length of street frontage. No sign shall be
permitted as a main or accessory use except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(c)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
234/543
The primary intent of this chapter is to regulate signs of a commercial nature intended to be viewed from any
vehicular public right-of-way.
(d)
Additional regulations on signs may be imposed by ordinances, supplemental to the Code, for specified areas,
such as historic districts.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-2. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings, ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandoned sign means a sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service,
owner, product or activity.
Administrator means the person, designated by the director to enforce this chapter.
Alteration means to replace, exchange, reconstruct, renovate, move, relocate, animate, enlarge or decrease in
size.
Animated sign means any sign which incorporates in any manner mechanical movement, or apparent movement
achieved by electrical pulsations or other means such as sequential light phasing. Animated signs are prohibited.
Awning means a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed on nonrigid
materials on a supporting framework.
Awning sign means a sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning.
Balloon sign means any display capable of being expanded by air or other gas used on a permanent or temporary
basis to advertise a product or event. Balloon signs are prohibited.
Banner sign means a sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material. The maximum size of a banner is five feet
vertical and 20 feet horizontal.
Bench sign means any sign attached to or a part of a sitting bench. Bench signs are prohibited.
Billboard means any sign.
Billboard site means one sign structure regardless of the number of faces. A location containing multiple
billboards not exceeding 15 feet in distance between the closest point of the billboards is one billboard site.
Changeable copy sign (electronic) means a sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or
through mechanical means. These electronic activated changes are allowed in 15 second intervals, with no
illusion of motion. Time and temperature characters may change at real time.
Changeable copy sign (manual) means a sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., reader boards
with changeable letters.
Clearance (of a sign) means the smallest vertical distance between the grade and the lowest point of any sign,
including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade.
Construction sign means a temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor, and/or material
supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located. One construction sign for
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
235/543
each street frontage of a construction project, not to exceed 16 square feet in sign area per face in residential
zones or 64 square feet in sign area in all other zones. Such signs may be erected ten days prior to beginning of
construction and shall be removed ten days following completion of construction.
Copy means the wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter form.
Directional/information sign means a sign that does not exceed two feet square, and no more than four feet in
height, giving direction to a specific location, instructions or facility information. The sign may contain the
business name or logo and an arrow for direction of travel, but no advertising or commercial copy.
Director means the director of the department of the city designated by the mayor as having authority and
responsibility under this chapter.
Double-faced sign means a sign with two faces.
Electrical sign means a sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections or fixtures are used.
Facade means the entire building front including the parapet, wing walls, etc.
Face of sign means the area of a sign on which the copy is placed or message conveyed.
Festoon means a string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels or similar objects. Festoons are prohibited.
Flashing sign means a sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source used primarily to
attract attention. Flashing sign does not include a changeable (electronic) copy sign, or sign which through
reflection or other means, creates an illusion of flashing of intermittent light. Flashing signs are prohibited.
Freestanding sign means a permanently attached sign on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom
edge of the sign is nine feet or greater above grade in pedestrian areas or 13 feet or greater in vehicular areas.
Frontage means the length of the property line of any one premises along a public right-of-way on which it
borders.
Frontage, building means the length of an outside building wall on a public right-of-way.
Government sign means any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, county, state or
federal government for traffic direction or for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site,
or for providing information concerning public services or events, public properties, or public facilities.
Ground mounted sign means a permanently attached sign, other than a freestanding sign, in which the entire
bottom of the sign is in contact with the ground or is close to the ground and is independent of any other
structure.
Height (of a sign) means the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, including decorative
embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less
(compare "clearance").
Identification sign means a sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building; institution, or
person and/or to the activity or occupation being identified.
Illegal sign means a sign which does not meet the requirements of this chapter and which has not received legal
nonconforming status.
Illuminated sign means a sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose
of illuminating the sign.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
236/543
Incidental sign means a sign, emblem or decal informing the public of facilities or services available on the
premises, e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating the hours of business. Incidental signs shall not exceed five
square feet in aggregate sign area per occupancy.
Lot means a parcel of land legally defined on a subdivision map recorded with the assessment department or
land registry office, or a parcel of land defined by a legal record or survey map.
Maintenance means the cleaning, painting, repair or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that
does not alter the basic copy design or structure of the sign.
Mansard means a steeply sloping ornamental roof-like structure commonly used on exterior walls of buildings
having flat, or nearly flat roofs.
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by an extending structure
from the facade of a building.
Marquee sign means any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. All permitted marquee signs shall
have a minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and nine feet over any pedestrian use area.
Marquee signs shall not exceed one-third square foot of sign area per each linear foot of marquee frontage.
Nameplate means a non-electric on-premises identification sign giving only the name, address and/or occupation
of an occupant or group of occupants.
Nonconforming sign means a sign which was erected legally but which does not comply with subsequently
enacted sign restrictions and regulations.
Occupancy means the portion of a building or premises owned, leased, rented or otherwise occupied for a given
use.
Off-premises sign means a sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment,
which is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which the sign is located, e.g.,
billboards or outdoors advertising.
On-premises sign means a sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located.
Owner means a person recorded as such on official records. For the purposes of this chapter, the owner of
property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary are
officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the administrator, e.g., a sign leased from a sign
company.
Painted wall sign means a sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall.
Parapet means the extension of a false front or wall above a roof line.
Permanent mounting means to set, fix or secure in or on a support, thereby allowing such sign to become a fixed
object to be used for the purpose of which it was intended.
Point of purchase display means advertising of a retail item accompanying its display, e.g., an advertisement on
a product dispenser.
Pole cover means a cover enclosing or decorating poles or other structural supports of a sign.
Political sign means a temporary sign used in connection with a local, state, or national election or referendum.
No political sign be shall allowed to be placed within eight feet of the curb or edge of pavement on any public
street except when flush mounted on a building face of a permanent building nor will they be permitted to
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
237/543
interfere with safe sight distance for vehicle turning movement. Political signs in residential zones shall be
limited in sign area to 16 square feet per face of sign.
Portable sign means any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a
structure or building.
Poster panel means a billboard containing up to 300 square feet of sign area.
Premise means a parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, may be
regarded as a conveyable unit of real estate.
Projecting sign means a sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a building wall
or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign.
Real estate sign means a temporary sign of 16 square feet or less advertising the real estate upon which the sign
is located as being for rent, lease or sale. Real estate signs must be removed 14 days following sale, rental or
lease.
Roof sign means any sign erected over or on the roof of a building. Roof signs are prohibited.
Rotating sign means a copy in which the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves in a revolving or similar
manner. Such motion does not refer to methods of changing copy.
Scenic corridor means a public right-of-way which in the opinion of the city council exhibits special aesthetic
and visual characteristics worthy of protection through enhanced billboard regulation.
Sight triangle means a triangular shaped piece of land established at a street intersection in which nothing is
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorist
entering or leaving the intersection. The sight triangle is measured from the intersection of the two rights-ofway,
a distance of 25 feet along each right-of-way. Within this sight triangle there shall be no obstruction to
vision between a height of two feet and a height of nine feet above the average grade of each street at the
centerline of the street. Street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated appurtenances
thereto shall be permitted within this area.
Sign means any attention gathering device, structure, balloon, festoon, fixture or placard using imagery,
graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying any
establishment, product, goods or services.
Sign, area of means that area enclosed by one continuous line connecting the extreme points or edges of a sign.
The area shall be determined using the largest sign area or silhouette visible at any one time from any one point.
This area does not include the main supporting sign structure but all other ornamental attachments, inner
connecting links, etc., which are not a part of the main supports of the sign, are to be included in determining
sign area.
Snipe sign means a temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, telephone poles, public benches, fence, etc. or
placed on public property or in the public right of way. Snipe signs are prohibited.
Subdivision identification sign means a ground mounted sign identifying a recognized subdivision,
condominium complex, or residential development, not to exceed 32 square feet in area and six feet in height.
Temporary sign means a sign not constructed or intended for long-term use, and not permanently attached to the
ground, a building or structure.
Trailer sign means any sign that is attached to a frame with wheels (or with the wheels removed) and designed
in a manner that allows it to be moved easily. Trailer signs are prohibited.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
238/543
Under-canopy sign means a sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof or marquee.
Use means the principal purpose for which a building, lot, sign or structure is intended, designed occupied or
maintained.
Vehicular sign is any sign displayed on a parked or moving vehicle, where the primary purpose of the vehicle is
to advertise a product or business or to direct people to a business or activity. Vehicular signs shall not include
business logos, identification, or advertising on vehicles primarily used for other business purposes. Vehicular
signs are prohibited.
Wall sign means a sign attached parallel to the wall of a building. Wall signs include painted, individual letter
and cabinet signs and signs on a mansard.
Window sign means a sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. Window signs
shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window space. Incidental signs, when placed inside a window shall not
be included in this 25 percent measurement.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-3. - Penalty.
It is the desire of the city council that the provisions of this sign code be enforced in a fair and consistent
manner. While the particular facts and circumstances of a situation may dictate more drastic enforcement
measures, it is the desire of the city council that this sign code be enforced progressively, beginning with
administrative action, followed by civil action, and if necessary, criminal action. It is envisioned by the city
council that significant education of the community will occur after passage of this chapter, and that the more
severe enforcement actions will be initiated after refusal to comply with less severe measures. However, this
Code may be enforced administratively, and by all civil and criminal remedies allowed under this Code and state
law.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-4. - Conflicts.
If any portion of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any other provision of any section of this Code or
other applicable codes or statutes, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-5. - Exemptions.
(a)
This chapter does not relate to building design.
(b)
This chapter does not regulate:
(1)
Official traffic or government signs.
(2)
The copy and message of signs.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
239/543
(3)
Product dispensers.
(4)
Scoreboards on athletic fields.
(5)
Flags of any nation, government, or non-commercial organization.
(6)
Gravestones.
(7)
Religious symbols.
(8)
Commemorative plaques.
(9)
The display of street numbers.
(10)
Any display or construction not defined as a sign.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-6. - Nonconforming signs and sign uses.
(a)
Existing signs as of the effective date of this article which do not conform to the specific provisions of the
chapter may be eligible for the designation "nonconforming" provided that the signs have a valid city permit or
variance and the signs comply with all applicable laws.
(b)
A nonconforming sign shall lose its designation if the sign is altered in violation of this chapter. Such signs shall
be deemed illegal and removed by the sign owner pursuant to the provisions of this code or state law. This
provision does not refer to change of copy or normal maintenance.
(c)
The nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this chapter regarding safety, maintenance and repair.
However, any nonconforming sign that is damaged to the extent that the cost for complete repair exceeds 50
percent of the replacement cost of the sign, such sign shall be removed by the sign owner. Owners of managed
on-premise signs may obtain a new sign permit if the sign is to be replaced as permitted and in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(d)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
240/543
The requirements of this chapter regarding animation, the illusion of movement, or the rate at which copy or
content changes, shall not apply to any changeable copy sign (electronic) that has a valid city permit or variance
and was lawfully erected prior to the 22nd day of November, 2004.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04; Ord. No. 7707, § 1, 5-9-05)
Sec. 83-7. - Violations.
(a)
When, in the judgment of the administrator, a violation of this chapter exists, the administrator shall issue a
written order to the alleged violator. The order shall specify those sections of this chapter of which the person
may be in violation and shall state that the person has ten days from the date of the order in which to abate the
alleged violation or to appeal to the housing and building board of adjustment (sign board); provided, however,
that in the case of an alleged violator to whom the administrator has issued such an order within the preceding
12-month period, the notice shall require the person to abate the alleged violation within 24 hours. If the violator
fails to appeal or to correct the violation within the time allowed by this section, the sign shall be deemed illegal
and removed by the sign owner.
(b)
If upon inspection, the Administrator finds that a sign is abandoned or structurally, materially, or electrically
defective, or in any way endangers the public, or is not maintained in accordance with this or other applicable
codes or statutes, such signs shall be deemed illegal and the administrator shall issue a written order to the owner
of the sign and/or the occupant of the premises stating the nature of the violation and requiring the sign to be
repaired in conformance with this chapter or removed within ten days of the date of the order.
(c)
Illegal signs are public nuisances. In the event of a failure to comply with the order of the administrator, the city
may institute legal proceedings pursuant to this Code, including without limitation, an action to abate the sign as
a nuisance. Costs incurred by the city shall be charged to the owner of the sign and/or the owner of the property
on which the sign is located. The costs may constitute a lien upon the property and may be collected by any
appropriate lawful means.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-8. - Enforcement agency.
The code enforcement department which shall enforce this chapter and all references herein.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-9. - Interpretation and variances by enforcement officer.
The administrator shall interpret the application of the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out its
stated purpose and intent. The administrator may review requests for variances from the literal provisions of this
chapter in cases where strict enforcement of the chapter would cause undue hardship to the individual
application under consideration and allow such deviation only when it is demonstrated that such action will be in
keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter. In no event shall the administrator authorize a deviation of
greater that 15 percent of height and area requirements of this chapter. Requests for variances greater than 15
percent of height of area requirements shall be made to the housing and building board of adjustments pursuant
to chapter 18.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
241/543
Sec. 83-10. - Reserved.
Sec. 83-11. - Compliance.
It is unlawful for any person to erect, place or maintain a sign in the city except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-12. - Business license.
(a)
No person shall engage in the business of installing, erecting, or maintaining any sign, nor contract for the
performance of such service, without a business license to do so.
(b)
The business license of any sign contractor may thereafter be canceled for cause by the revenue/fiscal control
department. When any sign contractor has, within two calendar years, been found guilty of three separate
violations of this chapter or the building code by any court of record, whether such judgment by appealed or not,
the revenue/fiscal control department shall cancel the license. The license of any person which has been
canceled shall not be renewed until all past violations have been corrected, and any application for renewal of
the license shall be made to the city council, and the department shall file with the city council a report stating
whether or not all previous violations have been corrected.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-13. - Same—Bond or insurance.
No person shall engage in the business of installing, or erecting or maintaining any sign or medium of display or
advertising, electric or otherwise, within the city until he has filed with the city collector a bond or certificate of
liability and property damage insurance in the sum of $500,000.00 with such surety thereon as may be approved
by the city clerk. Such bond or certificate of liability and property damage insurance shall be conditioned for the
installation, erection, and maintenance of signs in accordance with the ordinances of the city and laws of the
state, and shall provide for the indemnification of the city and the purchaser or lessee of such signs, for damages
or liabilities which may accrue by reason of faulty installation, erection, maintenance, demolition, repair,
removal, or defects in, or collapse of any sign so serviced by or under the direction of the maker of such bond, or
certificate of liability of property damage insurance. Such bond or certificate of liability and property damage
insurance shall provide for the indemnification of any person who, while upon public property or in any public
place, incurs damages for which the principal named in the bond or certificate of liability property damage
insurance is legally liable.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-14. - Prohibited signs and sales promotion devices.
The following type signs are prohibited in all districts unless otherwise noted:
(1)
Abandoned signs.
(2)
Pennants, festoons, searchlights.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
242/543
(3)
Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals.
(4)
Snipe signs.
(5)
Vehicular signs.
(6)
Trailer signs.
(7)
Roof signs.
(8)
Bench signs.
(9)
Flashing signs.
(10)
Animated signs.
(11)
Rotating signs.
(12)
Balloons.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-15. - Abandoned signs and sign structures.
All abandoned signs and sign structures not removed by owner after due notice may be removed by the city.
Upon completion of the work the city shall file and have a lien upon real estate for the cost of removing the sign.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-16. - Permit.
(a)
Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all signs shall require permits and payment of fees as described in
this section. No permit is required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on manual changeable
copy signs.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
243/543
(b)
The following signs are exempted from permit requirements but must be in conformance with all other
requirements of this chapter:
(1)
Construction signs.
(2)
Directional/information signs.
(3)
Nameplates.
(4)
Political signs.
(5)
Public signs or notices.
(6)
Real estate signs.
(7)
Incidental signs.
(8)
Governmental signs.
(9)
Any sign relating to an emergency.
(c)
Application for a permit for the erection, alteration or relocation of a sign, when allowed by this chapter, shall be
made to the administrator upon a form provided by the administrator and shall include the following
information:
(1)
The sign owner's name, address and telephone number; and (if different) the name of the person in possession of
the premises where the sign is located or to be located;
(2)
The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be performing the work requested;
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
244/543
The location and zoning description of the parcel in which the sign is or will be located;
(4)
The type of sign or sign structure as defined in this chapter;
(5)
Specifications and scale drawings showing the materials, design, dimensions, structural supports and electrical
components of the proposed sign;
(6)
The cost to construct the sign and any alteration expenses;
(7)
Any other information the administrator shall require to ensure compliance with this and all other applicable city
ordinances.
Accompanying each application for a sign permit shall be a detailed drawing or drawings, all of which are to be
to scale and legible. All existing structures and proposed structures along with proposed sign locations will be
indicated. Building or structure elevation drawings shall be submitted when applications are for buildingmounted
signs.
(d)
Accompanying each application for a sign permit for an existing sign shall be:
(1)
A completed application form stating all necessary facts concerning each sign, signed by the owner certifying to
the facts in the application.
(2)
Photographs of the sign and its locations.
(e)
All applications for permits filed with the Administrator shall be accompanied by a payment of the initial permit
fee for each sign according to the following schedule. All signs shall be permitted and tagged for which a fee
shall be paid in accordance with the permit schedule set out below:
(1)
Off-premise signs on scenic corridors:
Painted bulletin .....$225.00
Poster panel .....$135.00
(2)
Off-premise signs outside scenic corridors:
Painted bulletin .....$100.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
245/543
Poster panel .....$60.00
(3)
All on-premise signs as follows:
Ground mounted signs .....$40.00
Projecting .....$40.00
Wall signs (including marquee and mansard) .....$40.00
Special event .....$10.00
(4)
Alteration fee (based on cost of alteration as percentage of replacement cost):
Off-premise signs .....No fee
Ground-mounted signs:
Up to 25% .....$10.00
25% to 50% .....$20.00
50% to 75% .....$30.00
Over 75% .....$40.00
Projecting signs:
Up to 25% .....$15.00
25% to 75% .....$25.00
Over 75% .....$35.00
Wall signs (marquee and mansard signs included):
Up to 75% .....$20.00
Over 75% .....$30.00
(f)
If a permit is denied, the permit fee will be refunded to the applicant. If any sign is installed or placed on any
property prior to receipt of a permit, the specified permit fee shall be doubled. However, payment of the doubled
fee shall not relieve the responsible party of any other requirements or penalties prescribed in this chapter. The
mayor or his designee may accept requests for refunds or unused sign fees when a lease has been terminated or
the sign has been destroyed. In the event a lease has been terminated or a sign has been destroyed, the mayor or
his designee may refund a portion of the sign permit fee based on the amount of time remaining between the
date the lease was terminated or the sign was destroyed and the date the permit expires.
(g)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
246/543
Any person installing, altering or relocating a sign for which a permit has been issued shall notify the
administrator upon completion of the work. The administrator may require a final inspection, including an
electrical inspection and inspection of footings on freestanding signs. The administrator may require in writing
upon issuance of a permit that he be notified for inspection prior to the installation of certain signs.
(h)
Permits for on-premise signs are to be issued for a period of one year. All sign owners are required to renew
their sign permits every year prior to January 31 of the year. Any sign not permitted within the month of January
of the year shall be classified as abandoned. On-premise signs with expired permits are illegal and shall be
removed by the sign owner at his expense.
(i)
All off-premise sign permits which are valid on the effective date of this article are hereby revoked. The fees
paid for such permits shall be prorated, rounded to the nearest $10.00 and applied toward the new permit fees.
Each billboard site shall require one off-premise sign permit. Notwithstanding any other provision for the
application and issuance of permits, owners of all existing billboards shall obtain a new permit for each billboard
within 60 days of the passage of this article. Billboard permits shall be issued for a period of two years.
Billboard owners shall renew their permits prior to September 30th of the second year. The renewal fee shall be
the same amount as the initial permit fee. The sign owner shall submit to the administrator any changes in the
information contained in the original permit. Any sign not permitted by the due date shall be classified as
abandoned. Such signs are illegal and shall be removed by the sign owner at his expense.
(j)
Off-premise sign permits issued for new signs prior to the effective date of this article are hereby revoked
provided the permit holder has not commenced actual construction under the permit resulting in a tangible
erection of the sign structure. The permit fee for such signs shall be refunded by the city upon application of the
owner.
(k)
The issuance of a sign permit shall in no instance be construed as waiving any provision of the chapter. If any
person commences work on a sign before obtaining the necessary permit, or if a permit issued despite the
violation of any provision of this chapter, or if the location or specifications of the sign vary from the approved
design or location, the person shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in this Code and the sign shall be
removed as an illegal sign.
(l)
In addition, the administrator shall revoke a sign permit for failure of the holder to conform with any of the
provisions of the chapter. All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this chapter, or any
amendment thereto, are mere licenses revocable at any time.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-17. - Maintenance.
(a)
All signs and the premises surrounding the same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary,
and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
247/543
All signs shall be properly maintained at all times. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and painted if paint is
required. Defective parts shall be replaced.
(c)
The administrator shall have the right to order the repair or removal of any sign which is defective, damaged,
substantially deteriorated or presents a public hazard, as defined in the edition of the Standard Building Code in
force in the city.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-18. - Lighting.
Unless otherwise specified by this chapter, all signs may be illuminated. However, no sign regulated by this
chapter may utilize:
(1)
An exposed incandescent lamp with an external reflector and without a sunscreen or comparable diffusion.
(2)
Any exposed incandescent lamp in excess of 300 watts.
(3)
Any revolving beacon light.
(4)
Any device that allows oscillating, rotating or flashing lights.
(5)
Animation manifesting either kinetic or illusionary motion occasioned by a natural, manual, mechanical,
electrical or other means.
(6)
The illusion of movement by means of a preprogrammed (repetitious or sequential) switching action in which
illuminated elements of the sign are turned off or on to visually simulate the impression of motion characteristic
of chasing, running, blinking, oscillating, twinkling, scintillating, or expanding and contracting light patterns.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-19. - Changeable copy.
(a)
Unless otherwise specified by this chapter a sign may use changeable copy limited to:
(1)
Manually activated: Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content can be changed or
altered by manual means.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
248/543
Electrically activated: Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content can be changed
or altered on a fixed surface composed of electrically illuminated or mechanically driven changeable segments.
These electronic activated changes are allowed in 15 second intervals and shall not have the illusion of
movement. Time and temperature characters may change at real time.
(b)
However, in no instance shall these types of signs produce an illusion of movement or animation prohibited by
section 83-18
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-20. - Construction specifications.
(a)
Compliance with building, electrical, and traffic codes. All electrical signs or equipment and devices used in
electrical signs shall bear the label of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or other recognized independent testing
laboratory approved by the building official. Disconnect switches shall be located in a safe and secure location
for each electrical sign and shall be located within 25 feet of such sign. Each disconnect switch shall be located
so as to be readily accessible and shall be properly identified stating what sign it controls. All materials and
methods used for installation shall comply with the current adopted electrical code. Specific application shall be
made for approval of these signs and/or devices by the building official and/or chief electrical inspector of the
city, building codes section. Such review shall be accomplished utilizing standard application and permit
procedures established by the city.
(b)
Anchoring. No sign shall be suspended by non-rigid attachments that will allow the sign to swing in a wind. All
freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures erected on or permanently attached to concrete
foundations, or erected with pilings or other methods approved by the administrator.
(c)
Wind loads. All signs shall be designed to withstand a wind of 60 miles per hour.
(d)
Additional construction specifications. No signs shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any
fire escape, required exit, window or door opening used as a means of egress. No sign shall be attached in any
form, shape or manner which will interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that signs that may
be erected in front of any building may cover transom windows when not in violation of the provisions of the
edition of the Standard Building Code or Fire Prevention Code. Signs shall be located in such a way as to
maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of the overhead electrical conductors in accordance with all
ordinances, depending on voltage concerned. However, in no case shall a sign be installed closer than 24 inches
horizontally or vertically from any conductor or public utility guy wire. Electrical connections to any sign must
be made with overhead or underground connections. Construction and placement of all signs must conform to
the applicable traffic codes of the city and in no way restrict the safe and efficient movement of traffic.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-21. - Signs permitted in all zones.
The following signs are permitted in all zones:
(1)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
249/543
All signs not requiring permits.
(2)
One construction sign for each street frontage of a construction project. Signs shall not be placed within a sight
triangle.
(3)
One non-illuminated real estate sign per lot or premises. Signs shall not be placed within a sight triangle.
(4)
One attached nameplate sign.
(5)
Political signs. Signs shall not be placed within a sight triangle.
(6)
Two directional/information signs. Signs shall not be placed within a sight triangle.
(7)
One company or organizational flag that can be displayed from a permanently mounted flag pole.
(8)
Governmental signs.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-22. - Signs permitted in R-0, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-6 and RT-1 zones.
(a)
The following signs shall be permitted in residential R-0, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-6 and RT-1 zones:
(1)
All signs as permitted in section 83-21
(2)
Real estate signs shall not exceed two feet by three feet.
(b)
For permitted nonresidential uses, including churches and synagogues, one ground mounted sign and one wall
sign shall be permitted.
(c)
All permitted wall signs shall face required street frontage except in complexes where a sign without street
frontage would be the only means of identification for a tenant. Wall signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in sign
area.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
250/543
(d)
All permitted ground mounted signs shall not to exceed 24 square feet in sign area. Ground mounted signs shall
have a maximum height limit of six feet and shall have a setback of five feet from any public right-of-way,
measured from the closest edge of the sign. Signs shall not be placed within a sight triangle.
(e)
Illumination of permitted signs shall not be greater than 50-foot lamberts luminance.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-23. - Signs permitted in R-4 and R-5 zones.
(a)
The following signs shall be permitted in R-4 and R-5 zones:
(1)
All signs as permitted in section 83-21, except subsections (6) and (7).
(2)
One ground mounted subdivision identification sign per neighborhood, subdivision or development.
(3)
One ground mounted identification sign per apartment or condominium complex.
(4)
Real estate signs shall not exceed two feet by three feet.
(b)
For permitted nonresidential uses, including churches and synagogues, one ground mounted sign and one wall
sign shall be permitted.
(c)
All permitted wall signs shall face required street frontage except in complexes where a sign without street
frontage would be the only means of identification for a tenant. Wall signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in sign
area.
(d)
All permitted ground mounted signs shall not to exceed 24 square feet in sign area. Ground mounted signs shall
have a maximum height limit of six feet and shall have a setback of five feet from any public right-of-way,
measured from the closest edge of the sign. Signs shall not be placed within a sight triangle.
(e)
Illumination shall not be greater than 100-foot lamberts of luminance.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
251/543
Sec. 83-24. - Signs permitted in I-1, I-2 and I-3 zones.
(a)
The following signs shall be permitted in I-1, I-2 and I-3 zones:
(1)
All signs as permitted in section 83-21, except subsections (6) and (7).
(2)
One freestanding or ground mounted sign per premise.
(3)
In addition to the above allowed signs, the owner may use one of the following:
a.
Wall or mansard signs.
b.
One awning sign.
(4)
Incidental signs.
(b)
Where a building is on a corner and has more than one main street frontage, one additional wall sign and one
additional freestanding or ground mounted sign shall be permitted on the additional frontage, not to exceed the
size limitations of other permitted wall and freestanding or ground mounted signs.
(c)
All permitted freestanding signs shall have a maximum height limit of 30 feet and shall have a setback of five
feet from any property line, measured from the closest edge of the sign. Freestanding signs shall have a
minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and nine feet over any pedestrian use area.
Freestanding signs shall not exceed two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of main street frontage up to
a maximum of 64 square feet. Signs shall not be placed in a sight triangle.
(d)
All permitted ground mounted signs shall have a maximum height limit of six feet and shall have a setback of
five feet from any property line, measured from the closest edge of the sign. Ground mounted signs shall not to
exceed two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of main street frontage up to a maximum of 64 square
feet. Signs shall not be placed in a sight triangle.
(e)
All permitted wall signs shall not to exceed ten percent in aggregate sign area for that occupancy's facade area.
Wall signs must face required street frontage except in complexes where a sign without street frontage would be
the only means of identification for a tenant.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
252/543
(f)
All permitted awning signs shall have a minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and nine feet
over any pedestrian use area. Awning signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the surface area of an awning.
(g)
Where a lot has in excess of 150 linear feet of street frontage, one additional on-premise freestanding or ground
mounted sign will be allowed for each additional 150 linear feet of main street frontage. Such signs shall be
subject to the size and height limitations of the first allowed freestanding or ground mounted sign and may be
placed no closer than 150 linear feet from any other freestanding or ground mounted sign located on the same
property.
(h)
Sign heights for all freestanding on-premises signs located on properties immediately adjacent to and contiguous
to an expressway or freeway may be measured from the elevation of the centerline of the traffic lanes (excluding
frontage roads) adjacent to subject property to the top of the sign structure. It shall be the responsibility of the
sign owner to submit all necessary information when this approach is used. A survey may be required as proof
of elevations.
(i)
Illumination shall not be greater than 300-foot lamberts of luminance.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-25. - Signs permitted in C-1 and C-2 zones.
(a)
The following signs are permitted in C-I and C-2 zones.
(1)
All signs as permitted in section 83-21
(2)
One free standing or ground mounted sign per premises.
(3)
In addition to the above allowed signs, the owner may use one of the following:
a.
Wall or mansard signs.
b.
One under-canopy sign.
c.
One projecting sign.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
253/543
d.
One awning sign.
(4)
Incidental signs.
(b)
Where a building is on a comer and has more than one main street frontage, one additional wall sign and one
additional ground mounted sign shall be permitted on the additional frontage, not to exceed the size limitations
of other permitted wall and freestanding or ground mounted signs.
(c)
All permitted ground mounted signs shall have a maximum height limit of six feet and shall have a setback of
five feet from any property line, measured from the closest edge of the sign. Ground mounted signs shall not to
exceed two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of main street frontage up to a maximum of 64 square
feet. Signs shall not be placed in a sight triangle.
(d)
All permitted wall signs shall not to exceed ten percent in aggregate sign area for that occupancy's facade area.
Wall signs must face required street frontage except in complexes where a sign without street frontage would be
the only means of identification for a tenant.
(e)
All permitted awning signs shall have a minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and nine feet
over any pedestrian use area. Awning signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the surface area of an awning.
(f)
All permitted under canopy signs shall have a minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and
nine feet over any pedestrian use area. Under canopy signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in sign area.
(g)
All permitted projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and nine
feet over any pedestrian use area. Projecting signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in sign area.
(h)
Where a lot has in excess of 150 linear feet of street frontage, one additional on-premise ground mounted sign
will be allowed for each additional 150 linear feet of main street frontage. Such signs shall be subject to the size
and height limitations of the first allowed ground mounted sign and may be placed no closer than 150 linear feet
from any other ground mounted sign located on the same property.
(i)
Illumination shall not be greater than 300-foot lamberts of luminance.
(j)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
254/543
All permitted freestanding signs shall have a maximum height limit of 36 feet and shall have a setback of five
feet from any property line measured from the closest edge of the sign. Freestanding signs shall have a minimum
clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and nine feet over any pedestrian use area. Freestanding signs
shall not exceed two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of main street frontage up to a maximum of 120
square feet. Signs shall not be placed in a sight triangle.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04; Ord. No. 7681, § 1, 12-13-04)
Sec. 83-26. - Signs permitted in C-3, C-4, C-5 and C-6 zones.
(a)
The following signs are permitted in C-3, C-4, C-5 and C-6 zones:
(1)
All signs as permitted in section 83-21
(2)
One freestanding or ground mounted sign per premises.
(3)
In addition to the above allowed signs, the owner may use one of the following:
a.
Wall or mansard signs.
b.
One under-canopy sign.
c.
One projecting sign.
d.
One awning sign.
(4)
Incidental signs.
(b)
Where a building is on a corner and has more than one main street frontage, one additional wall sign and one
additional freestanding or ground mounted sign shall be permitted on the additional frontage, not to exceed the
size limitations of other permitted wall and freestanding or ground mounted signs.
(c)
All permitted freestanding signs shall have a maximum height limit of 36 feet and shall have a setback of five
feet from any property line, measured from the closest edge of the sign. Freestanding signs shall have a
minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and nine feet over any pedestrian use area.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
255/543
Freestanding signs shall not to exceed two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of main street frontage up
to a maximum of 120 square feet. Signs shall not be placed in a sight triangle.
(d)
All permitted ground mounted signs shall have a maximum height limit of six feet and shall have a setback of
five feet from any property line, measured from the closest edge of the sign. Ground mounted signs shall not to
exceed two square feet in sign area for each linear foot of main street frontage up to a maximum of 120 square
feet. Signs shall not be placed in a sight triangle.
(e)
All permitted wall signs shall not to exceed ten percent in aggregate sign area for that occupancy's facade area.
Wall signs must face required street frontage except in complexes where a sign without street frontage would be
the only means of identification for a tenant.
(f)
All permitted awning signs shall have a minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and nine feet
over any pedestrian use area. Awning signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the surface area of an awning.
(g)
All permitted under canopy signs shall have a minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and
nine feet over any pedestrian use area. Under canopy signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in sign area.
(h)
All permitted projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of 13 feet over any vehicular use area and nine
feet over any pedestrian use area. Projecting signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in sign area.
(i)
Where a lot has in excess of 150 linear feet of street frontage, one additional on-premise freestanding or ground
mounted sign shall be allowed for each additional 150 linear feet of main street frontage. Such signs shall be
subject to the size and height limitations of the first allowed freestanding or ground mounted sign and may be
placed no closer than 150 linear feet from any other freestanding or ground mounted sign located on the same
property.
(j)
Illumination shall not be greater than 300-foot lamberts of luminance.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-27. - Off-premise signs.
(a)
No new off-premises or billboard signs shall be erected within the city limits, as well as the city's extra-territorial
planning jurisdiction, subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance except as provided herein. This prohibition
against new off-premises or billboard signs shall apply to all areas within the city limits and the city's extraterritorial
planning jurisdiction, including those areas regulated by the Federal Highway Beautification Act (23
U.S.C. 131) or the Arkansas Highway Beautification Act (Ark. Code Ann. § 27-74-101 et seq.).
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
256/543
Any existing off-premises or billboard sign located on Interstate 30, Interstate 40, Interstate 440, or Highway
67/167 that is required to be removed or relocated for any reason, may only be replaced with an off-premises or
billboard sign located on a site along Interstate 30, Interstate 40, Interstate 440, or Highway 67/167 as long as
the site meets all of the following requirements.
(1)
That the site is zoned C-4, I-1, I-2, I-3, or Cons-1 and the off premise or billboard sign, including the facing and
support structure, meets all required building setbacks;
(2)
That the off-premise or billboard sign is not greater than 800 square feet and shall not contain more than more
than one advertising sign per facing;
(3)
That the off-premises or billboard sign will be separated by not less than 1,000 feet from another off-premise or
billboard sign. Said distance shall be measured along the nearest edge of the pavement between points directly
opposite the center point of the signs. Each side of the interstate or highway shall be considered separately on
interstates or highways with a median: and
(4)
That the maximum height for the off-premise or billboard sign shall not exceed 45 feet above grade level except
that off-premises or billboard signs located within two hundred feet of a highway or interstate may be elevated a
maximum of 45 feet above the level of the highway or interstate at the point of the highway or interstate that is
perpendicular to the center of the sign.
(c)
There is hereby created an off-premises or billboard sign permit bank whereby the city planning department
shall maintain a permit on file for the replacement of off-premises or billboard signs as allowed under subsection
(b) supra. In order for a sign owner to be eligible to have an off-premises or billboard sign permit within said
permit bank, the owner must file a notice of intent to replace an existing off-premises or billboard sign with the
planning department within 30 days after the original off-premises or billboard sign has been removed.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Sec. 83-28. - Temporary special event banners or devices.
One temporary special event banner or device per business as allowed by the administrator for special events or
grand openings. Special event banners or devices shall only be utilized for nonresidential uses or nonresidential
zoning districts. For these events, the banner or device may be erected for a maximum of 30 days per occasion,
not to exceed four events in a calendar year. Special event permits are good for 30 days and may only be issued
60 days from the previous date of issuance.
(1)
The banner or device shall be secured by a method approved by the administrator to ensure safety and stability
and are not permitted off premise.
(2)
The maximum size for the banner or device shall be five feet vertical and 20 feet horizontal.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
257/543
(3)
The banner or device shall not be tied, secured, mounted or affixed in any manner to a tree, landscaping,
screening wall or fence. The placement of the banner or device may be pole mounted or on a building provided
there are no encroachments onto a public right-of-way.
(4)
A special events permit shall be obtained by an owner or operator of a site, which will allow the user to structure
the number of events and days per year desired. The permit shall be submitted for review and approval as set
forth in section 83-16
(5)
Maintenance shall be as provided in section 83-17
(6)
For purposes of mixed use development with multiple businesses or buildings on a lot or tract of land, only one
freestanding banner or device shall be permitted per premise or lot. One wall mounted banner per business shall
be permitted.
(7)
Banners or devices shall not be placed in a sight triangle.
(8)
Banners shall face required street frontage.
(Ord. No. 7674, § 2(Exh. A), 11-22-04)
Chapter 90 - SOLID WASTE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— City beautiful commission, § 2-556 et seq.; trash containers and waste materials at North
Little Rock Municipal Airport, § 14-141; environment, ch. 42; removal of uncut weeds, grass and other
unsightly and unsanitary articles, § 42-1; health and sanitation, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 106.
State Law reference— Arkansas Solid Waste Management Act, A.C.A. § 8-6-201 et seq.; municipal solid
waste management system, A.C.A. § 8-6-211; Litter Control Act, A.C.A. § 8-6-401 et seq.; Solid Waste
Management and Recycling Fund Act, A.C.A. § 8-6-601 et seq.; local recycling plans, A.C.A. § 8-6-604;
recycling, A.C.A. § 8-9-101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 90-1. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alley means any public way, generally of less width than a street, used for the public utility purposes and rightof-
way and as an alternate secondary or emergency route for vehicle and pedestrian traffic, generally situated at
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
258/543
the rear of or alongside a tier of lots.
Apartment means an apartment as defined by the building code.
Apartment house means an apartment house as defined by the building code.
Brush means nonputrescible solid waste consisting of tree, shrub and hedge clippings, provided that trunks and
limbs do not exceed three inches in diameter and are cut in lengths not to exceed five feet.
Building code means the edition of the Standard Building Code adopted in section 18-36 of this Code.
Commercial establishment means any structure intended or used for the purpose of conducting a commercial
business enterprise.
Container means a receptacle for the deposit of solid waste.
Department means the public works department.
Director means the public works director or anyone authorized to act for him.
Drive-in service means service involving department employees driving in on private property to collect
commercial accounts.
Duplex means a structure intended for use and occupancy as two family dwelling units.
Dwelling unit means a dwelling unit as defined by the city's building code.
Food establishment means a cafe, restaurant, or other similar establishments serving food or food products,
including quick service drive-ins where food is prepared or served.
Garbage means solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage
facilities, handling and sale of produce and other food products.
Household appliance means, but is not limited to, larger household appliances such as refrigerators, deep
freezes, stoves, ovens, air conditioners, washers, dryers, trash compactors, dishwashers, televisions, radio, hot
water heaters and plumbing fixtures.
Illegally dumped solid waste means any solid waste placed on properties with or without the consent of the
owner or person in control where such waste constitutes a nuisance detrimental to the public health and welfare.
Institution or institutional means any church, church building or structure housing any charitable, philanthropic
or eleemosynary undertaking, or any school.
Manager means the person in charge of real estate used for apartment, institutional or commercial purposes.
Manual collection means the service rendered in collecting municipal solid waste from containers, which
containers can be handled in part by men picking up the containers as distinguished from picking up containers
by mechanical means and which containers are too large for handling by manual means.
Municipal solid waste or solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community,
trade, business and recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish or trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, and all other solid waste other than industrial solid waste.
Occupant means the person residing in a dwelling unit, specifically the head of such household.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
259/543
Owner means the record titleholder of real property.
Packout service means service involving city sanitation service employees walking in on private property to
collect garbage.
Parkway means the area ordinarily intervening between the curbline of a street and the inside property line.
Permittee means any person licensed by the city to contract to collect, remove or dispose of solid waste.
Property line means the peripheral boundary of real estate.
Public easement means a right-of-way used or dedicated to be used by any public utility, including, but not
limited to, services such as electricity, telephone, gas, solid waste collection, water, sewer and drainage.
Public way means any street, alley, easement or other right-of-way.
Residence means a structure intended for use and occupancy as a one-family dwelling unit.
Rubbish or trash means nonputrescible solid waste, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste
materials; combustible rubbish or trash includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, rubber, plastics, yard
trimmings, leaves and similar materials; noncombustible rubbish or trash includes glass, crockery, tin cans,
aluminum cans, and like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 degrees
Fahrenheit to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit).
Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of municipal solid waste on land without creating a nuisance or
hazard to public health or safety, by utilizing the principles of engineering to confine the solid waste to the
smallest practical area to reduce it to the smallest practical volume, and to cover it with a layer of earth at
appropriate intervals.
Street means any public thoroughfare for the passage of vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance.
(Code 1980, § 28-1; Ord. No. 7692, § 1, 2-28-05)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 90-2. - Littering of certain public places.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw, deposit, or otherwise put any newspaper, advertising circular,
pamphlet, brochure, or any other publication, advertising material or printed material in or on any city street,
alley, curb, gutter, drainage ditch or related drainage facility. Provided, however, that this prohibition shall not
apply to the placement of political advertisements or political campaign signs on private residential premises or
commercial property over either of which the city owns or enjoys a right-of-way.
(b)
Each violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00; provided, however, that two or
more violations of this section occurring on the same day shall be considered as a single violation under this
section.
(Code 1980, § 21-16)
State law reference— Litter Control Act, A.C.A. § 8-6-401 et seq.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
260/543
Sec. 90-3. - Unlawful deposits.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, discard, or otherwise cause to be put, brush, garbage,
rubbish, or any other type of waste, on any outside premises within the city, whether public or private, in such a
manner as to cause insanitary, unsightly, or unhealthy conditions, except at such places as are, have been, or
shall be designated by the director and except in accordance with other provisions of this chapter. The term
"outside premises" shall be construed to include streets, alleys, sidewalks, ditches, yards, lots, fields, streams,
and exterior portions of buildings.
(b)
The director shall regularly inspect all outside premises to enforce the provisions of subsection (a) of this
section. The director shall issue citations for violations of this section and may abate such conditions pursuant to
the provisions of chapter 42, article II of this Code.
(c)
In the prosecution of subsection (a) of this section, the following presumptions shall apply:
(1)
If the condition resulting from the violation was found on premises owned and/or occupied by the person to
whom notice was given, then it shall be presumed that such owner and/or occupant was responsible for such
condition. If the person to whom notice was given fails to remove or otherwise correct such condition without
notifying the director of the reason for his failure to do so within seven days, then it shall be presumed that such
person notified was in fact responsible for such conditions not being removed. The presumptions described
above are rebuttable by the person charged and must be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence in order for
the person so charged to be exonerated.
(2)
If the condition resulting from the violation was found on property whereon multiple dwelling units exist and the
party actually committing the violation cannot with reasonable certainty be determined, then it shall be
presumed that the owner of the subject premises, upon being given notice, is the party responsible for ensuring
that the condition is removed from the premises.
(Code 1980, § 28-3)
State law reference— Litter Control Act, A.C.A. § 8-6-401 et seq.; liens for nuisance abatement, A.C.A. § 14-
56-903.
Sec. 90-4. - Vehicle loads to be secured.
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in commercial or for-hire hauling to operate any truck or other
vehicle within the limits of the city to transport litter, trash or garbage unless such vehicle is covered to prevent
its contents from blowing, dropping or falling off or otherwise departing from the vehicle. In addition, any
person operating his own truck or other vehicle to transport litter, trash or garbage shall take reasonable steps to
prevent its contents from blowing, dropping or falling off or otherwise departing from the vehicle. Provided, no
vehicle hauling predominately metallic material shall be required to be covered if it is loaded in a manner which
will prevent such material from falling or dropping from the vehicle.
(Code 1980, § 28-4)
State law reference— Vehicles spilling loads, A.C.A. § 27-35-110.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
261/543
Secs. 90-5—90-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CITY COLLECTION SERVICE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 90-36. - Containers generally.
(a)
Every person occupying a residence or duplex and every owner of an apartment shall provide such premises
with a sufficient number of solid waste containers or receptacles to provide adequate capacity for the solid waste
placed out for collection without overloading the capacity of the containers.
(b)
Solid waste containers or receptacles shall be watertight and constructed of a solid and durable grade of metal or
plastic material.
(c)
In the case of those containers which are manually emptied by the sanitation service employees of the city, the
combined weight of the waste and container shall not exceed 50 pounds.
(d)
Underground containers are prohibited for use in the city.
(e)
All containers (except plastic bags) shall be provided with suitable lifting handles on the outside and a
closefitting or other approved cover equipped with a handle, and shall not exceed 30 gallons capacity.
(f)
Containers shall not contain any inside structures, such as bands or reinforcing angles or anything within the
container to prevent the free discharge of the contents. Containers that have deteriorated or that have become
damaged to the extent that the covers therefor will not fit securely or that they have jagged or sharp edges
capable of causing injury to sanitation service employees or other persons whose duty it is to handle such
containers shall be condemned by the city and if such containers are not replaced after notice to the owner or
user, such containers will be removed along with the contents thereof.
(g)
The lid shall be closefitting and shall remain in place covering the container or receptacle at all times when there
is any material in the container. The lid may be attached by an appropriate means to the rack upon which the
containers are placed or to an adjacent fence or other appropriate fixed object in order to prevent the lids from
getting into the pathway of vehicles, provided however, that no lid shall be attached to the container itself.
Containers which have the lids directly attached to them constitute a hazard to sanitation service employees
engaged in the collection of solid waste and shall be condemned by the city, and if such attachments are not
removed after notice to the owner or user, such containers will be removed along with the contents thereof.
(h)
Plastic bags shall be constructed of a material and in a manner conforming to the standard city specifications
approved by the director and on file in the office of the city clerk. All plastic bags shall be secured at the top to
prevent spillage.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
262/543
(Code 1980, § 28-21)
Sec. 90-37. - Collection from residences and duplexes.
(a)
All collection of solid waste materials from residences or duplexes shall be by the sanitation department's crews;
such service shall not be performed through any other person.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any solid waste container within any alley or any public utility
easement or public way. Suitable racks and containers shall be provided by the occupant of any premises where
containers are deemed by the director as necessary to prevent overturn or spillage by the actions of animals,
wind or other similar causes.
If a fence separates the alley from the lot where the container is located, a platform rack for the container or
containers shall be constructed so that the top of the container shall be not lower than level with the top of the
fence nor higher than five feet above the bottom of the fence or the ground at the fence.
If a fence is constructed with an inset space for the placement of solid waste containers outside the fence, but
inside the lot line, containers placed therein shall be protected from overturn or spillage by a rack as specified in
this subsection.
(c)
Where a residence or duplex is not served by an alley, public utility easement or other public way in the rear or
alongside thereof, all containers shall be placed just behind the curbline of the street abutting such property, but
shall not be placed in the street or on the sidewalk, or in any manner placed where the containers will interfere
with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Where garbage is collected from the front or side street, containers shall be placed there no earlier than 6:00 p.m.
of the afternoon preceding the collection day and shall be removed to a point at the side or rear of the structure
not later than 8:00 a.m. of the day following collection.
Where special conditions exist which subject containers so placed to overturn and spillage, the director may, at
his direction, require such containers subject to overturn and spillage to be placed in a portable or moveable
rack.
For those residents who are physically handicapped and are not able to place their containers on the curb, the
sanitation workers will collect the cans and carry them to the curbside. Any person who feels he qualifies for this
service should contact the department. The director will investigate each case and when it has been determined
that such service is justified, the appropriate collection crew will be notified to render special pickup service at
no extra charge.
(d)
Garbage containers shall be placed at locations and under such conditions approved by the director for collection
service by the department.
(Code 1980, § 28-22)
Sec. 90-38. - Collection of rubbish, trash or brush from residences and duplexes.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
263/543
Rubbish, trash or brush normally shall be collected from residences and duplexes from the alley, when it is
paved, and from the street when the alley is not paved or when no alley exists or is not serviceable.
(b)
Where rubbish, trash or brush is collected from the alley, public utility easement or public way and not from the
street, all rubbish, trash or brush shall be placed at the property line, but shall not be placed inside the alley,
easement or public way in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(c)
Where rubbish, trash or brush is not collected from the alley, public utility easement or other public way, but is
collected from the street, it shall be placed just behind the curbline of the street abutting the premises, but shall
not be placed in the street or on the sidewalk in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(d)
Where the quantity of brush set out for collection is excessive, the director shall determine the amount of brush
to be collected at any one time, the day of its collection and any other matters pertaining to brush collection in
order not to disrupt normal service to other premises.
(e)
Rubbish or trash consisting of small, loose items shall be placed in an approved container.
(f)
All boxes and cartons must be broken down and bundled and no bundle shall exceed 50 pounds in weight for
collection by the city.
(g)
Rubbish or trash collection service shall not be rendered as a packout collection service.
(h)
Pickups of rubbish, trash or brush will be made the workday following garbage pickup.
(Code 1980, § 28-23)
Sec. 90-39. - Collection from apartments, institutions and commercial establishments.
The manual collection and removal of solid waste materials from apartments, institutions and commercial
establishments shall be performed by department crews only where the containers conform to the requirements
of containers for residential or duplex collection service. Where larger waste containers are used, the owner or
occupant of the premises shall have the option of disposing of solid waste materials through his own efforts and
at his own expense or may contract with persons who are permitted to collect and remove solid waste materials.
The placement of containers for collection from apartment houses, institutions and commercial establishments
by the city sanitation department shall be as approved by the director. Rubbish or trash collection shall not be
rendered as a packout collection service.
(Code 1980, § 28-24)
Sec. 90-40. - Collection from downtown areas.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
264/543
(a)
The collection of solid waste materials from the downtown area, as described in this chapter, shall be governed
by all the provisions of this chapter pertaining to apartments, institutions and commercial establishments, except
that no solid waste materials or containers of any kind shall be placed for collection on the public streets,
sidewalks, alleys or easements of the city prior to 5:00 p.m. on the day of collection, and all containers which
must be manually emptied shall be removed to a location inside the building situated on the premises by not later
than 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection. Where collection service is furnished by the department to these
premises, all provisions of this chapter which are applicable to residences and duplexes shall apply.
(b)
At any of the establishments in the downtown area where there is insufficient space between any structure and
the alley property line, the easement property line, or street property line to permit the placing of waste
containers as required by the provisions of this chapter relating to residences and duplexes, the containers may
be placed in such public way at the very boundary thereof so as to permit the passage of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, or at a time other than as set out in subsection (a) of this section, subject to the approval of the director. In
these special locations, the owner or occupant of the premises shall remove all containers immediately after the
solid waste material has been collected to a place within the structure situated on the premises until the next
regularly scheduled time for collection.
(Code 1980, § 28-25)
Sec. 90-41. - Collection and removal of dead animals.
The bodies of dead animals shall not be placed in solid waste containers or in any street, alley, easement or
public way. The collection and removal of dead animal bodies shall be a service of the city's animal shelter and
shall be furnished upon request or notification by any interested party.
(Code 1980, § 28-26)
Sec. 90-42. - Items city will not collect.
(a)
The scope of the service rendered by the department in the collection and removal of solid waste materials is
intended, in general, to serve the needs of dwelling units and their directly related activities, operating businesses
and commercial establishments, except as exempted from the provisions of this chapter. It is considered to be
beyond the scope of such service to collect or remove solid waste materials generated by clearing, construction,
demolition and other such solid waste materials resulting from an activity beyond the scope described above.
(b)
The following solid wastes shall not be collected and removed by the department as a regular service:
(1)
Rock, scrap building materials or other trash resulting from construction, remodeling or destruction by fire, the
elements, acts of God or other causes resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property or trees,
brush and/or debris cleared from property in preparation for construction or occupancy. Such materials shall be
removed at the expense of the owner or developer.
(2)
Industrial wastes resulting from manufacturing or processing operations, including waste from food and
vegetable produce houses, poultry dressing establishments, meat processing and meat packing plants, must be
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
265/543
disposed of by the owner or occupant of the building, business or premises where such wastes originate in the
manner prescribed by state law and any other applicable ordinance. The director shall determine what wastes fall
within this industrial classification.
(Code 1980, § 28-27)
Sec. 90-43. - Processing and disposal.
(a)
All garbage and rubbish or trash or other solid waste materials must be processed and/or disposed of at a
location and in a manner approved by the director. All landfill operations, including disposal procedures and
determination of acceptable users, are the responsibility of the director or his authorized representative.
(b)
The use of disposal sites, transfer stations, or other disposal facilities operated by the city is restricted to the
department, city residents, nonresidents, city businesses and industries, or such commercial haulers as may be
authorized to haul solid waste materials for them. Individuals bringing garbage, trash or rubbish to disposal sites
must present a valid driver's license as proof of residency or a valid commercial hauling permit.
(c)
Any person entering upon a city-operated disposal site for any purpose shall be conclusively presumed to know
and appreciate the hazards and the extent of the damage which accompanies the accumulation of scrap wood,
glass, nails, trash, brush, waste and garbage of every description; and the use of trucks, vehicles and heavy
machinery to move, remove, bury and dispose of same; every person entering upon any such site shall be
conclusively presumed to have assumed the risk of injury connected with or resulting from such hazards and
danger, and by his actions in entering upon such site, and for and in consideration of the permission granted by
the city to enter upon such site, every person shall covenant and be deemed to have covenanted not to sue and to
indemnify, save harmless and defend the city, its agents, officers and employees from and against any and all
claims of any nature whatsoever for injury or damage to person or property, whether real or asserted, arising out
of or resulting from the entry by such person upon any city-operated disposal site.
(d)
Processing and disposal of solid waste materials by private persons shall be permitted only after proper
application has been made to the director as complying with all applicable city, county and state regulations
pertaining to solid waste processing and disposal operations.
(e)
The director shall have the authority to temporarily suspend any solid waste processing or disposal operation
being conducted by any private person which does not conform to the requirements of city, county or state
regulations pertaining thereto or which shall in any manner jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare and
to maintain that restriction until, in his judgment, adequate measures have been taken to assure that removal of
the curtailment or suspension restrictions will not jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare.
(f)
The director shall have the authority to cause to be rejected for processing or disposal any material which, in his
judgment, would create a nuisance by reason of emission, disagreeable odors, or would operate to make the
processing or disposal facilities unwholesome or adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare.
(g)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
266/543
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, remove or carry away from any processing or disposal facility
operated by the city any garbage, rubbish, trash or other solid waste material, article, thing or object situated
thereon, whether or not the same has monetary value, without prior written permission and approval of the
director. In prosecutions for this offense, it shall not be necessary to describe the things taken, removed or
carried away other than as generally described in this section or as "article," "thing" or "item," and it shall not be
necessary to allege that the same had value.
(h)
The director shall have the authority to designate which processing and/or disposal sites are to be opened to the
public and which are to be restricted to municipal vehicles only, provided that no processing or disposal facility
within the city will be opened to solid waste materials originating outside the city limits without prior written
permission and approval of the director.
(Code 1980, § 28-28)
Sec. 90-44. - Filing a complaint for commercial garbage pick-up between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Any citizen who is disturbed by the commercial pick-up of garbage from dumpsters between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., may file a complaint with the code enforcement department. The code enforcement
department shall prepare a complaint form that may be forwarded to the complainant to be used to assist with
said complaints. Upon receiving a complaint, the code enforcement [department] shall investigate the complaint
and make contact with the company allegedly responsible for the disturbance to resolve the matter. If 15 days
have passed since the company has been notified and the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of both the
complainant and the code enforcement department, that matter shall be filed with the city council as a
correspondence.
(Ord. No. 7500, § 1, 11-25-02)
Sec. 90-45. - Regulations for trash dumpsters.
(a)
All trash dumpsters in active use as a trash receptacle within the city limits shall be secured and maintained as
follows:
(1)
All trash dumpsters shall be maintained in a sanitary manner that will not cause odorous or rank smells. These
dumpsters shall also be maintained in a manner in which no trash, rubbish, or debris is located outside of the
dumpster.
(2)
Doors to a trash dumpster shall be closed at all times when trash is not being deposited into or emptied from the
dumpster.
(b)
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any owner of property upon which an active trash dumpster is used fails
to comply with the requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 7624, §§ 1, 2, 3-8-04)
Sec. 90-46. - Securing of household appliances set out for collection.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
267/543
All property owners, tenants, entities, or residents within the city who place household appliances out for
collection or store or keep a household appliance in an open, accessible area (i.e. porch, patio, etc.) shall do so in
a manner that will not pose a risk to the public health, safety, or welfare of others, or in a manner otherwise
violating Municipal Code Provisions. Any person or entity who places household appliances out for collection
or keeps household appliances in open, accessible areas, shall take any and all reasonable precautions to
preclude the existence of any hazards in this respect, including but not limited to, removing refrigerator doors
and latches, securing doors with locks, chain, wire or rope to prevent opening, or other reasonable methods.
(Ord. No. 7692, § 2, 2-28-05)
Secs. 90-47—90-65. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Fees and charges authorized, A.C.A. § 8-6-211(b).
Sec. 90-66. - Generally.
(a)
The establishment of solid waste service charges will be based upon the current use of the property rather than
being based upon the zoning.
(b)
There shall be no proration of service charges for a portion of a billing period. No final billing for sanitation
charges for less than a full billing period shall be rendered.
(Code 1980, § 28-41)
Sec. 90-67. - Schedule.
A solid waste collection service charge is hereby established for all residences, businesses and duplexes,
including all mobile-type dwelling units, as follows:
(1)
A fee of $12.00 per dwelling unit per month shall be charged for curb collection service for residential garbage
and trash, including each apartment which receives manual collection service, whether curb or drive-in.
(2)
A collection service charge will be made for all commercial establishments for all collection services provided
by the sanitation department of the city as provided below:
Table of Monthly Charges
No. of Pickups
1 2 3 4 5
4 cans or less $14.70 $16.70 $19.20 $21.70 $24.20
Each additional can 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00 2.50
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
268/543
(3)
Miscellaneous collection service charges will be as follows:
a.
Public housing may be charged as apartments.
b.
Churches, clinics, hospitals, public buildings and schools will be charged as commercial locations.
(Code 1980, § 28-42; Ord. No. 6947, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 7088, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 7191, § 1, 1-11-99)
Sec. 90-68. - Notice to discontinue service; no credit if notice not given.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of property which receives solid waste collection service
from the city to notify the city to discontinue such service; there shall be no billing credits unless the city is so
notified.
(Code 1980, § 28-43)
Sec. 90-69. - Credit for vacant apartments.
(a)
Sanitation service charge credits will be granted for vacant or unoccupied dwelling units in apartment complexes
which contain two or more dwelling units upon receipt from the applicant of proof of such vacancy meeting
certain uniform requirements specified by the director, but such credits shall be limited to only those units which
are continuously vacant or unoccupied for 30 days or more and no credit will be given prior to the date of
notification.
(b)
Any applicant for credit under this section who intentionally makes any misrepresentation in any written
statement required by the uniform requirements specified in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1980, § 28-44)
Sec. 90-70. - Billing and collection.
(a)
All solid waste collection and disposal charges and fees shall be billed in a manner which will show each
customer's fees and charges separately from the water bill. Such charges and fees shall be billed to the person in
control of the premises, and if this fact cannot be ascertained, the bill shall be directed to the record owner of
such premises. The person who is so billed and to whom the services are made available shall be indebted to the
city for such services and shall be obligated to make payment therefor as provided in this article. The bill will
become delinquent ten days after it is rendered.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
269/543
In addition to all other legal remedies available for the collection of a debt, the following actions and remedies
are authorized for delinquent payment of the charges authorized in this article:
(1)
The department may refuse to pick up and dispose of the solid waste at the delinquent location.
(2)
A penalty of ten percent of the total net bill shall be charged in the event of delinquency.
(3)
All present utility guaranty deposits upon termination of sanitary service and/or water service may be applied to
any amounts due either for sanitation service charges or fees of water utility bills.
(4)
All utility service contracts entered into between the department and the customer shall contain an agreement
that any guaranty deposit upon termination of sanitation service, electric service and/or water service may be
applied to utility charges that have become due.
(Code 1980, § 28-45)
Chapter 94 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-451 et seq.; public possession of containers of alcohol with
broken seals, § 6-1; smoking prohibitions, § 54-36 et seq.; library, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 70; traffic
and vehicles, ch. 102.
State Law reference— Municipal streets, A.C.A. § 14-301-101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 94-1. - Changing street names; approval of new street names.
The city council shall have power and authority to change names of streets within the city limits when deemed
necessary, and to assign numbers to houses. No addition, division or subdivision, nor dedication of streets shall
be accepted until the council shall have approved the names of the streets therein.
(Code 1980, § 29-5)
Sec. 94-2. - Signs on streets dedicated but not accepted.
(a)
Signs shall be placed on all streets dedicated but not accepted by the city council. Signs shall be placed at each
end of such street by the street department after authorization by the director of public works. Signs to be placed
on streets not accepted by the city shall read as follows: "The City of North Little Rock will not maintain this
street."
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
270/543
Signs placed on streets in accordance with this section shall remain until such time that owners of property
abutting such streets make improvements to meet the minimum street standards. If improvements are to be made
by the city, property owners involved shall make a cash deposit with the city clerk in an amount determined by
the director of public works to complete installation of improvements.
(Code 1980, § 29-12)
Sec. 94-3. - Allocation of certain costs of land development relating to the installation of streetlights.
(a)
In all instances wherein a developer makes application with the city to develop property which is at such time
within the Arkansas Power and Light (AP&L) distribution system, approval of such application by the city shall
be conditioned upon payment by the developer to the city, which would reimburse the city in the event of
subsequent acquisition by the city of that portion of the AP&L distribution system covering the development in
question, for all costs of acquisition directly related to such streetlights.
(b)
The amount charged to the developer under this section shall be determined by the electric department at the
time of the developer's application, to be based upon the projected cost of subsequent acquisition by the city.
(Code 1980, § 29-13)
Sec. 94-4. - Sidewalks to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.
All sidewalks shall be constructed to permit wheelchair access at street intersections or any other interruption of
the sidewalk.
(Code 1980, § 29-14)
State law reference— Wheelchair access required, A.C.A. § 14-301-108.
Sec. 94-5. - House numbering.
(a)
Main Street and Washington Avenue shall be the base and dividing line from which the numbering of houses
begins.
(b)
Commencing at Main Street for the numbering of houses on streets running east and west, each half lot or 25
feet shall be entitled to a whole number, and each fraction thereof shall be entitled to a proportional fractional
number; commencing at Washington Avenue, for the numbering of houses on streets running north and south,
each half lot or 25 feet shall be entitled to a whole number and each fraction thereof shall be entitled to a
proportional fractional number.
(c)
Looking west from Main Street, even numbers shall be located on the right or north side of the street and odd
numbers shall be located on the left or south side of the street. Looking east from Main Street, even numbers
shall be located on the right or south side of the street and odd numbers on the left or north side of the street.
(d)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
271/543
Looking north from Washington Avenue, even numbers shall be located on the east or right side of the street and
odd numbers on the west or left side of the street. Looking south from Washington Avenue, even numbers shall
be located on the right or west side of the street and odd numbers on the left or east side of the street.
(Code 1980, § 29-6)
Sec. 94-6. - Minimum design standards for bridges.
(a)
For the purposes of this section, a "bridge" is any clear roadway span greater than six feet.
(b)
The upgrading of existing bridges and the construction and erection of replacement and new bridges on city
roads shall meet certain minimum bridge design standards as set forth in subsection (c) of this section.
(c)
The minimum bridge design standards for the upgrading of existing bridges and for the construction and erection
of all replacement and new bridges on city roads shall be as follows:
MINIMUM BRIDGE STANDARDS
FOR REPLACEMENT OR NEW BRIDGES BUILT ON CITY ROADS
Standard Number 1 2 3 4 5 6
Current ADT OVER
6,000
1,600
TO
6,000
750
TO
1,600
400
TO
750
50
TO
400
*0
TO
50
Terrain F R M F R M F R M F R M F R M F R M
Design Speed 50 40 30 50 40 30 50 40 30 50 40 30 50 40 30 50 40 30
Hydraulic Design Variable
Capacity (Based on Cost Risk Analysis)
Design loading HS-20 HS-20 HS-20 HS-20 HS-15 HS-15
Bridge Width (ft.) 64 54 54 40 30 30 38 28 28 28 28 26 24 24 24 24 24 24
*Standard Number 6 may be used on minor roads with few trucks.
F—Flat terrain R—Rolling terrain M—Mountainous terrain
(Code 1980, § 29-201)
State law reference— Authority to build and repair bridges, A.C.A. § 14-301-103.
_____
Sec. 94-7. - Paving contractor's bond.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
272/543
(a)
Before any person shall be permitted to lay or repair any sidewalk, curb, gutter or the like or to lay or repair any
pavement, or to build or lay any other public work on the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places in the
city, such person shall file in the office of the city clerk a bond conditioned for the faithful performance of any
such work, which bond shall be in words and figures as follows:
"Know all men by these presents that ____________ as principal, and ____________ and ____________ as
sureties are firmly bound unto the City of North Little Rock, in her corporate capacity and for the use and benefit
of all persons, firms or corporations in front of whose property any work may be done or who shall have
furnished labor or material for doing the said work in the sum of ____________, to be paid to the city for the
property damaged, for which payment we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors and administrators, assigns, and
successors, forever, firmly by these presents.
"The conditions of this Bond are such that if the said ____________ shall, well and truly, perform all public
work on streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public places in this city to the satisfaction of the director of public
works, and as required by contract and ordinance in reference thereto and shall pay for all labor done and
material used in said work, turn over said work to said city or persons for whom done, on or before the time
specified for its completion, then this obligation shall be null and void but otherwise it shall remain in full force
and effect.
"This bond shall cover all such public work done for the city or the property owners thereof for the term of one
year from date thereof."
(b)
This city or any property owner who shall be damaged by reason of the failure of any person faithfully to do or
perform any public work described in subsection (a) of this section to the satisfaction of the engineer in charge
of such work or by any person furnishing labor or material for such work, is authorized to bring suit in the name
of the city for his use against such contractor or sureties and to prosecute the suit to final judgment and
execution, provided such action shall involve the city in no expense.
(c)
The bond required by this section shall be approved by the director of public works before being filed and
accepted.
(d)
No permit shall be issued to any person to do any paving or repair work until the required bond is filed and
approved.
(Code 1980, § 29-3)
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.
Sec. 94-8. - Merchandise on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any mercantile business to use any sidewalk, street or alley for display of goods, wares
and merchandise for sale, either by placing such goods, wares and merchandise upon or suspending them over
the sidewalks and streets or alleys or by using showcases on sidewalks, streets or alleys for the display of such
goods, wares and merchandise.
(Code 1980, § 29-7)
Sec. 94-9. - Obstruction or encroachments on streets or public property.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
273/543
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction in, or to maintain, build or repair any fence, building
or structure of any kind upon, the whole or any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public property of the
city.
(Code 1980, § 29-8)
Sec. 94-10. - Poles or posts between property line and curb prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city or duly authorized franchise to set or plant or fix any posts
or poles upon or along the street rights-of-way of the city.
(Code 1980, § 29-9)
Sec. 94-11. - Boxes, cans or coops on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or place upon any sidewalk, street or alley of the city, any chicken
coops, boxes, cans or crates, except in a regularly approved trash container.
(Code 1980, § 29-10)
Sec. 94-12. - Installation or use of basketball goals.
(a)
The installation of or use of permanent or temporary basketball goals on any public street or any public right-ofway
adjacent to a public street is hereby prohibited as a public nuisance. This prohibition shall not apply to city
owned, approved, or maintained recreation activities.
(b)
Any city code officer or police officer may order the immediate removal of any permanent or temporary
basketball goal prohibited in subsection (a) above.
(c)
If any person feels that an order to remove a basketball goal pursuant to the above sections was given in error,
said person may file an appeal to the housing and building board of adjustment no later than ten days after such
an order has been issued. Under no circumstance shall the board issue a variance.
(Ord. No. 7226, §§ 1—3, 6-28-99)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7226, §§ 1—3, adopted June 28, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new §
94-12 was at the editor's discretion.
Sec. 94-13. - Procedures for renaming of streets.
(a)
Any citizen who desires to circulate a petition for the renaming of a street may obtain a copy of such a petition
from the city clerk's office. The proposed new name for the street will be entered on the petition, and the petition
will be given to the city clerk's office.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
274/543
The city clerk's office will date stamp the petition when received and forward a copy to the police, fire, planning
departments and 911 communications center for review. Upon receiving the proposed petition, these departments
shall review the same and within ten days forward any objections to the office of the city clerk.
(c)
If no objections are received, the petition must then be circulated to affected property owners who will indicate
whether they are for or against the renaming. All reasonable efforts will be made to obtain signatures of all
affected property owners. The petition shall contain at least one point of contact and shall be filed with the
offices of the city clerk and planning department.
(d)
Community planning will then submit the paperwork to the city attorney's office for preparation of legislation.
(e)
Once legislation is filed, the city council shall hold a public hearing no sooner than the next council meeting
before taking a vote.
(Ord. No. 7598, § 1, 10-27-03)
Sec. 94-14. - No access to property across horizontal curbs.
Entry to private residential property shall be made only by way of a curb cut for a driveway, and no motor
vehicle is permitted to be driven over or across horizontal street curbs to access said property, except for
occasional maintenance vehicles.
(Ord. No. 7841, § 1, 7-10-06)
Secs. 94-15—94-45. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS OR DRIVEWAYS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 94-46. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Inner curbing means only that portion of the curbing required in this article along driveways and sidewalks and
not constituting the curbing which borders and marks the margin of the street designated and constructed for
vehicular traffic.
Street curb means the portion of concrete curbing and structure which borders and marks the margin of the street
designated and constructed for vehicular traffic.
(Code 1980, § 29-57)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 94-47. - Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to concrete curbs and gutters and concrete sidewalks on those streets
within the city that are not governed or controlled by the city's subdivision regulations.
(Code 1980, § 29-56)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
275/543
Sec. 94-48. - Work to be in accordance with approved plans.
All work done under a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be performed in accordance
with the plans approved by the director of public works.
(Code 1980, § 29-58)
Sec. 94-49. - Stop-work order.
The director of public works shall be authorized to suspend work on curbs, walks and driveways on public
property whenever he may deem such work is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, with due
notice to the person in charge of the work on the grounds.
(Code 1980, § 29-65)
Sec. 94-50. - Sidewalk specifications.
(a)
Where sidewalks are installed on property situated at the corner of intersecting streets, they shall extend to the
street curbline of the intersecting street.
(b)
Where sidewalks are to be adjacent to an off-street parking area, a concrete inner curb must be built two feet
inside the property line to separate the parking area from the sidewalk. This inner curb must be at least four
inches above the driving surface. A barrier or fence equivalent to this curb may be used in lieu of the concrete
curb.
(c)
Wheelchair ramps shall be provided for sidewalks in accordance with the following specifications:
(1)
There shall be at least one ramp per corner of each block;
(2)
There shall be a slope to the street of one inch vertical distance for each 12 inches of horizontal distance;
(3)
Such ramps shall be a minimum of four feet in width;
(4)
Such ramps shall be constructed of 3,000-pound concrete and shall be textured so as to be different from the
surrounding concrete.
(d)
Except as provided in subsection (c), no step or offset shall be constructed in any sidewalk on public property,
except where certain conditions necessitate such step or offset and then only upon written instructions from the
director of public works. Where such step or offset is likely to occur, the contractor shall notify the director
before constructing same.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
276/543
(e)
The width of all sidewalks shall be at least four feet and generally the inner edge shall be two feet from the
property line unless otherwise approved by the director of public works. This requirement is for all zones except
zone C-5 (business district), as specified in the comprehensive zoning ordinance; in such zone it shall be as
specified by the director.
(f)
Sidewalks shall meet the following specifications:
(1)
Sidewalks shall be divided into sections in accordance with good engineering practice. The line dividing
sections shall be finished with a one-quarter inch edging tool.
(2)
Edges of sidewalks shall be finished with an edging tool.
(3)
Transverse expansion joints shall be constructed with premolded joint filler and shall be spaced at no more than
60-foot intervals and at joints between curb and sidewalk.
(4)
The surface of sidewalks shall be given a brush finish.
(g)
Maximum transverse slope of sidewalks shall be one-fourth inch per foot or as approved by the director of
public works. Sidewalks shall be sloped to drain to the street.
(Code 1980, § 29-59)
State law reference— Wheelchair access required, A.C.A. § 14-301-108.
Sec. 94-51. - Layout and design of driveways.
(a)
For entrances to nonresidential driveways, all radii shall not be less than five feet measured from back of curb
and a point of tangency to the curbline of the street, and all curb radii shall be tapered to meet the grade of the
outer edge of the sidewalk as determined by the director of public works. Radii for curbs at street intersections
shall be as specified in the subdivision regulations. The width of the entrances to driveways for residences at the
intersection of the driveway and curb at the street shall not have a width less than the width of the driveway plus
four feet.
(b)
No driveway shall be constructed closer than ten feet of a property line or as specified by the director of public
works, except in residential areas, where the driveway shall not be closer than one foot of the property line.
Where property abuts an alley, the minimum distance shall be ten feet; where property abuts a street, the
minimum distance shall be 35 feet. All multiple driveways on the same property shall be separated by a
minimum 20-foot safety island, and the maximum driveway opening shall not exceed 40 feet. All above
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
277/543
measurements for multiple openings shall be along the outer edge of the sidewalk, or if a sidewalk is not
provided then along the edge of the right-of-way.
(c)
No driveway shall be constructed at an angle of less than 45 degrees to the centerline of the street.
(d)
No pump island shall be constructed closer than 18 feet to the front property line or 15 feet to the side property
line, as specified in the comprehensive zoning ordinance.
(e)
There shall be an expansion joint installed at a suitable location between the back of curb of rigid pavement and
the property line for driveways, which shall be constructed in accordance with accepted engineering practices as
approved by the director of public works. Such expansion joints shall be no more than 50 feet apart.
(Code 1980, § 29-60)
Sec. 94-52. - Paving of driveways.
All driveways from a paved street into private property must be paved from the street curbline to property line.
(Code 1980, § 29-61)
Sec. 94-53. - Restrictions on curb cuts on Main Street.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut any curb on Main Street between Washington Street on the south and
Eighth Street on the north for the purpose of driving any motor vehicle over such curb unless and until such
person has secured the recommendation, in writing, from the director of public works, and the approval of the
city council by a duly enacted ordinance. Before granting the authorization, the director shall first determine that
the curb cut will not impede the orderly flow of traffic upon Main Street.
(Code 1980, § 29-62)
Sec. 94-54. - Materials.
(a)
Cement shall conform to the A.S.T.M. Standard Specifications for Portland cement (serial designation C 150-53
type 1).
(b)
Fine aggregate shall conform to the A.S.T.M. Standard Specifications for Sand (serial designation C 33-54T).
(c)
Coarse aggregate shall conform to the A.S.T.M. Standard Specifications (serial designation C 33-54T),
designated sizes no. 4 to no. 1.
(d)
All concrete shall have a minimum of 28 days compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch. Retemping
of concrete is forbidden.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
278/543
(e)
The curb and gutter shall conform to the standard section for curbs and gutters attached to Ordinance No. 3015
and made a part of this article by reference. The drawing is referred to as "standard section for curbs and gutters"
and is filed with the original ordinance in the office of the city clerk.
(Code 1980, § 29-63)
Sec. 94-55. - Construction methods.
(a)
Excavation for concrete sidewalks shall be brought to a subgrade four inches below the finished grade of the
walk.
(b)
Excavation for curbs and gutters shall be brought to a subgrade to meet the bottom of the gutter.
(c)
Backfill for the subgrade of sidewalk or curb and gutter shall be made with suitable materials and thoroughly
compacted to afford a solid foundation. The subgrade shall be dampened before pouring the concrete.
(d)
Forms shall be on such materials as will give the required rigidity to maintain the established alignment and
grade. Upon completion of the sidewalk and/or curb and gutter, the contractor shall remove all debris,
construction materials and excess excavated materials from the street.
(e)
The area between the gutter and the existing street shall be backfilled and compacted by the contractor. The curb
shall be backfilled by the contractor with the excavated materials from the curb and gutter excavation.
(f)
The contractor shall maintain the necessary barricades and lights for protection of the public until the curb and
gutter and/or sidewalk are constructed and backfilling is completed.
(Code 1980, § 29-64)
Sec. 94-56. - Removal of rubbish.
After all work is completed, the person in charge of the work shall remove all rubbish, waste and excess
materials and have the land used for construction purposes and the street and right-of-way area in a neat and
clean appearing condition.
(Code 1980, § 29-66)
Sec. 94-57. - Notice to city upon discovery of monument or survey mark.
Whenever during the excavation for any construction under the provisions of this article, the contractor or party
doing the work discovers a city monument or survey mark, he shall notify the director of the department of
public works and use all possible caution to protect such monument or survey mark.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
279/543
(Code 1980, § 29-67)
Sec. 94-58. - Saw-cut curbcuts required when connecting driveway to existing curb and gutter street.
(a)
A driveway permit shall be required whenever a homebuilder, developer, owner or other individual performing
work on a driveway seeks to connect a driveway to an existing curb and gutter street.
(b)
To make a connection between a driveway and an existing curb and gutter street, the homebuilder, developer,
owner or other individual performing work on the driveway must saw-cut the existing curb and gutter street
longitudinally along the gutter line a minimum depth of four inches from radius turnout to radius turnout.
(c)
After the cut is made as described herein and above, the entire curb shall then be removed and replaced with a
minimum of six-inch thick 3500 PSI concrete.
(Ord. No. 7382, §§ 1—3, 8-13-01)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7382, §§ 1—3, adopted Aug. 13, 2001, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 94-
58 was at the discretion of the editor.
Secs. 94-59—94-80. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS
Sec. 94-81. - Required.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, alter, remove and/or replace any curb, curb and
gutters, sidewalk or driveway on public property without a permit from the director of public works. No separate
permit will be required where curbs, sidewalks and driveways are an integral part of an overall construction
project for which a building permit has been issued.
(b)
No person shall cut any curb or replace any curb upon any street in the city without first securing permission in
writing from the director of public works.
(Code 1980, § 29-81)
Sec. 94-82. - Application.
(a)
A person desiring the permit required by the provisions of this division shall file a written application with the
director of public works upon a form furnished by the director, giving the information required on such form.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
280/543
Plans, profiles and cross sections of the street or streets on which curbs and gutters or sidewalks are to be built
shall accompany the application for a permit under this division.
(Code 1980, § 29-83)
Sec. 94-83. - Issuance.
The director of public works shall issue the permit required by this division if the plans and other information in
the permit application reveal that the work will comply with the provisions of this article.
(Code 1980, § 29-84)
Sec. 94-84. - Duration.
A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be valid for a period of 90 days after its
issuance; provided, however, that the director of public works may grant extensions of time of 30 days each for
cause shown.
(Code 1980, § 29-82)
Secs. 94-85—94-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7449, §§ 1—6, adopted May 13, 2002, repealed art. III, §§ 94-121—94-154 and
enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III, §§ 94-121—94-154, pertained to similar subject
matter and derived from Code 1980, §§ 29-101—107, and §§ 29-121—29-124.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 94-121. - Definitions.
Street cut means an excavation in city right-of-way within or out of the pavement area. (Sometimes called a
utility cut.)
Street cut repair means the repair to the location of the disturbed right-of-way caused by a street cut.
Street cut barricade means the barricade plan used during the time a street cut is being made and while the
utility repair or work is being made.
Street cut repair barricade means the barricade plan in use after the completion of the utility repair work but
prior to the final repair to the street.
Temporary street cut repair means that repair in place between the time the street cut is completed but prior to
the completion of the final repair. If in the pavement area, this repair consists of a cap of cold mix asphalt flush
with the existing pavement surface.
Permanent street cut repair means the completed street cut repair and marked with the appropriate utility color if
the cut is in the pavement area.
(Ord. No. 7449, § 4, 5-13-02)
Sec. 94-122. - Prior approval.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
281/543
The public works director shall approve prior to the start of any street cut, the type, design, manner of cut repair,
barricading of the cut and cut repair and shall also require the following, but not limited to the following:
(1)
At least one two-sided sign that bears the name of the utility company responsible for the cut shall be kept at
each cut location. This shall apply for not only maintenance cuts that require permits, but also any other cuts
related to relocations, new installations, etc. of the utility company. The sign shall also bear the telephone
number of the party within the utility company that shall be responsible for managing the maintenance and
making of the cut. The sign shall also be legible for at least 100 feet and shall be at least three feet by three feet
in size. The sign shall be placed in a conspicuous spot that is easily visible from either direction of traffic. The
sign or signs shall be posted at the time a cut is made and shall remain in place until the permanent cut repair is
complete. During the time that the sign or signs are required to be in place, it shall be the responsibility of the
utility company to maintain the sign. It will be acceptable to allow the signs on the rolling equipment of the
utility company to serve as temporary signage while they are at the cut site, however, they must be legible at 100
feet, have the required utility telephone number, and be replaced by proper signage when the rolling equipment
is not at the site. This signage is required for all cuts, whether they are in the pavement or behind the curb, as
long as the cut is in the city right-of-way or city easement.
(2)
Contact persons and phone numbers shall be a part of any permit request. As many as three names (or titles) and
numbers can be listed and at least one of them shall be reachable during normal working hours. If one of these
persons (or titles) cannot be reached at one of these numbers, then the permit will be in violation.
(3)
After a cut repair is completed, the cut repair (if in the pavement) shall be marked with a six-inch diameter
circular templated spot the color designated for that utility by Arkansas One Call.
(4)
The city wastewater and electric department are exempt from permit charges in the article as long as they notify
the public works department of a cut within one day after the cut is made and again within one day after the cut
repair is complete. If not, then they will be required to pay the fee structure listed in the article.
(5)
If in the pavement area, a temporary street cut repair shall be maintained by the permitted utility owner and if it
fails shall be in violation of this article.
(6)
This article does not apply to a utility company relocation, or new facility work but only to routine maintenance
of existing facilities. The distinction between "routine" and relocation or new facility is if the plans are required
to be signed by a professional engineer. Work not requiring a professional engineer's stamp will be considered to
be routine.
(7)
Any utility company doing work in the city will be required to attend a meeting once a month at the direction of
the director of public works building.
(8)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
282/543
The drilling of holes for the purpose of installing utility poles will not be covered in the article as long as clean
up and completion of work is carried out in a timely manner. If not, then the regulation and fee structure of the
article will apply.
(9)
If a directional boring machine is used to make the utility repair, then no fee shall be charged except if the
excavation becomes in violation of this article in which case, all fees shall become applicable.
(10)
The utility shall warranty their street right-of-way repair for one year after completion. If during that time the cut
repair fails, the utility at the request of the city shall correct the repair within one working day or shall be in
violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 7449, § 3, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 7456, § 1, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 7520, § 1, 3-1-03)
Sec. 94-123. - Schedule.
No later than the first workday of each month of every calendar year, utilities must file a schedule of planned or
anticipated excavation, cut or boring of any public right-of-way with the director of public works.
(Ord. No. 7449, § 5, 5-13-02)
Secs. 94-124—94-150. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS
Sec. 94-151. - Required.
It shall be unlawful to make any excavation or cut in the public right-of-way without having first obtained a
permit from the director of public works. Permits must be obtained before the work is to begin. Any emergency
excavation, cut or boring of any public right-of-way shall also require a permit from the director of public
works. Application for an emergency permit must be submitted within one working day after work is begun.
(Ord. No. 7449, § 1, 5-13-02)
Sec. 94-152. - Fees for street cuts.
(a)
If obtained prior to the beginning of work, the fee shall be per working day as follows:
(1)
$5.00 if work in the street is completed and a final street cut repair is completed within oneday.
(2)
$7.00 if work in the street is completed and a final street cut repair is completed within two days.
(3)
$10.00 if work in the street is completed and a final street cut repair is completed within three days.
(4)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
283/543
$13.00 if work in the street is completed and a final street cut repair is completed within four days.
(5)
$16.00 if work in the street is completed and a final street cut repair is completed within five days.
(6)
$20.00 if work in the street is completed and a final street cut repair is completed within six days.
(7)
$25.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within seven days.
(8)
$27.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within eight days.
(9)
$29.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within nine days.
(10)
$35.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within ten days.
(11)
$45.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 11 days.
(12)
$55.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 12 days.
(13)
$65.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 13 days.
(14)
$75.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 14 days.
(15)
$100.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 15 days.
(16)
$110.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 16 days.
(17)
$120.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 17 days.
(18)
$130.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 18 days.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
284/543
(19)
$140.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 19 days.
(20)
$150.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 20 days.
(21)
$150.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 21 days.
(22)
$150.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 22 days.
(23)
$150.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 23 days.
(24)
$150.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 24 days.
(25)
$150.00 if work in the street is completed and final street cut repair is completed within 25 days.
No cut is allowed to remain uncompleted for more than 25 days.
(b)
The amount of $10.00 per day shall be added for any lane closure required. Any street closure will require
permission from the director of public works and be assumed at $50.00 per day from the first day. These fees are
in addition to the utility cut fee.
(c)
If it is found that a cut repair has been made not in compliance with the requirements of the public works
director or this article, then the violators may be assessed up to $100.00 per day per violation per location
retroactive from the first day of violation plus any permit fees that have accumulated.
(d)
Additionally, if a street cut or street cut repair should become a hazard or danger to the public, and if no one
listed on the permit as a responsible party can be reached, no immediate response is made by the permitted party,
or if, in the opinion of the public works director or his delegate, an emergency response by the city if necessary,
the city will make whatever repairs or changes necessary to make the cut, cut repair, or work associated with the
cut, safe and functional. The person, persons, or entity issued the permit will be billed for this work at a rate of
$200.00 per hour for time spent at the site, plus three times the costs for materials and equipment. A minimum
charge of $500.00 will be assessed.
(Ord. No. 7449, § 2, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 7458, § 1, 6-10-02)
Secs. 94-153—94-185. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING BUILDINGS AND HEAVY OBJECTS
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
285/543
Sec. 94-186. - Permit.
(a)
Required. Every person desiring to move any building, machinery or other heavy object over the streets of the
city for which, under the laws of the state, they are required to secure a state permit from the state, shall also
secure a permit from the city, unless specifically exempted from local permits by state law.
(b)
Application; bond. The permit required by this section shall be secured from the planning department at least 48
hours in advance of the time in which the building, machinery or other heavy object is to be moved, and the
person securing such permit shall designate in his application for the permit the time and route over which such
material or object is to be moved. Prior to the issuance of such permit, the applicant shall post with the city an
indemnity bond in the amount of $2,500.00 and shall assume responsibility for any and all damages that may
occur.
(c)
Additional requirements for house moving. Prior to the issuance of the permit required by this section, an
applicant seeking to move a house to be located within the boundaries of North Little Rock shall obtain the
approval of the North Little Rock Planning Commission. Prior to consideration by the planning commission,
such applicant shall file an application including:
(1)
Inspection report. An inspection report by a certified and registered home inspector stating that the house is
capable of being moved safely must be included with the application. The report shall also include exterior
photos of the house in its present location that accurately indicate the current state of repair of the structure.
(2)
Development plan. A development plan for the anticipated location of the house must be included in the
application. The plan will include a site plan of the proposed location, an estimate of the cost of remodeling, a
statement of what type of remodeling is proposed, the estimated date of completion of such remodeling and a
bond to ensure timely compliance with local building codes. The amount of the required bond shall be
$5,000.00. This bond may be waived by the planning commission if, and only if, the applicant demonstrates: (1)
that the applicant has low income as defined by Part 5 of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations and (2) that
a non-profit organization will satisfactorily guarantee completion of the development plan within six months.
The applicant will have 90 days to complete the foundation and exterior of the site. The date of completion for
the development plan shall be within six months of the issuance of the permit, unless the planning commission
expressly grants an extension of time. Should the development plan not be completed in time, or should the
work performed pursuant to the development plan fail to substantially conform to applicable building codes, the
city may liquidate the bond and use the proceeds thereof to raze the house.
(d)
Violations. Violations of this section shall be considered to be continuous in nature and punishable by a fine not
to exceed $50.00 per day such violation continues.
(Code 1980, § 29-141; Ord. No. 7363, § 1, 4-23-01; Ord. No. 7366, § 1, 5-14-01)
State law reference— State permits for vehicles of certain weight, A.C.A. § 27-35-203; permits for special
cargoes, A.C.A. § 27-35-210; permits to move mobile homes, A.C.A. § 27-35-304.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
286/543
Sec. 94-187. - Route approval.
Buildings and objects moved pursuant to permits granted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be
moved only upon routes approved by the chief of police.
(Code 1980, § 29-142)
Sec. 94-188. - Liability of mover for damages.
Every person applying for the permit required by this article shall also sign an affidavit on a form to be presented
to them by the city clerk stating that they shall assume and be responsible for any and all damages which may
occur to the streets or to any other public property of the city resulting from the moving of buildings, machinery
or heavy objects upon the streets.
(Code 1980, § 29-143)
Secs. 94-189—94-220. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - PARADES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 102.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 94-221—94-250. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT
Sec. 94-251. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar
display, in or upon any street or other public place.
(Code 1980, § 29-181)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 94-252. - Exemptions.
This division shall not apply to:
(1)
Funeral processions.
(2)
Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is
under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
287/543
A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(Code 1980, § 29-182)
Sec. 94-253. - Required.
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, without a parade permit issued by the
chief of police.
(Code 1980, § 29-183)
Sec. 94-254. - Application.
(a)
A person desiring a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such
officer. Such application shall be filed not less than seven days nor more than ten days before the date on which
it is proposed to conduct the parade.
(b)
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
(1)
The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade.
(2)
If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such
organization.
(3)
The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be
responsible for its conduct.
(4)
The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(5)
The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point.
(6)
The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type
of animals, and description of the vehicles.
(7)
The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
288/543
A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be
traversed.
(9)
The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(10)
The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly areas.
(11)
The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade.
(12)
If the parade is designed to be held by, on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for
such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the
parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf.
(13)
Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to
whether a permit should issue.
(c)
The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application for
a parade permit which is filed less than seven days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted.
(Code 1980, § 29-184)
Sec. 94-255. - Fee.
There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee of $100.00. This fee may be
waived in whole or in part by the mayor.
(Code 1980, § 29-185)
Sec. 94-256. - Standards for issuance.
The chief of police shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
(1)
The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic
contiguous to its route.
(2)
The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of this
municipality to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal
police protection to this municipality.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
289/543
The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent
normal ambulance service to portions of this municipality other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto.
(4)
The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere
with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas.
(5)
The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment enroute to a fire.
(6)
The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly
conduct or to create a disturbance.
(7)
The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays enroute.
(Code 1980, § 29-186)
Sec. 94-257. - Notice of denial.
If the chief of police disapproves the application for a parade permit, he shall mail to the applicant, within three
days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action.
(Code 1980, § 29-187)
Sec. 94-258. - Alternative permit.
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct
of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a
written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the
requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this division.
(Code 1980, § 29-188)
Sec. 94-259. - Contents.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
(1)
Starting time.
(2)
Minimum speed.
(3)
Maximum speed.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
290/543
(4)
Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade.
(5)
The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade.
(6)
The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
(7)
Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this division.
(Code 1980, § 29-189)
Sec. 94-260. - Revocation.
The chief of police shall have the authority, after a hearing affording due process, to revoke a parade permit
issued under this division upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this division.
(Code 1980, § 29-190)
Sec. 94-261. - Compliance with laws and regulations.
A person holding a parade permit shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable
laws and ordinances.
(Code 1980, § 29-191)
Chapter 98 - TAXATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Finance director and assistant finance director, § 2-256 et seq.; financial affairs, § 2-696 et
seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; service charge for 911 emergency telephone system, § 38-1.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 98-1—98-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL AND RESTAURANT TAXES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 98-36. - Hotel tax.
(a)
There is hereby levied on hotels and motels with more than 40 rooms a tax of two percent upon the gross
receipts from the renting, leasing or otherwise furnishing of hotel or motel accommodations for profit in the city.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
291/543
The tax levied by this section shall be collected from the purchaser or user of the accommodations by the person
furnishing such accommodations. Such person shall remit to the city on the 15th day of each month all
collections of such tax for the preceding month, accompanied by reports on forms to be prescribed by the city
attorney.
(Code 1980, § 17-16; Ord. No. 6882, § 1, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 7394, 9-10-01)
State law reference— Hotel tax authorized, A.C.A. § 26-75-602.
Sec. 98-37. - Hotel and restaurant tax for parks and recreation.
(a)
There is levied an additional one percent of tax upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds on the renting, leasing
or otherwise furnishing of hotel or motel accommodations for profit in the city and upon the gross receipts or
gross proceeds of restaurants, cafes, cafeterias and other establishments engaged in the business of selling
prepared food for consumption on the premises in the city. All establishments remitting this tax shall be entitled
to a two percent discount on the amount due if such amount is paid on or before the 20th day of each month.
(b)
The proceeds from the tax levied by this section shall be for the benefit of the parks and recreation commission.
(Code 1980, § 17-16.1)
State law reference— Authority for above tax, A.C.A. § 26-75-602.
Sec. 98-38. - Restaurant tax for advertising and promotion.
(a)
There is hereby levied an additional one percent tax upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds of restaurants,
cafes, cafeterias, and other business establishments engaged in the business of selling prepared food for
consumption on the premises in the city. All restaurants, cafes, cafeterias and other business establishments
engaged in the business of selling prepared food for consumption on the premises or selling prepared food and
beverages for consumption off the premises in the city shall be entitled to a two percent discount on the amount
due if the amount is paid on or before the 20th day of each month.
(b)
All taxes, interest, penalties and costs collected pursuant to the additional tax levy under this section shall be
credited to the city advertising and promotion fund.
(c)
It is hereby determined by the city council that it is necessary to provide funds to the advertising and promotion
commission of the city in order for it to properly function, and therefore the sum of $40,000.00 shall be retained
by the advertising and promotion commission from the funds levied by this section, and the advertising and
promotion commission is hereby expressly directed to pay out any remaining funds levied by this section and
credited to the city advertising and promotion fund to the parks and recreation department of the city.
(Code 1980, § 17-16.2)
State law reference— Authority for above tax, A.C.A. § 26-75-602.
Sec. 98-39. - City advertising and promotion commission.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
292/543
There is hereby created the city advertising and promotion commission. The commission shall have the powers
and duties prescribed by state law.
(Code 1980, § 17-17)
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies, § 2-486 et seq.
State law reference— Advertising and promotion commission, A.C.A. § 26-75-605.
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— The former §§ 98-40 and 98-41 have been deleted at the direction of the city, inasmuch as they
have been superseded by Ord. No. 7394, §§ 1—26, adopted Sept. 10, 2001, codified as §§ 98-40—98-65 of this
chapter. Said §§ 98-40 and 98-41 pertained to the city advertising and promotion fund and collection of certain
taxes by the advertising and promotion commission, respectively, and were derived from Code 1980, § 17-18(a)
and Ord. No. 7223, § 1, adopted May 24, 1999.
Sec. 98-40. - Title, purpose.
(a)
This division shall be known and may be cited as the "North Little Rock A&P Gross Receipts Tax Collection
and Enforcement Ordinance."
(b)
The purpose of this division is to provide the procedures for the enforcement and collection of the taxes levied
and administered by the city with the adoption of Ordinance No. 4530, Ordinance No. 4759, Ordinance No.
4882, Ordinance No. 4990, Ordinance No. 5497, Ordinance No. 5503, Ordinance No. 6335, and Ordinance No.
7186 pursuant to Act 185 of 1965, and as subsequently amended.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 1, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-41. - Application of division and construction with other laws.
The provisions of this division shall be cumulative to the Arkansas Gross Receipts Act of 1941, A.C.A. § 26-52-
101 et seq., and the Arkansas Tax Procedure Act, § 26-18-101 et seq., the provisions of which, so far as is
practicable, shall be deemed incorporated herein as applicable with respect to the enforcement and collection of
the A&P tax.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 2, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-42. - Definitions.
The following words and phrases, except where the context clearly indicates the application of a different
meaning, when used in this division shall have the following meanings:
A&P tax means the gross receipts tax levied by the city pursuant to Act 185 of 1965, and as subsequently
amended.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
293/543
Assessment means a tax is assessed when it is recorded as the liability of a taxpayer on the commission's records.
The assessment becomes a first assessment following the decision of the commission or a hearing officer, if the
assessment is protested.
Business entity means a corporation, association, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, limited
liability partnership, trust or other legal business entity.
City means the City of North Little Rock, Arkansas.
Commission means the city advertising and promotion commission of North Little Rock, Arkansas, and any
representative designated by the commission to perform any function hereunder.
Delinquency date means the A&P tax is delinquent and subject to penalty on the first day of the month following
the month it was due.
Due date means the A&P tax is due no later than the 20th calendar day of the month following the month the tax
is imposed on gross receipts.
Person means any natural person, firm, corporation or other business entity.
Taxpayer means any person liable to remit the A&P tax.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 3, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-43. - Administration and regulations.
The administration of this division is vested in the commission and the commission shall promulgate rules and
regulations and prescribe all forms as are necessary or required for the enforcement and collection of the A&P
tax.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 4, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-44. - Permits.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to transact in the city a business which is subject to the A&P tax prior to the
issuance and receipt of a A&P tax permit from the commission.
(b)
A separate A&P tax permit must be obtained from the commission for each location whereat the person
conducts a business which is subject to the A&P tax.
(c)
An A&P tax permit shall have no stated terms.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 5, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-45. - Application for permit.
Any person transacting in the city a business which is subject to the A&P tax shall file with the commission an
application for an A&P tax permit to conduct that business, the form and contents of which application shall be
as prescribed by the commission from time to time.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
294/543
(Ord. No. 7394, § 6, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-46. - Permits not assignable, display required and expiration.
(a)
The A&P tax permit shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and
for the location thereon designated.
(b)
The A&P tax permit shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the location thereon designated.
(c)
The A&P tax permit shall expire at the time of cessation of the business of the taxpayer at the location
designated thereon.
(d)
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the A&P tax to transact business within the city when their A&P
tax permit is expired.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 7, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-47. - Unpaid taxes upon discontinuance of business.
(a)
Any taxpayer operating under an A&P tax permit, upon discontinuance of the business at the location designated
thereon, shall return the A&P tax permit to the commission for cancellation together with remittance of any
unpaid and accrued A&P taxes.
(b)
Failure to surrender the A&P tax permit and pay any and all accrued A&P taxes shall be sufficient cause for the
commission to refuse the issuance of any A&P tax permit in the future to the taxpayer.
(c)
In the case of the sale of any business which is subject to the A&P tax, the A&P tax shall be deemed to be due
and payable at the time of the sale of fixtures and equipment incident to the business and shall constitute a lien
against the said fixtures and equipment in the hands of the purchaser of the business until all A&P taxes have
been paid.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 8, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-48. - Revocation or suspension; renewal.
(a)
Whenever a person to whom an A&P tax permit has been issued fails to comply with any provision of this
division, including any rule or regulation prescribed by the commission from time to time, the commission shall
give notice to the person of an intention to revoke the A&P permit.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
295/543
(1)
The person may, within ten consecutive days after receipt of the notice of intent to revoke the A&P tax permit,
apply to the commission for a hearing.
(2)
The hearing shall be conducted at a time and place to be designated by the commission before such person as is
designated by the commission to conduct such hearing, and the taxpayer shall be entitled to introduce testimony
and be represented by counsel, and the designated representative of the commission shall determine at the
hearing whether the taxpayer's A&P tax permit should be revoked.
(3)
Failure of the person to appear at the hearing shall be grounds for the commission, acting through its designated
representative, to revoke the taxpayer's A&P tax permit.
(c)
The person shall be entitled, within 30 consecutive days from the date of the revocation of the taxpayer's A&P
tax permit, to appeal to the county circuit court, where the action shall be tried de novo.
(d)
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the A&P tax to transact business within the city when their A&P
tax permit is revoked or suspended.
(e)
Any revoked or suspended permit may be renewed upon the filing of proper returns and the payment of all A&P
taxes due or removal of any other cause of revocation or suspension.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 9, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-49. - Preparation of returns; payment of A&P tax.
(a)
The A&P tax shall be due and payable as of the first day of each calendar month by the person liable for the
payment of the A&P tax (taxpayer) and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the first day of the
next calendar month.
(b)
(1)
It shall be the duty of the taxpayer on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month to deliver to the
commission, upon forms prescribed and furnished by the commission, returns under oath showing the total
combined gross receipts or gross proceeds which are subject to the A&P tax for the preceding calendar month
and the amount of the tax due. The tax due shall be remitted with the return.
(2)
The returns shall contain such further information as the commission may require and, once a taxpayer has
become liable for the payment of the A&P tax, the taxpayer must continue to file a return, even though no tax
may be due, until such time as the taxpayer surrenders the A&P tax permit.
(c)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
296/543
If not paid on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, the full amount of the A&P tax shall be due
from that date; provided, however, no penalty for delinquency shall be assessed if payment thereof is made on or
before the first day of the calendar month next following.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 10, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-50. - Discount for prompt payment.
(a)
If the return is delivered on or before the 20th day of the calendar month following the month the tax is imposed
on gross receipts, the taxpayer may remit therewith to the commission 98 percent of the A&P tax due on or
before the 20th of the calendar month. A return is "delivered" on the date it is postmarked if it is delivered by the
U.S. Postal Service.
(b)
Failure of the taxpayer to remit the A&P tax on or before the twentieth of each calendar month shall cause the
taxpayer to forfeit his claim to the discount and the taxpayer must remit to the commission 100 percent of the
amount of the A&P tax due, plus any penalty and interest accrued thereon.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 11, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-51. - Additional penalties and tax.
If the taxpayer shall fail to comply with certain provisions of this division, then the following penalties and
additions to the tax shall be applicable:
(1)
In the case the taxpayer's failure to file the A&P tax return and pay the tax due on or before the delinquency
date, determined with regard to any extension of time for filing thereof, unless it is shown that the failure is due
to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, there shall be added to the amount required to be shown as tax on
A&P tax return five percent of the A&P tax if the failure is not more than one month past the delinquency date,
with an additional five percent for each additional month or fraction thereof during which the failure continues,
not to exceed 35 percent in the aggregate;
(2)
In addition to any penalty assessed hereunder, simple interest on any paid A&P tax shall be assessed at the rate
of ten percent per annum from the delinquency date.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 12, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-52. - Examinations and investigations.
(a)
In the administration of this division, the commission or its designated representatives, for the purpose of
determining the accuracy of a return or fixing any liability hereunder, may make an examination or investigation
of the place of business, the tangible personal property, equipment, and facilities, and the books, records, papers,
vouchers, accounts, and documents of any taxpayer or other person. Every taxpayer or other person and his
agents and employees shall exhibit to the commission or its designated representative these places and items and
facilitate any examination or investigation.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
297/543
No taxpayer shall be subjected to unnecessary examination or investigations, and only one inspection of a
taxpayer's books of account shall be made for each taxable year unless the taxpayer requests otherwise or unless
the commission, after investigation, notifies the taxpayer in writing that an additional inspection is necessary.
(c)
(1)
When conducting an investigation or an audit of any taxpayer, the commission or its designated representatives
may, in its discretion, examine the records and files of any person, except where privileged by law, any other
business, institution, financial institution, the records of any state agency, agency of the United States
government, or agency of any other state where permitted by agreement or reciprocity.
(2)
The commission or its designated representative may compel production of these records by summons. A
summons may be served directly by the commission or its designated representatives.
(d)
In the administration of this division, the commission, its executive director, or its designated representatives
may:
(1)
Administer oaths, conduct hearings, and compel by summons the attendance of witnesses, testimony, and the
production of any books, records, papers, or other data of any person or taxpayer; or
(2)
a.
Examine under oath any person regarding the business of any taxpayer concerning any matter incident to the
administration of this division.
b.
The fees of witnesses required by the commission, its executive director, or its designated representatives to
attend any hearing shall be the same as those allowed to the witnesses appearing before circuit courts of this
state. The fees shall be paid in the manner provided for the payment of other expenses incident to the
administration hereof.
(e)
(1)
The investigation may extend to any person that the commission or its designated representative determines has
access to information which may be relevant to the examination or investigation.
(2)
When any summons requiring the production of records as described in subsection (c) of this section is served
on a third-party record keeper, written notice of the summons shall be mailed to the taxpayer that his records are
being summoned, at least 14 days prior to the date fixed in the summons as the day for the examination of the
records.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
298/543
Notice to the taxpayer required by this section is sufficient if it is mailed by certified mail to the last address on
record with the commission.
(f)
When the commission or its designated representatives have the power to issue a summons for its own
investigative or auditing purposes, then the commission shall honor any reasonable request by any taxpayer to
issue a summons on the taxpayer's behalf.
(g)
(1)
The commission or the taxpayer may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction in the county for an order
compelling the production of the summoned records.
(2)
Failure to comply with the order of the court for the production of records may be punished by the court as for
contempt.
(h)
(1)
The cost of producing records of a third party required by a summons shall be borne by the taxpayer if he
requests the summons to be issued.
(2)
If the commission or its designated representatives initiate the summons for third-party records, the commission
shall bear the reasonable cost of producing the records. The commission or its designated representatives may
later assess the cost against any delinquent or deficient taxpayer as determined by the records.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 13, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-53. - Time limitations for assessments, collection, refunds, and prosecution.
(a)
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no assessment of the A&P tax shall be made after the expiration of
three years from the date the return was required to be filed or the date the return was filed, whichever period
expires later. The commission shall not begin court proceedings after the expiration of the three-year period
unless there has been a previous assessment for the collection of the tax.
(b)
Upon written agreement of the commission and the taxpayer, the time within which the commission may make a
final assessment, as provided herein, may be extended to a date mutually agreed upon in the written agreement.
(c)
Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of the tax or of extensions thereof, both
the commission and the taxpayer have consented in writing to an assessment after that time, then the A&P tax
may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the time agreed upon.
(d)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
299/543
In the case of a fraudulent return or failure to file a report or return required hereunder, the commission may
compute, determine, and assess the estimated amount of A&P tax due from any information in its possession or
may begin an action in court for the collection of the tax without assessment, at any time.
(e)
Whenever a taxpayer requests an extension of time for filing any return required hereunder, the limitation of
time for assessing any tax shall be extended for a like period.
(f)
Where the assessment of the A&P tax has been made within the period of limitation properly applicable thereto,
the A&P tax may be collected by levy or proceeding in court, but only if the levy is made or the proceeding is
begun within ten years after the date of the assessment of the tax.
(g)
No person shall be prosecuted, tried, or punished for any of the various criminal offenses arising under the
provisions of this division unless the indictment of the taxpayer is instituted within six years after the
commission of the offense.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 14, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-54. - Notice requirements.
(a)
(1)
The commission shall give a taxpayer notice of any assessment, demand, decision, or hearing before the
commission or its designated representative which directly involves that taxpayer.
(2)
All notices required to be given by the commission to a taxpayer shall be either served by personal service or
sent by mail to the taxpayer's last address on record with the commission. If this mail is returned unclaimed or
refused, then proper notice shall have been served and given, and the commission may take any action permitted
by this division or otherwise by law.
(3)
All notices of final assessment hereunder shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(b)
The taxpayer, when giving notice to the commission, shall give notice either by mail or by personal service on
the commission. The notice the taxpayer gives shall be effective when postmarked or, in case of personal
service, when so served.
(c)
The commission and any taxpayer may, by written agreement, provide for any other reasonable means of giving
notice.
(d)
All notices shall be in writing.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
300/543
(Ord. No. 7394, § 15, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-55. - Assessment and collection of taxes generally.
(a)
(1)
The commission or its designated representatives are authorized and required to make the inquiries,
determinations, and assessments of the A&P tax, including interest, additions to taxes, and assessable penalties,
imposed hereby.
(2)
The assessment shall be made by recording the liability of the taxpayer in the offices of the commission in
accordance with rules or regulations prescribed by the commission.
(3)
Upon request of the taxpayer, the commission shall furnish the taxpayer a copy of the record of the assessment.
(b)
(1)
The commission shall collect all A&P taxes imposed by law.
(2)
As soon as practicable after the making of assessment of the A&P tax, the commission shall give notice to each
person liable for the unpaid tax, stating the amount and demanding payment within ten days.
(3)
Upon receipt of notice and demand from the commission, the person liable for the tax shall pay the stated
amount including any interest, additions to tax, and assessable penalties at the place and time stated in the notice
and demand.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 16, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-56. - Proposed assessments.
(a)
(1)
If any taxpayer fails to file any return as required hereunder, the commission, from any information in its
possession or obtainable by it, may determine the correct amount of tax for the taxable period. If a return has
been filed, the commission or its designated representatives shall examine the return and make any audit or
investigation that is considered necessary.
(2)
When no return has been filed and the commission determines that there is an A&P tax due for the taxable
period or when a return has been filed and the commission determines that the A&P tax disclosed by the return
is less than the tax disclosed by its examination, the commission shall propose the assessment of additional tax
plus penalties, as the case may be, and shall give notice of the proposed assessment to the taxpayer. The notice
shall explain the basis for the proposed assessment and shall state that a final assessment, as provided for herein,
will be made if the taxpayer does not protest such proposed assessment as provided hereby. The taxpayer does
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
301/543
not have to protest the proposed assessment to later be entitled to exercise the right to seek a judicial review of
the assessment.
(b)
Any demand for additional payment of the A&P tax which is made as the result of a verification of a
mathematical error on the return shall not be deemed to be a proposed assessment under the provisions of this
section and shall not be subject to the hearing or appeal provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 17, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-57. - Taxpayer relief.
(a)
Any taxpayer who wishes to seek administrative relief from any proposed assessment of taxes or proposed
notice of disallowance of a claim for refund by the commission shall follow the procedure provided by this
section.
(b)
(1)
A taxpayer may at his option either request the commission to consider his request for relief solely upon written
documents furnished by the taxpayer or upon the written documents and any evidence produced by the taxpayer
at a hearing.
(2)
A taxpayer who requests the commission to render its decision based on written documents is not entitled by law
to any other administrative hearing prior to the commission's rendering of its decision and, if necessary, the
issuing of a final assessment and demand for payment or issuing of a certificate of indebtedness.
(c)
Within 30 days after service of notice of the proposed assessment, the taxpayer may file with the commission a
written protest under oath, signed by himself or his authorized agent, setting forth the taxpayer's reasons for
opposing the proposed assessment.
(d)
The commission may, in its discretion, extend the time for filing a protest for any period of time not to exceed an
additional 90-day period.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 18, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-58. - Hearing on proposed assessments.
(a)
(1)
The executive director or his designee shall serve as a hearing officer to review all written protests submitted by
taxpayers, hold all hearings, and make written findings as to the applicability of the proposed assessment.
(2)
Decisions of the hearing officer shall be final unless revised by the commission.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
302/543
(3)
The hearing on written and oral protests and determinations made by the hearing officer shall not be subject to
the provisions of the Arkansas Administrative Procedure Act, § 25-15-201 et seq.
(b)
The actual hearing on the written protest shall be held in the commission's offices.
(c)
(1)
The hearing officer shall set the time and place for hearing on the written protest and shall give the taxpayer
reasonable notice thereof.
(2)
At the hearing, the taxpayer may be represented by an authorized representative and may present evidence in
support of his position.
(3)
After the hearing, the hearing officer shall render his decision in writing and shall serve copies upon both the
taxpayer and the commission.
(4)
a.
If the proposed assessment is sustained, in whole or part, the taxpayer may request in writing, within 20 days of
the mailing of the decision, that the commission revise the decision of the hearing officer.
b.
If the commission refuses to make a revision or if the taxpayer does not make a request for revision, then a final
assessment shall be made upon the final determination of the hearing officer or the commission.
c.
A taxpayer may seek relief from the final decision of the hearing officer or the commission on a final assessment
of a tax deficiency by following the procedure set forth in section 98-59
(d)
(1)
In addition to the hearing procedures set out in subsections (a)—(c) of this section, the commission may hold
administrative hearings by telephone, video conference, or other electronic means if the commission or the
hearing officer determines that conducting the hearing in such a manner:
a.
Is in the best interest of the taxpayer and the commission;
b.
Is agreed to by both parties;
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
303/543
c.
Is not fiscally unsound or administratively burdensome; and
d.
Is in compliance with state law.
(2)
The commission is authorized to contract with third parties for all services necessary to conduct hearings by
telephone, video, or other electronic means.
(3)
Any person who enters into a contract with the commission to provide services necessary to conduct hearings by
telephone, video, or other electronic means shall be subject to the laws of the State of Arkansas.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 19, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-59. - Judicial relief.
(a)
Within 30 days after the issuance and service on the taxpayer of the notice and demand for payment of a
deficiency in tax established by (1) an audit determination that is not protested by the taxpayer, or (2) a final
determination of the hearing officer or the commission, a taxpayer may seek judicial relief from the final
determination by either:
(1)
Within one year of the date of the final assessment, paying the entire amount of the A&P tax due, including any
interest or penalties, for any taxable period or periods covered by the final assessment and filing suit to recover
that amount within one year of the date of payment. The commission may proceed with collection activities,
including the filing of a certificate of indebtedness as authorized hereunder, within 30 days of the issuance of the
final assessment for any assessed but unpaid A&P taxes, penalties, or interest owed by the taxpayer for other
taxable periods covered by the final assessment, while the suit for refund is being pursued by the taxpayer for
other taxable periods covered by the final assessment; or
(2)
a.
Within 30 days of the issuance and service on the taxpayer of the notice and demand for payment, filing with the
commission a bond in double the amount of the tax deficiency due and by filing suit within 30 days thereafter to
stay the effect of the commission's determination.
b.
The bond shall be subject to the condition that the taxpayer shall file suit within 30 days after filing the bond,
shall faithfully and diligently prosecute the suit to a final determination, and shall pay any deficiency found by
the court to be due and any court cost assessed against him.
c.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
304/543
A taxpayer's failure to file suit, diligently prosecute the suit, or pay any tax deficiency and court costs, as
required by subsection (a) of this section, shall result in the forfeiture of the bond in the amount of the
assessment and assessed court costs.
(b)
Jurisdiction for a suit to contest a determination of the commission under this section shall be in the county
circuit court, where the matter shall be tried de novo.
(c)
The methods provided in this section shall be the sole alternative methods for seeking relief from a written
decision of the commission or hearing officer establishing a deficiency in the A&P tax. No injunction shall issue
to stay proceedings for assessment or collection of any A&P taxes.
(d)
In any court proceeding under this section, the prevailing party may be awarded a judgment for court costs.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 20, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-60. - Issuance of certificates of indebtedness and execution.
(a)
(1)
a.
If a taxpayer does not timely and properly pursue his remedies seeking relief from a decision of the commission
or hearing officer and a final assessment is made against the taxpayer, or if the taxpayer fails to pay the
deficiency assessed upon notice and demand, then the commission through its authorized representative shall, as
soon as practicable thereafter, issue to the circuit clerk of any county of the state in which the taxpayer's business
is located a certificate of indebtedness certifying that the person named therein is indebted to the commission for
the amount of the tax established by the commission as due.
b.
If a taxpayer has a delinquent A&P tax liability to the commission of less than $1,000.00, the commission or its
hearing officer may enter into an agreement with the taxpayer to allow the taxpayer to pay the delinquency in
installments. The commission or its hearing officer may choose not to issue a certificate of indebtedness during
the period of the installment agreement if he determines that it is in the best interest of the commission.
(2)
The circuit clerk shall enter immediately upon the circuit court judgment docket:
a.
The name of the delinquent taxpayer;
b.
The amount certified as being due;
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
305/543
c.
The name of the tax; and
d.
The date of entry upon the judgment docket.
(3)
a.
The entry of the certificate of indebtedness shall have the same force and effect as the entry of a judgment
rendered by the circuit court. This entry shall constitute the commission's lien upon the title of any real and
personal property of the taxpayer in the county where the certificate of indebtedness is recorded.
b.
This lien is in addition to any other lien existing in favor of the commission to secure payment of taxes,
applicable interest, penalties, and costs. The lien is superior to other liens of any type or character attaching to
the property after the date of entry of the certificate of indebtedness on the judgment docket. This lien is superior
to all claims of unsecured creditors.
c.
The certificate of indebtedness authorized by this subsection shall continue in force for ten years from the date
of recording and shall automatically expire after the ten-year period has run. Actions on the lien on the
certificate of indebtedness shall be commenced within ten years after the date of recording of the certificate, and
not afterward.
(b)
(1)
After entry of the certificate, the circuit clerk shall issue a writ of execution directed to the commission,
authorizing the commission to levy upon and against all real and personal property of the taxpayer.
(2)
The commission shall have all remedies and may take all proceedings for the collection of the tax which may be
taken for the recovery of a judgment at law.
(3)
The writ shall be issued, served, and executed in the same manner as provided for in the issuance and service of
executions rendered by the circuit courts of this state, except the commission shall act in the place of the county
sheriffs.
(4)
The commission shall have this authority for all liens either presently filed or filed after the passage of the
ordinance from which this division derives.
(c)
(1)
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the commission from resorting to any other means provided by law for
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
306/543
collecting delinquent taxes.
(2)
The issuance of a certificate of indebtedness, entry by the clerk, and levy of execution as provided in this section
shall not constitute an election of remedies with respect to the collection of the tax.
(3)
The taxes, fees, interest, and penalties imposed or levied hereby may be collected in the same way as a personal
debt of the taxpayer.
(4)
The commission may sue to the same effect and extent as for the enforcement of a right of action for debt.
(5)
All provisional remedies available in these actions are available to the commission in the enforcement of the
payment of the A&P tax.
(d)
(1)
In addition to the remedies provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the commission may direct the
circuit clerk to issue a writ of execution directed to the sheriff of any county authorizing the sheriff to levy upon
and against all real and personal property of the taxpayer. The writ shall be issued, served, and executed in the
same manner as provided for in the issuance and service of executions rendered by the circuit courts of this state.
(2)
The circuit clerks and sheriffs shall be entitled to receive the same fees provided by law in these matters. These
fees shall be collected from the taxpayer by either the commission or the sheriff in addition to the tax, penalties,
and interest included in the certificate of indebtedness. If the sheriff is unable, after diligent effort, to collect the
tax, interest, penalties, and costs, the commission may pay such fees as are properly shown to be due to the clerk
and sheriff.
(e)
The commission may contract with persons inside or outside the state to help the commission collect
delinquencies of resident or nonresident taxpayers.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 21, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-61. - Injunction proceedings.
When a return required hereunder has not been filed or does not furnish all the information required by the
commission or when the A&P taxes imposed by law have not been paid or when any required license or permit
has not been secured, the commission may institute any necessary action or proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction in the county to enjoin the person or taxpayer from continuing operations until the report or return
has been filed, required licenses or permits secured, or taxes paid as required. The injunction shall be issued
without a bond being required from the commission.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 22, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-62. - Settlement or compromise of liability controversies.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
307/543
(a)
The commission may enter into an agreement to compound, settle, or compromise any controversy relating to
the A&P tax when:
(1)
The controversy is over the amount of tax due;
(2)
The inability to pay results from the insolvency of the taxpayer.
(b)
The commission may waive or remit the interest or penalty, or any portion thereof, ordinarily accruing because
of a taxpayer's failure to pay the A&P tax within the statutory period allowed for its payment:
(1)
If the taxpayer's failure to pay the tax is satisfactorily explained to the commission; or
(2)
If the failure results from a mistake by the taxpayer of either the law or the facts subjecting him to such tax; or
(3)
If the inability to pay the interest or penalty results from the insolvency or bankruptcy of the taxpayer.
(c)
In settling or compromising any controversy relating to the liability of a person for the A&P tax for any taxable
period, the commission is authorized to enter into a written closing agreement concerning the liability. When the
closing agreement is signed by the commission, it shall be final and conclusive, and except upon a showing of
fraud or misrepresentation of a material fact, no additional assessment or collection shall be made by the
commission, and the taxpayer shall not institute any judicial proceeding to recover such liabilities as agreed to in
the closing agreement.
(d)
The commission shall promulgate rules and regulations establishing guidelines for determining whether a
proposed offer of compromise is adequate and is acceptable to resolve a tax dispute.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 23, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-63. - Release of property from lien.
(a)
Upon written application by any person, the commission may release any property from the lien imposed by any
assessment, order, judgment, or certificate of indebtedness obtained by or from any levy made by it if:
(1)
Either full payment is made to the commission of the sum it considers adequate consideration for the release; or
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
308/543
(2)
Adequate security deposit is made with the commission to secure the payment of the debt evidenced by the lien.
(b)
When the commission determines that its assessment, certificate of indebtedness, or judgment is clouding the
title of property because of an error in the description of properties or similarity in names, the commission may
issue a release without the payment of any consideration.
(c)
The commission's release shall be given under its seal and filed in the office of the circuit clerk in the county in
which the lien is filed, or it shall be recorded in any office in which conveyances of real estate may be recorded.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 24, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-64. - Violations.
Any person subject to the A&P tax who is transacting business within the city without a valid A&P tax permit
shall be guilty of a violation which shall be punishable up to a $500.00 fine. Each day a person transacts
business within the city without a valid A&P permit shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 25, 9-10-01)
Sec. 98-65. - Criminal penalties.
Sanctions for any taxpayer who willfully attempts to evade or defeat the payment of the A&P tax, or who assists
any taxpayer to evade or defeat the payment, or otherwise fails to file a report, fails to pay the tax, or makes a
false or fraudulent report, return, statement, claim, application or other instrument required by the commission in
connection with the A&P tax, or makes a false answer to any question from the commission or its designed
representative concerning and A&P tax, neglects to answer a subpoena to appear and answer questions about
records for the A&P tax, or who acts, or fails to act, in conformance with the provisions of the Arkansas Tax
Procedure Act, as that act applies to the A&P tax, shall be subject to penalties set forth in A.C.A. § 26-18-101 to
26-18-105; 26-10-201 to 26-10-212 (Michie Repl. 1997 and Supp. 1999), as they exist on the date of the passage
of the ordinance from which this division derives, or as they may be amended by the general assembly and are in
effect on the date of any such violation.
(Ord. No. 7394, § 26, 9-10-01)
ARTICLE III. - PRIVILEGE TAX
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Authority of city to levy and impose taxes on occupations, A.C.A. § 26-77-102.
Sec. 98-66. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Employee means any person, including a minor, whether lawfully or unlawfully employed, in the service of an
employer in excess of 30 hours per week under any contract of hire or apprenticeship, written or oral, expressed
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
309/543
or implied, but excluding one whose employment is casual and not in the course of trade, business, profession or
occupation of his employer.
Employer means any person who employs one or more persons on salary, wage, commission or other
compensation basis, including self-employed persons.
Individual means any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or profession within the city.
Occupation means any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character including
services, domestic or other, carried on or performed within the city for which compensation is charged or
received, whether by means of salary, wages, commissions or fees for services rendered.
Stock means and includes not only goods, wares and merchandise, but all other articles and things carried for
sale or distribution by any persons at one location.
(Code 1980, § 17-26)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 98-67. - Engaging in business without a license.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, to commence, engage in or carry on any of the
businesses or occupations enumerated in this article within the city without having first paid the privilege tax
and procured a license therefor.
(Code 1980, § 17-27)
State law reference— Maximum penalty for violation of occupational license tax ordinance, A.C.A. § 26-77-
101.
Sec. 98-68. - Enforcement.
(a)
The privilege tax officer and the police officers, in addition to their duties as police officers, are hereby
appointed inspectors of licenses, and are hereby required to examine all places of business and persons in the
city liable to pay a license and to see that such licenses are taken out, and shall file or cause to be filed
complaints against all persons violating any of the provisions of this article.
(b)
The mayor or any alderman may file a resolution to be placed upon the city council agenda so that the city
council may vote whether to revoke the license of any business constituting a public nuisance.
(c)
In all instances where a resolution is filed to revoke a business license for a business that constitutes a public
nuisance, the business owner shall be given ten days notice of the date of the city council meeting wherein the
matter will be considered and will be given an opportunity to be heard by the city council prior to a vote being
taken by the city council. Notice shall be given to the business owner by regular U.S. mail.
(Code 1980, § 17-44; Ord. No. 7452, § 1, 5-13-02)
Sec. 98-69. - What constitutes carrying on business or profession; special exemption.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
310/543
For the purposes of this article, a person shall be deemed to be engaging in or carrying on a business, trade,
occupation, vocation, calling or profession within the limits of the city when such person does any of the
following:
(1)
Advertises for any type of business in any newspaper, magazine or any other publication giving an address or
phone number, or a post office box number, within the limits of the city as a place to be contacted to do business.
(2)
Lists a telephone number within the limits of the city in the telephone directory as a place to be contacted for
carrying on a business activity.
(3)
Erects or maintains any type of advertising within the limits of the city indicating that any goods or services or
merchandise may be obtained at the place where the sign is erected.
(4)
Engages, within the limits of the city, in any type of personal service for hire with a gross income of not less
than $200.00 per month, and does not pay a privilege tax to any other municipality within the county and is not
performing such service as an employee of a licensed business.
(5)
Maintains an office, shop, store or place of business within the limits of the city.
(b)
For the purposes of this article, a professional or business person who maintains an office in another part of the
county and lists his phone number in the city as a residence phone shall not, by that alone, be deemed to be
carrying on a business, trade, occupation, vocation, calling or profession within the limits of the city.
(c)
A person who engages, either as principal, agent or employee, in the sale of merchandise at a licensed business
elsewhere in the county and delivers an item to a friend on a casual sale or accommodation basis shall be
deemed not guilty of a violation of this article. The proof, however, that such a delivery is a casual transaction
shall be upon the person making such delivery.
(d)
The payment of the privilege tax to the city clerk shall not, of itself, constitute authority to engage in any
occupation or maintain a place of business which is not legal either because of its nature or is not legally
permitted in the location specified.
(e)
Charitable or eleemosynary, nonprofit businesses and organization are required to obtain privilege licenses under
this article but are not required pay a fee or any cost for said license. It shall be unlawful for any such charitable
or nonprofit business or organization to operate within the city without having obtained a privilege license. Any
such business or organization shall provide the city clerk or clerk's designee a copy of its article of incorporation
or nonprofit determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
311/543
(Code 1980, § 17-28; Ord. No. 7642, § 1, 6-14-04)
Sec. 98-70. - Engaging in two businesses at once.
Any person engaging in two or more businesses, occupations or professions shall pay a privilege or occupational
tax for each business, profession or occupation. However, if any combination of businesses, occupations or
professions, etc., as classified in section 98-83, are so related as to constitute a single professional pursuit, the
single highest occupation, business or profession will be taxed, with $20.00 added for each additional
occupation, profession or business so classified.
(Code 1980, § 17-29)
Sec. 98-71. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Section 2 of Ord. No. 7502, adopted Dec. 9, 2002, repealed § 98-71, which pertained to exemption of privilege
tax for elderly persons, and derived from § 17-30 of the 1980 Code.
Sec. 98-72. - Interstate commerce and United States government business exempt.
No provision of this article shall be so construed as to tax interstate commerce or any United States government
business.
(Code 1980, § 17-39)
Sec. 98-73. - Procedure for circuses or carnivals.
The privilege tax license procedure for circuses, carnivals and traveling amusement rides require that the
applicant obtain:
(a)
Certification of insurance;
(b)
Certification of inspection by the department of labor;
(c)
Proof that all requirements of the fire marshall have been met; and
(d)
A bond to cover costs which may be incurred by the city.
(Code 1980, § 6-16; Ord. No. 7510, § 4, 12-23-02)
Sec. 98-74. - Issuance and form.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk upon the receipt of the amount of privilege tax provided in this article, and
upon presentation of a zoning certificate in cases of application for either commercial or industrial privilege
license, to issue a license under this article. Such license shall state the amount of tax paid, the period of time
covered thereby, the name of the person to whom it is issued, the business, occupation or profession to be carried
on, and the location or place where such business, occupation or profession is to be carried on.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
312/543
(Code 1980, § 17-31; Ord. No. 6825, § 1, 7-11-94)
Sec. 98-75. - Effect of errors or mistakes in computation.
No error or mistake in stating or computing the amount of license due pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall prevent or prejudice collection by the city of the amount actually due to the city.
(Code 1980, § 17-32)
Sec. 98-76. - Due date; penalty for late payment.
Payment of the privilege tax is due January 1 of each year for licenses required by this article. A penalty of 25
percent of the amount is due when the payment is made after April 1 of any year. A penalty of 50 percent of the
amount is due when the payment is made after July 1 of any year.
(Code 1980, § 17-33; Ord. No. 7502, § 3, 12-9-02)
Sec. 98-77. - No refunds; license not transferable.
There shall be no refunds under any condition at any time to any person in the city of any privilege tax
previously paid, nor shall the license be transferable.
(Code 1980, § 17-34)
Sec. 98-78. - Display of license.
Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous place where the business, occupation or profession is carried on,
and the holder of such license shall show such license to any agent of the city upon request.
(Code 1980, § 17-35)
Sec. 98-79. - Expiration date.
All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire at the end of each calendar year.
(Code 1980, § 17-38)
Sec. 98-80. - Gross value of inventory; minimum tax.
(a)
Any person, unless otherwise provided, within the city engaging in the business of selling any and all kinds of
goods, wares and merchandise, whether raw materials or finished products, or both, from a regularly established
place of business maintained within the city shall pay, on January 1 of each year, an annual privilege tax for the
privilege of doing business within the city in an amount equal to that reflected in the schedule contained in
section 98-83
(b)
Average stock or inventory shall also include all goods, wares and merchandise, etc., on consignment located
within the city. The value of the goods shall be the price paid therefor by the taxpayer. Such inventory shall be
furnished to the privilege tax officer in a sworn statement setting forth the amount of such average stock
inventory upon a form to be furnished by the privilege tax officer. In the initial year of operation, the beginning
inventory amounts shall be used. The minimum privilege tax for any such business affected by this section shall
be $25.00.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
313/543
(Code 1980, § 17-36)
Sec. 98-81. - Reexamination of books.
The city privilege tax officer or his duly authorized representative shall have the right to request any person
subject to the privilege tax as provided in this article to conduct a reexamination of his inventory and make any
alterations in his previous estimate as such reexamination may indicate.
(Code 1980, § 17-37)
Sec. 98-82. - Civil liability of licensee for fee.
The amount of any license imposed by this article shall be deemed as a debt due the city, and any person
commencing, engaging in or carrying on any trade, business, occupation, vocation, calling or profession without
having obtained a license from the city to do so shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the amount of license imposed on such trade, business, occupation, vocation, calling
or profession by this article or any ordinance of the city.
(Code 1980, § 17-40; Ord. No. 7069, § 1, 9-8-97)
Sec. 98-83. - Schedule of license taxes.
The amount of occupational license tax levied and imposed upon every person that shall engage in or manage
any business, profession, privilege or occupation within the city mentioned is hereby fixed, levied and imposed
at rates and amounts per year, unless otherwise indicated. The schedule of license taxes is not set out herein, but
is on file for inspection in the office of the city clerk.
(Code 1980, § 17-41; Ord. No. 7069, § 1, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 7113, §§ 1, 2, 4-27-98; Ord. No. 7430, § 1, 2-11-02;
Ord. No. 7431, § 1, 2-11-02; Ord. No. 7502, § 1, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 7505, § 1, 12-23-02; Ord. No. 7431, § 1, 2-
11-02; Ord. No. 7521, § 1, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 7526, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 7596, § 1, 10-27-03)
Sec. 98-84. - Stock schedule.
The following stock schedule shall apply to this article:
$ 1.00 to $ 2,000.00 ..... $ 25.00
2,001.00 to 2,500.00 ..... 37.00
2,501.00 to 4,000.00 ..... 45.00
4,001.00 to 5,000.00 ..... 48.00
5,001.00 to 6,000.00 ..... 51.00
6,001.00 to 7,000.00 ..... 54.00
7,001.00 to 8,000.00 ..... 57.00
8,001.00 to 9,000.00 ..... 60.00
9,001.00 to 10,000.00 ..... 63.00
10,001.00 to 11,000.00 ..... 66.00
11,001.00 to 12,000.00 ..... 69.00
12,001.00 to 13,000.00 ..... 72.00
13,001.00 to 14,000.00 ..... 75.00
14,001.00 to 15,000.00 ..... 78.00
15,001.00 to 16,000.00 ..... 81.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
314/543
16,001.00 to 17,000.00 ..... 84.00
17,001.00 to 18,000.00 ..... 87.00
18,001.00 to 19,000.00 ..... 90.00
19,001.00 to 20,000.00 ..... 93.00
20,001.00 to 21,000.00 ..... 99.00
21,001.00 to 22,000.00 ..... 102.00
22,001.00 to 23,000.00 ..... 105.00
23,001.00 to 24,000.00 ..... 108.00
24,001.00 to 25,000.00 ..... 111.00
25,001.00 to 26,000.00 ..... 113.00
26,001.00 to 27,000.00 ..... 115.00
27,001.00 to 28,000.00 ..... 117.00
28,001.00 to 29,000.00 ..... 119.00
29,001.00 to 30,000.00 ..... 121.00
30,001.00 to 31,000.00 ..... 123.00
31,001.00 to 32,000.00 ..... 125.00
32,001.00 to 33,000.00 ..... 127.00
33,001.00 to 34,000.00 ..... 129.00
34,001.00 to 35,000.00 ..... 131.00
35,001.00 to 36,000.00 ..... 133.00
36,001.00 to 37,000.00 ..... 135.00
37,001.00 to 38,000.00 ..... 137.00
38,001.00 to 39,000.00 ..... 139.00
39,001.00 to 40,000.00 ..... 141.00
40,001.00 to 41,000.00 ..... 146.00
41,001.00 to 42,000.00 ..... 148.00
42,001.00 to 43,000.00 ..... 150.00
43,001.00 to 44,000.00 ..... 152.00
44,001.00 to 45,000.00 ..... 154.00
45,001.00 to 46,000.00 ..... 156.00
46,001.00 to 47,000.00 ..... 158.00
47,001.00 to 48,000.00 ..... 160.00
48,001.00 to 49,000.00 ..... 162.00
49,001.00 to 50,000.00 ..... 164.00
All over $50,000.00: $0.75 per $1,000.00 stock.
(Code 1980, § 17-43)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
315/543
Sec. 98-85. - Unclassified businesses.
The license fee for any business, trade, occupation, vocation, calling or profession which is not classified and
provided for under the provisions of this article or other ordinances of the city or is not specifically exempt by
the provisions of this article or by the state shall be $25.00 per year.
(Code 1980, § 17-42)
Chapter 102 - TRAFFIC
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Storage of abandoned boats, motor vehicles and trailers, § 42-61 et seq.; streets, sidewalks
and other public places, ch. 94; parades, § 94-221 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 114.
State Law reference— Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways of Arkansas, A.C.A. § 27-49-101 et seq.;
powers of local authorities, A.C.A. § 27-49-106.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 102-1. - State traffic laws adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference all laws of the state regulating traffic on the highways, except as modified
in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of such laws.
(Code 1980, § 31-8)
State law reference— State traffic laws, A.C.A. § 27-2-101 et seq.
Sec. 102-2. - Application of chapter to use of publicly owned vehicles.
The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the public streets, highways and
alleyways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned and operated by the United States, this state or any
county, or the city, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter with reference to authorized
emergency vehicles.
(Code 1980, § 31-5(a))
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. § 27-49-108.
Sec. 102-3. - Application of chapter to persons engaged in street work.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles or other equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the surface of the public streets, but shall apply to all of such vehicles and
persons operating the same while traveling to or from such work.
(Code 1980, § 31-5(d))
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. § 27-49-110.
Sec. 102-4. - Application of chapter to bicycles and animals.
Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a public street or
roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
316/543
provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(Code 1980, § 31-6)
State law reference— Similar provisions, A.C.A. § 27-49-111.
Sec. 102-5. - Special service vehicle permits.
(a)
Required. All special service vehicles principally based within the city limits shall obtain from the city clerk a
special service vehicle permit prior to operating such vehicle within the city limits of this city.
(b)
Special service vehicles. For the purpose of this section, "special service vehicles" shall be defined as any
taxicab, ambulance, or other vehicle of public conveyance. Such term shall specifically preclude and shall not
apply in any way to vehicles owned and operated by the city, nor to vehicles serving the city stationed or based
in the city for which the city provided reciprocal arrangement.
(c)
Sticker; display. The special service vehicle sticker required in subsection (g) of this section shall be four inches
square and shall be displayed on the lower right front windshield of such special service vehicle. The special
service vehicle stickers shall be numbered individually and the sticker shall be of a color which is changed
yearly.
(d)
Prerequisites to issuance of permit. Prior to issuing a special service vehicle permit, the city clerk shall obtain
evidence that the persons seeking to have the permit issued shall have met all city requirements, including but
not limited to proof of payment of privilege tax and proof of compliance with any state regulation or standard.
(e)
Fee. The fee for issuance of each special service vehicle permit shall be $75.00 for the first wrecker and $10.00
for each additional wrecker.
(f)
Separate permit for each vehicle. Each individual operating one or more special service vehicles shall obtain a
separate permit for each individual vehicle.
(g)
Sticker required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a special service vehicle principally based within
the city limits of this city without obtaining and displaying a special service vehicle sticker.
(Code 1980, § 31-12; Ord. No. 7098, § 1, 1-26-98)
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; vehicles for hire, ch. 114.
Secs. 102-6—102-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
317/543
Sec. 102-31. - Traffic services department.
There is hereby created the traffic services department. Such department shall be responsible for the erection,
maintenance and installation of all traffic control devices within and under the jurisdiction of the city. The
director of the traffic services department shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council,
and shall be directly responsible to the mayor and city council. The number of other personnel within the traffic
services department shall be as provided in the annual budget adopted and approved by the city council.
(Code 1980, § 31-2)
Cross reference— Department and similar agencies, § 2-326 et seq.
Sec. 102-32. - Notices or tickets to violators.
(a)
Notices given by police officers for the purpose of ordering any person to answer charges for violation of any
traffic laws of the city shall be executed by the officer giving such notice in triplicate, the original of which shall
be retained and kept in a file for the purpose by the police department, a copy delivered to the person so
summoned or affixed to the vehicle and a copy filed in the office of the clerk of the municipal court.
(b)
The copy of the notice of violation delivered to the office of the clerk of the municipal court shall have indicated
thereon by the officer handling such violation whether such violator deposited bail for appearance in court or
whether hearing was waived and the fine and costs paid to the police department.
(Code 1980, § 31-10)
State law reference— Traffic citations, A.C.A. § 27-50-501 et seq.
Sec. 102-33. - Summonses; failure to appear.
(a)
It shall constitute a lawful summons of any person violating any provision of this chapter requiring such person
to appear in the municipal court at the time stated upon such notice, for any authorized officer to affix such
notice to a motor vehicle offending against any provisions of this chapter in the absence of the operator, or to
deliver such notice to the operator of such vehicle in person.
(b)
Any person who wilfully fails or neglects to appear in response to a notice affixed to such person's motor vehicle
by an officer as provided in this section, or who fails to appear in response to such notice delivered to him in
person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which such notice was
originally issued.
(Code 1980, § 31-7)
State law reference— Traffic citations, A.C.A. § 27-50-501 et seq.; arrest and release of violators, A.C.A. § 27-
50-601 et seq.
Sec. 102-34. - Waiver of trial; exceptions.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
318/543
Any person who has received any notice to appear in the municipal court in answer to a traffic charge under the
ordinances of this city (except charges of driving drunk, reckless driving, hazardous driving, speeding or failing
to stop after an accident) may, within the time specified in such notice, pay a prescribed fine and costs and, in
writing, plead guilty to the charge or charges set forth therein, thereby waiving a hearing in court and giving
power of attorney to such police officer to make such plea for him in court and to pay such fine and costs into
the office of the city collector. Acceptance of the fine and costs and the power of attorney by the officer of the
police department shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the violation and the violator shall be given a
receipt which so states.
(b)
Any person who has been guilty of three or more violations of provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city
within the preceding 12 months shall not be permitted to pay a fine at the office of the police officer designated
for that purpose, but will be required to give bail for his appearance in court at the time required for any other
offense.
(Code 1980, § 31-9)
Secs. 102-35—102-45. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of traffic control signals, A.C.A. § 27-49-106(b)
(2); traffic control devices generally, A.C.A. § 25-52-101 et seq.
Sec. 102-46. - Ratified.
The location of all traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings in existence on the adoption of this Code
are hereby ratified and confirmed.
(Code 1980, § 31-73)
Sec. 102-47. - When required.
Provisions of this chapter for designations authorized to be made by the chief of police and requiring signs,
markers or traffic control devices to be installed for such designation shall not be enforced against any alleged
violator of such designation if, at the time of such alleged violation, such sign, marker or traffic control device is
not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. However, when any
particular section of this chapter does not state that signs or markers are required, such section shall be effective
without signs or markers erected to give notice thereof.
(Code 1980, § 31-75)
Sec. 102-48. - Play streets.
Whenever authorized signs or markers are erected indicating any street or portion thereof as a play street, no
person shall drive a vehicle upon such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or
whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving
within such area.
(Code 1980, § 31-76(a))
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
319/543
Sec. 102-49. - Certain signs prohibited.
Every sign, signal or marking prohibited by A.C.A. § 27-52-109 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and
the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(Code 1980, § 31-76(b))
Sec. 102-50. - Blocking intersections.
Any driver of a motor vehicle who enters an intersection when there is not sufficient room for his vehicle to
continue through the intersection, notwithstanding the fact that traffic signals at such intersection indicated "go,"
or who enters any intersection not controlled by a traffic signal when there is not sufficient room for his vehicle
to continue through the intersection, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1980, § 31-116)
Sec. 102-51. - Speed hump petition procedures.
(a)
Any citizen who desires to circulate a petition for the installation of a speed hump may obtain a copy of such a
petition from the city clerk's office.
(b)
Upon obtaining a petition in support of the installation of a speed hump the citizen shall circulate the petition to
those individuals who are in support thereof. Following the circulation of the petition, the petition shall be filed
with the city clerk. The petition shall contain at least one point of contact.
(c)
All petitions filed with the city clerk shall be stamped as received on the date received. All petitions received on
or prior to December 31st shall be reviewed for installation in the following year.
(d)
At the beginning of each year, the city clerk shall forward all petitions filed with the clerk's office during the
prior year to the city's traffic services department.
(e)
Upon receiving the petitions, the traffic services department shall review each petition and provide the city
council with a list of recommended speed hump locations. Upon receiving the recommended list, the city
council may proceed with appropriating money for the installation of said speed humps.
(f)
All individuals listed as a point of contact on each petition that is reviewed shall be notified by letter as to the
result of their petition efforts by the traffic services department.
(g)
Any member of the city council who desires to have a speed hump installed that is not on the recommended list
may sponsor a resolution for the installation of said speed hump. The passage requirement for such a resolution
shall be by a two-thirds vote.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
320/543
(h)
Upon finalizing a recommended list, the traffic services department shall forward the list to the mayor and all
aldermen. If the mayor or any two aldermen oppose the installation of any speed hump on the recommended list,
the traffic services department shall remove the location from the list. The mayor or aldermen shall request the
removal within 14 days after receiving the list from the department.
(Ord. No. 7345, § 1, 2-12-01)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7345, § 1, adopted Feb. 12, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as §
102-51 was at the discretion of the editor.
Secs. 102-52—102-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE OPERATION GENERALLY
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Rules of the road, A.C.A. § 27-51-101 et seq.
Sec. 102-71. - Hazardous driving.
Any person who shall drive or operate any vehicle within the city in such a manner as to constitute a hazard or
menace to the safety of other persons or traffic under the conditions and circumstances existing at the time
thereof (notwithstanding such person may not have been driving in excess of the lawful speed limitation or that a
collision or accident may not have ensued) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1980, § 31-28)
State law reference— Reckless driving, A.C.A. § 27-50-308.
Sec. 102-72. - Unsafe driving.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle in such a manner as to evidence a failure to
keep proper lookout for other traffic, vehicular or otherwise, or in such a manner as to evidence a failure to
maintain proper control of the vehicle under the circumstances then existing.
(Code 1980, § 31-29)
State law reference— Reckless driving, A.C.A. § 27-50-308.
Sec. 102-73. - Speed limit generally.
No person shall drive a vehicle within the city at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour, unless otherwise posted;
provided, however, this limitation shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles traveling in response to an
emergency call, nor when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law. Such speed limitation shall
apply to authorized emergency vehicles at all other times.
(Code 1980, § 31-30)
State law reference— Speed generally, A.C.A. § 27-51-201; speed limit in urban district, A.C.A. § 27-51-
201(c)(1); local alteration of speed limits, A.C.A. § 27-51-206.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
321/543
Sec. 102-74. - Emerging from alley.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or emerge from an alley shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the street or highway.
(Code 1980, § 31-46)
Sec. 102-75. - U-turns.
(a)
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in an opposite direction upon any street
where such turning is not prohibited unless such movement can be made in safety and without obstructing or
interfering with other traffic.
(b)
No person operating a vehicle shall execute a U-turn at or within any intersection or upon any street between
intersections within the business district of the city.
(Code 1980, § 31-51)
State law reference— Turning movements generally, A.C.A. § 27-51-401 et seq.
Sec. 102-76. - Backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle into an intersection or over a crosswalk at any time and shall in
no event or at any place back a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety.
(Code 1980, § 31-52)
Sec. 102-77. - Truck routes.
(a)
All through trucks or any vehicle hauling natural resources shall be prohibited from residential streets, except
where it is necessary to use such streets enroute to a truck terminal. Trucks going to and from terminals shall use
the most direct route from the state or federal highways. Any truck using a residential street in a manner not
prescribed in this section shall be in violation of this chapter. Trucks making local deliveries or with places of
business in the above designated areas are hereby excluded from the requirements of this section.
(b)
Trucks in excess of three-quarters ton are hereby prohibited from traveling on Edmonds Street and East 19th
Street, except for the purposes of local pickup and/or delivery or when such vehicle is owned by a resident of the
subdivision and is temporarily garaged or parked at the owner's residence.
(c)
Trucks proceeding east on Washington Avenue, with a destination outside the city limits, shall turn north on
Vine Street to Third Street and then east on Third Street to the intersection of Highways 30 and 67-70. All trucks
proceeding west from Rose City shall use East Third Street to Vine Street, turning south on Vine to Washington
Avenue, then west on Washington Avenue to the Main Street Bridge.
(d)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
322/543
The following routes shall be utilized by all trucks servicing the port facilities on the north bank of the Arkansas
River:
Beginning at the port facility, trucks shall travel west on Gribble Street to Clover Street, then north on Clover
Street to East Washington Avenue, then west on East Washington Avenue to Palm Street, then north on Palm
Street to East Broadway.
The presently existing truck route utilized by Jeffrey Sand and Gravel (Lincoln Avenue to Buckeye Street to
Broadway Avenue) shall not be affected by this section.
(e)
Truck traffic shall not be permitted on Main Street or Washington Avenue bordered on the north by Eighth Street
and on the west by Cypress Street, except for local deliveries.
(f)
Heavily loaded trucks in excess of three-quarters ton are hereby prohibited from traveling on Lynch Drive
between the intersections of East Broadway and Rose Lane, except for the purposes of local residential or
business pickups and/or delivery, or when such vehicle is owned by a resident of Rose City and is temporarily
engaged or parked at the owner's residence.
(g)
A temporary exception to this section is granted to trucks leaving the Missouri-Pacific Railroad yard because the
previous 13th Street exit is being blocked by construction. Therefore trucks which exit at the 11th Street exit on
Pike Avenue should be allowed to turn right (north) on Pike Avenue and proceed to 16th Street where they may
again turn right (east) on 16th Street and proceed to North Sycamore where they will be allowed to turn right
(south) to 13th Street and turn left (east) on 13th Street and continue as previously from this point to make their
deliveries.
(Code 1980, § 31-56)
Sec. 102-78. - Loud and raucous sounds from vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person within or upon any vehicle within the city limits to make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any loud and raucous noise, which term shall mean any sound which, because of its
volume level, duration or character, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of
reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(Code 1980, § 31-57)
State law reference— Mufflers, A.C.A. § 27-37-601 et seq.
Sec. 102-79. - Motor vehicles on city sidewalks.
(a)
The term "motor vehicle" for purposes of this section shall include cars, trucks, motorcycles, off-road vehicles
(ATV's and ORV's), and any similar vehicles (including trailers) that are self-propelled by electricity, gas or
other similar form of fuel.
(b)
It is unlawful to park or operate a motor vehicle upon any city sidewalk. Any person found guilty of parking or
operating a motor vehicle in violation of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
323/543
(c)
The police department and the code enforcement department shall have authority to issue citations for violations
of this section.
(Ord. No. 7450, § 1—3, 5-13-02)
Secs. 102-80—102-100. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
State Law reference— Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, A.C.A. § 27-49-106(b)(1);
stopping, standing or parking generally, A.C.A. § 27-51-1301 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 102-101. - Illegal parking.
(a)
Fines generally. All illegal parking within the city as set forth in subsection (d) of this section shall be assessed a
fine of $15.00 per violation.
(b)
In handicapped parking zones. Illegal parking in handicapped parking zones shall carry a fine of $100.00 for
each offense.
(c)
In fire lanes. Illegal parking in fire lanes for the first offense shall carry a minimum fine of $15.00 and a
maximum fine of $25.00. Second and subsequent violations of fire lane parking restrictions shall carry a
minimum fine of $35.00 and a maximum fine of $50.00.
(d)
Other illegal parking violations. This section covering illegal parking includes illegal parking on the wrong side,
in loading zones, blocking alleys and driveways and double parking.
(Code 1980, § 31-131)
State law reference— Penalty for illegal parking in handicapped zone, A.C.A. § 27-15-305.
Sec. 102-102. - Parking within spaces required.
Vehicles parked upon streets marked with parking spaces shall be within the space designated so that it will not
interfere with proper parking in the adjacent spaces. It is unlawful for any person to park over or on one of the
perpendicular lines drawn indicating parking space.
(Code 1980, § 31-118)
Sec. 102-103. - Parking in no parking zones.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
324/543
When signs or markers have been erected or placed so directing, no person shall park or permit a vehicle to
stand in any area or district where such signs or markers indicate that parking is prohibited therein.
(Code 1980, § 31-128)
Sec. 102-104. - Parking in alleys.
No person shall park or stand a vehicle in any alley at any time, except for the purpose of loading or unloading
materials or merchandise and then only for the actual time necessary to accomplish such purpose. Whenever any
vehicle is so parked or permitted to stand, sufficient clearance room shall be permitted for the passage of other
vehicles.
(Code 1980, § 31-119)
Sec. 102-105. - Parking for purpose of sale, washing or repairing.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street or roadway for the principal purpose of displaying the
vehicle for sale, or for the purpose of washing, greasing or repairing except for emergency repairs.
(Code 1980, § 31-120)
Sec. 102-106. - Special provisions for commercial vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wreck, dismantle or store for commercial purposes any motor vehicle on
any street, sidewalk or public place.
(Code 1980, § 31-121)
Sec. 102-107. - Bus stops and taxicab stands.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle in any area designated as a stop or stand for motor vehicle carriers of
passengers for hire.
(Code 1980, § 31-123)
Sec. 102-108. - Trucks over one-half ton—Parking time limit on streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck over one-half ton, trailer, house or cargo, without or with
the tractor or towing vehicle attached thereto, on any street in the city for a period of time longer than one hour
at any time, unless such truck, trailer, house or cargo is being loaded or unloaded.
(Code 1980, § 31-124)
Sec. 102-109. - Same—Parking on Washington Avenue, Main Street and bus routes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck or trailer larger than one-half ton on Washington Avenue,
Main Street and other streets designated as bus routes in the city, except for loading and unloading.
(Code 1980, § 31-125)
Sec. 102-110. - Parking or storing tractor-trailer trucks or in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5 zones.
(a)
Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store a tractor-trailer truck or trailer of a tractor-trailer
truck in any area bearing an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5 zone.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
325/543
(b)
Exception. This section shall not apply to any legitimate delivery service vehicle parking within an R-1, R-2, R-
3, R-4, or R-5 zone for the purpose of make a delivery to or a pick up from a residence located in such zone.
(c)
Penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be find not more than $500.00. Each day shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Code 1980, § 31-125.1; Ord. No. 7353, § 1, 3-26-01)
Sec. 102-111. - Parking or storing heavy commercial vehicles in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5 zones.
(a)
Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store a heavy commercial vehicle on any lot(s) zoned R-
1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5 in such a manner that any part of the vehicle shall be closer to the street than the front
building line of said lot(s) as defined by city zoning regulations, or upon any street adjacent to property zoned R-
1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5.
(b)
Heavy commercial vehicles defined. For purposes of this section, a heavy commercial vehicle is a vehicle
designed for excavating, lifting, demolishing, constructing, moving, transporting and/or other commercial uses.
The term includes, without limitation, cargo trailers, dump trucks, vehicles having more than two axles, vehicles
that are propelled upon tracks or other systems not normally associated with passenger vehicles, and/or vehicles
that are equipped with spades, blades, scoops, shovels, discs, forks, or other tools not normally affixed to
passenger vehicles.
(c)
Exception. This section shall not apply to:
(1)
Any person conducting business during normal business hours;
(2)
Any person operating a legitimate service vehicle within an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5 zone during normal
business hours for the purpose of making a delivery to or a pick up from a residence located in such zone; or
(3)
Any person who stores a heavy commercial vehicle on a construction or demolition site provided all necessary
permits have been properly issued and such storage does not continue for a period to exceed five days.
(d)
Penalties: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each day
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 7396, § 1, 9-24-01)
Editor's note—
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
326/543
Prior to the reenactment of § 102-111 by Ord. No. 7396, Ord. No. 7353, § 1, adopted March 26, 2001, repealed §
102-111 which pertained to parking trailer unit of tractor-trailer truck in R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5 zones and derived
from Code 1980, § 31-125.2.
Sec. 102-112. - Loading zones.
Whenever, by appropriate markers or other indications, zones have been established for the loading or discharge
of passengers of motor vehicle carriers, no person shall drive a vehicle in or through such zone at any time when
persons are within the area thereof or when a carrier vehicle has stopped or is about to stop thereat for the
purpose of loading or discharging passengers.
(Code 1980, § 31-126)
Sec. 102-113. - Passenger carriers.
The driver or operator of any passenger carrier vehicle shall not stop such vehicle at any place for the purpose of
loading or discharging passengers except at such places as may be designated for such purpose by appropriate
signs or markers.
(Code 1980, § 31-127)
Sec. 102-114. - Unauthorized parking in handicapped spaces and fire lanes.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to unlawfully park in an area designated for disability parking as provided for
and defined by state law.
(b)
Any vehicle found to be parked in an area designated for the exclusive use of any person with a disability
including the access aisle, as provided by state law, on which is not displayed a special license plate, a special
certificate, or an official designation of another state as authorized by state law, or which is found to be parked in
an area designated for the exclusive use of any person with a disability, if operated by a person who is not a
person with a disability, while not being used for the actual transporting of a person with a disability, shall be
subject to citation and impoundment by the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(c)
Upon being convicted of violating subsection (a) above, the person shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$100.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first offense and not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for the
second and subsequent offense, plus applicable towing, impoundment, and related fees, as well as court costs.
(d)
It shall be unlawful for any person to park in an area designated as a fire lane. Upon being convicted of violating
this subsection, the person shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Code 1980, § 31-129; Ord. No. 7236, § 1, 8-9-99)
Sec. 102-115. - Overtime parking.
When signs or markers have been erected or placed indicating the allowance of parking for a definite period of
time and the days during which such regulations shall be applicable, it shall be unlawful for any person to park
or to permit a vehicle to stand contrary to such indications. Overtime parking is punishable by imposition of a
fine of $5.00.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
327/543
(Code 1980, § 31-130)
Sec. 102-116. - Parking on city trails.
(a)
"Motor vehicle" for purposes of this section shall mean to include cars, trucks, motorcycles, off road vehicles
(ATVs and ORVs), and any similar vehicles that are self propelled by electricity, gas or any similar form of fuel.
Motor vehicle shall not include any device used to assist individuals who are handicapped.
(b)
It is hereby declared unlawful to park or operate a motor vehicle on or along any city trail that has been or is
hereafter so posted by the city. Any person found guilty of parking or operating a motor vehicle in violation of
this section shall be fined not more than $500.00. Any motor vehicle that is being utilized for a legitimate
government purpose or emergency shall be exempt for the provision of this section.
(Ord. No. 7424, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-02)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7424, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2002, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 102-
116 was at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 102-117. - Recreational vehicle or motor home parking.
(a)
The owners or keepers of recreational vehicles or motor homes on residential property in the City of North Little
Rock are hereby prohibited from allowing any part of such motor home or recreational vehicle to extend past the
property line and onto the city's right-of-way or easement.
(b)
An exception is hereby created to allow motor homes and recreational vehicles to be parked in such a manner as
to extend past residential property lines onto city rights-of-way or easements for 48 hours prior to and 48 hours
following a trip in the motor home or recreational vehicle, to allow for preparation of the vehicle for the trip and
unpacking after the trip. This exception only applies to motor homes and recreational vehicles that are stored at
off-site locations.
(Ord. No. 7290, § 1, 8-14-00; Ord. No. 7471, § 1, 8-26-02)
Sec. 102-118. - Parking in any historic district.
(a)
No motor vehicle shall be parked upon premises within any area of the city that is zoned or used for residential
purposes and has been designated by city ordinance as a historic district unless within a garage or carport, or
upon a paved or unpaved driveway leading directly from the roadway to residential property or parked in a
backyard.
(b)
Parking is hereby prohibited upon any unimproved surface within areas of the city described in subsection (a).
As used in this section, the term "unimproved surface" includes, but is not limited to, grass and dirt surfaces.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
328/543
(Ord. No. 7625, §§ 1, 2, 3-8-04; Ord. No. 7633a, § 1, 4-12-04)
Secs. 102-119—102-125. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL PRIVILEGES FOR DISABLED VETERANS
Sec. 102-126. - Established.
All ordinances of the city which impose time limitations on parking or relate to metered parking at any place on
the streets of the city shall not apply to disabled veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces, who, as a result of their
service, are entitled under federal laws to compensation for the loss, or loss of use, of one or both legs at or
above the ankle.
(Code 1980, § 31-159)
Sec. 102-127. - Sticker.
(a)
The city clerk shall provide windshield stickers for the purpose of identifying automobiles owned by, operated
by or operated primarily for the use of veterans entitled by this division to parking privileges. Such stickers will
be issued annually without charge to any veteran upon presentation of a statement from the Veterans
Administration that he is eligible as provided in this division and shall be affixed permanently to the inside
surface of the lower righthand corner of the windshield of the automobile owned by, operated by or operated
primarily for the use of such veteran.
(b)
Upon transfer of the ownership of an automobile exempted under this division to another person, the sticker
shall be destroyed, but a replacement may be issued upon presentation of a signed statement testifying to the
destruction of the original sticker.
(c)
Stickers issued under this section shall not be transferable, and any person convicted of fraudulently obtaining or
using such a sticker for the benefit of an ineligible person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that an
automobile identified by such a sticker, but operated by another person for the benefit of an eligible veteran, may
be parked in a time limitation zone for the purpose of picking up or discharging an eligible veteran, when
necessary to avoid forcing such eligible veteran to walk a longer distance.
(Code 1980, § 31-160)
Sec. 102-128. - Hazards to safety not permitted.
Nothing in this division shall be construed as permitting any person to park in front of a fire station or in any
other danger zone, or in any manner so as to create a hazard to life and property.
(Code 1980, § 31-161)
Secs. 102-129—102-150. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS RULES
Sec. 102-151. - Accident reports to police department.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to any person or total property
damage to an apparent extent of $50.00 or more shall, within 48 hours after such accident, file with the police
department, upon forms to be supplied by such department, a written report of such accident; provided, that if
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
329/543
such report is given to any authorized officer at the scene of such accident, it shall not be necessary to make any
additional written report thereof. In any case, such report shall be signed by the person making the report and
shall be retained in a file kept for that purpose by the police department. Such report shall be for the confidential
use of the police department, except that such department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an
accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident.
No such report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the
police department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has, or claims to have, made such report, or
upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specific report has or has not been made solely to prove a
compliance or failure to comply with the requirements of this section.
(Code 1980, § 31-203)
State law reference— Power of city to require accident report, A.C.A. § 27-53-205.
Sec. 102-152. - Protection from spilling loads.
(a)
Required. Any vehicle moving upon a public street, alley or thoroughfare within the city, containing, carrying or
transporting any paper, trash, rubbish or rubble susceptible to spilling, falling or dislodgement from the vehicle,
or dissemination or dispersion into the atmosphere, shall be equipped with a container and cover adequately
constructed, attached and secured to prevent the spilling, falling, dislodgement, dissemination or dispersion of
such substance or material or any part thereof.
(b)
Transportation of dirt, gravel, etc. No person shall transport dirt, sand, gravel, chat, sawdust, ready-mix concrete
or other loose substance over the streets of the city in trucks or other vehicles in such a manner as to allow the
spilling of such loose materials or permit such materials or any portion thereof to fall, drop, be tracked, or
otherwise placed, left or deposited upon any street, alley or sidewalk of the city. It shall be the duty and the
responsibility of the person driving such vehicle to see that such vehicle is loaded in such a manner that no such
loose materials can spill or be tracked upon the streets.
(c)
Equipment to prevent spillage. Any vehicle moving upon a public street, alley or thoroughfare within the
corporate limits of the city, containing, carrying or transporting any substance or material susceptible to spilling,
falling or dislodgement from the vehicle, shall be equipped with sideboards and endgates at least three inches
higher than the sides of the load. This sideboard requirement shall not apply to vehicles hauling such materials
when the load has been struck level with the sideboards and is not crowned or peaked in any portion of the load.
(d)
Violations. In prosecution for violations of this section it shall not be incumbent upon the city to prove that any
material or substance actually spilled, fell, tracked or dislodged from the vehicle or was disseminated or
disbursed therefrom.
(Code 1980, §§ 31-220—31-222)
Sec. 102-153. - Driving on closed streets.
No person shall drive a vehicle through or across any barrier or against any proper signal indicating any street or
portion thereof closed for the purpose of construction or repairs thereupon.
(Code 1980, § 31-240)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
330/543
Sec. 102-154. - Driving through funeral and other processions.
No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession
while they are in motion and when such vehicles can be identified as parts of such procession. This provision
shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers.
(Code 1980, § 31-241)
Sec. 102-155. - Riding on portions of vehicles not intended for passengers.
No person shall ride in or upon any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of
passengers, nor upon the fenders or running boards thereof. This provision shall not apply to any employee
engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within bodies of trucks in space intended for
merchandise.
(Code 1980, § 31-248)
Sec. 102-156. - Skates or toy vehicles.
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, wagon or toy vehicle shall be upon any
street except while crossing a street at a regular crosswalk, except upon portions of streets that may be
designated for the time as "play streets."
(Code 1980, § 31-249)
Sec. 102-157. - Bicycles, roller skates or toy vehicles attaching to moving vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, wagon, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall cling to or
attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon the street.
(Code 1980, § 31-250)
Sec. 102-158. - Riding or driving on sidewalks.
No person shall push, draw or back a horse, wagon, cart or other vehicle over any sidewalk, or use, ride or drive
any horse or wagon thereon unless it be in crossing the sidewalk to go into a yard or lot where no other crossing
or means of access is provided.
(Code 1980, § 31-251)
Sec. 102-159. - Driving through private property.
No person shall drive any vehicle through any driveway or other private property for the purpose of avoiding the
negotiation of an intersection or any other traffic regulation.
(Code 1980, § 31-252)
Secs. 102-160—102-180. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Sec. 102-181. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
331/543
Off-road vehicle (ORV) or all-terrain vehicle (ATV) means a motor-driven off-road recreational vehicle capable
of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh,
swampland, or other natural terrain. Such term includes, but is not limited to, a multitrack or multiwheel device
or low-pressure-tire vehicle, a motorcycle or related two-wheel or three-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine,
a motor-driven cycle, or other means of transportation deriving motor power from a source other than muscle or
wind.
Owner, as such term relates to ORV's, ATV's, motorcycles or similar vehicles, means any of the following:
(1)
A vendee or licensee of an ORV, ATV, motorcycle or similar vehicle which is the subject of an agreement for the
conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right or purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the
agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or licensee.
(2)
The person renting an ORV, ATV, motorcycle or similar vehicle, or having exclusive use of such vehicle for
more than 30 days.
(3)
The person who holds legal ownership of such vehicle.
(Code 1980, § 31-261)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 102-182. - Operation on public or private property not open for public vehicular use.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, permit to be operated or to be in actual physical control of any
ORV or ATV or motorcycle or similar vehicle upon private property or upon public property which is not held
open to the public for vehicular use. It shall be a defense to a prosecution under this section that the operator of
such vehicle had the express written consent of the owner or lessee of the private property upon which such
vehicle was being operated at the time of the commission of the offense.
(Code 1980, § 31-262)
Sec. 102-183. - Loud, noisy operation.
It shall be unlawful for an owner or lessee of private property to authorize or knowingly permit the operation of
ORV's or ATV's, motorcycles or similar vehicles upon his property where such vehicles, by loud and excessive
noise, disturb the peace, quiet and tranquility of persons within reasonable proximity to such property.
(Code 1980, § 31-263)
Sec. 102-184. - Identification of owner and/or operator.
The license number, registration number or identification number of an ORV or ATV shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the owner of the vehicle was the person operating such vehicle at the time of the offense, unless
the owner of such vehicle identifies the operator to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(Code 1980, § 31-264)
Sec. 102-185. - Enforcement of article provisions.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
332/543
(a)
The police department and code enforcement officers shall have concurrent authority to enforce the provisions
of this article.
(b)
The city council directs the police department and code enforcement officers to enforce the provisions of this
article with diligence in order to protect the peace, quiet and enjoyment of the citizens of the city.
(Code 1980, § 31-266)
Secs. 102-186—102-205. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS
Sec. 102-206. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Curbed street means a street with a raised concrete curb section that sets the level of the sidewalk area higher
than that of the grade of the street and gutter.
Developed property means property that is platted into lots and blocks and that is developed or in the process of
being developed.
Ground cover means any growth, either natural or cultivated, less than 30 inches in height, as measured from the
top of the curb on curbed streets, or from the edge of the pavement on shoulder streets. Ground cover shall be
maintained so that it never exceeds the 30-inch maximum height specified in this article.
Landscaping means ground cover, wooded growth, structures, earthfills, and other natural or manmade aspects
of property development.
Property line means the common boundary between private property and the public right-of-way.
Right-of-way means property set aside by platting or dedication for the maintenance of streets and public
utilities.
Shoulder street means a street without curb and gutter but which has a shoulder and ditch section.
Street intersection means a location at which two or more streets meet one another.
Structures means any manmade features placed on the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, planters, walls
and mailboxes.
Wooded growth means any growth, either natural or cultivated, more than 30 inches in height.
(Code 1980, § 31-90)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 102-207. - Scope.
This article shall govern the placement and maintenance of ground cover, wooded growth, structures, and other
aspects of landscaping on developed property adjacent to city rights-of-way and as otherwise specified in this
article.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
333/543
(Code 1980, § 31-91)
Sec. 102-208. - New landscaping.
New landscaping placed on public rights-of-way shall be limited to ground cover unless otherwise approved in
writing in advance by the directors of public works, traffic services, community planning, and parks and
recreation. All wooded growth on corner lots shall be placed so as to be located free and clear of the triangular
area bordered by the first 45 feet of one curbline or edge of pavement measured from the imaginary point of
intersection, the first 45 feet of the other curbline or pavement edge measured from the imaginary point of
intersection, and an imaginary line connecting the two points on the respective curblines or pavement edges.
(This area is illustrated in figure 1 of exhibit A which is on file in the office of the director of public works.)
(Code 1980, § 31-92)
Sec. 102-209. - Existing landscaping.
All wooded growth on the rights-of-way at street intersections and in areas approaching street intersections shall
be maintained free of limbs, leaves and other obstructions to visibility. To ensure proper visibility, such
obstructions shall be at least ten feet above the curb or edge of pavement in an area bounded by the curb or
pavement edge and the property line from a point 100 feet from the curb or pavement edge of the intersecting
street. (This area is illustrated by figure 2 of exhibit A which is on file in the office of the director of public
works.)
(Code 1980, § 31-93)
Sec. 102-210. - Work performed by the city.
It shall be the responsibility of the city to maintain all landscaping in the medians and on rights-of-way not
adjacent to developed property. Furthermore, the city's current and longstanding responsibility and authority
over the public rights-of-way being recognized herein, the city may, as deemed necessary or appropriate,
perform maintenance on landscaping within the public rights-of-way without formal notice as otherwise required
by section 102-211. Waiver of formal notice may be for such cases as where owner maintenance is deemed a
hardship or the hazard to the public is severe enough to require immediate correction or as otherwise deemed
necessary by the director of traffic service.
(Code 1980, § 31-94)
Sec. 102-211. - Notice to property owners.
It shall be the responsibility of owners of property adjacent to public rights-of-way to place new landscaping and
maintain existing landscaping in the manner set forth in sections 102-208 and 102-209. When the director of
traffic services determines that any ground cover or wide growth constitutes an obstruction to the safety and/or
orderly flow of traffic due to noncompliance with the provisions of this article, the director of traffic services
may notify the property owner of the noncompliance and allow 15 calendar days for correction of the violation.
The notice shall state that if this article is not complied with within the 15 days, the city will effect the necessary
correction and that the city's cost in so effecting the correction will be charged to the property owner with a six
percent penalty added thereto. Such charge, if uncollected, shall constitute a lien on such property owner's
property.
(Code 1980, § 31-95)
Sec. 102-212. - Appeals.
Any property owner who shall desire to seek relief from the provisions of this article may appear before the city
council at any regularly scheduled meeting (during the 30 days allowed to effect compliance) to be heard on the
matter. The city council shall hear the case as presented by the director of traffic control and allow the aggrieved
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
334/543
property owner an opportunity to state his side of the case. A waiver of the provisions of this article will be
granted only in cases where the safety of the public is not jeopardized.
(Code 1980, § 31-96)
Chapter 106 - UTILITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 90.
State Law reference— General authority relative to utilities, A.C.A. § 15-54-701 et seq., 15-200-106.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 106-1. - Interference with utility service and equipment.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1)
Wilfully set on fire any gas escaping from broken or leaking mains, service pipes, meters, valves or other
equipment used to convey natural gas;
(2)
Tap, break, damage, interfere with, molest, install any device on, or tamper with any gas pipes, mains, lines,
meters, regulators, or other equipment, appliances, appurtenances, attachments or connections to, or seals or
locks on, any of same, which are owned by any utility company serving this city, or to interfere with the
operation of such utility's gas system;
(3)
Steal gas from any pipe or fixture which conveys natural gas, whether or not such pipe or fixture is owned by the
utility supplying or distributing such gas, or to install or cause to be installed any piping, tube, hose or other
device whatsoever for the purpose of taking or stealing gas or bypassing or deflecting the flow of gas around a
meter;
(4)
Turn on valves, break seals on meter cocks, or do any other act the purpose of which is to cause or attempt to
cause a resumption of the flow of gas which has been stopped or shut off by the utility supplying such gas; or
(5)
Interfere with or hinder any agent or employee of any utility company in the performance of his duly assigned
duties in checking, servicing, installing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, turning on or off, or in any manner
dealing with such pipes, meters or other equipment.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
335/543
The existence of any connection or bypass pipe or other device on or about the pipes, valves, meters or other
equipment owned or used by a utility in furnishing or measuring gas, or evidence of damage to meters, valves,
seals, or other appurtenances, which diverts or could result in the diversion of gas or which prevents or interferes
with proper use of such equipment for measuring or controlling the flow of gas, shall constitute prima facie
evidence of knowledge on the part of the person having custody or control of the premises or place where such
device or damage is located, of the existence thereof and of the effect thereof, and shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the intention of such person to defraud, take and steal gas from the main, pipes, valves, meters or
other equipment without knowledge, authority or consent of the utility company owning or using same, and shall
bring such person prima facie within the provisions of this section.
(Code 1980, § 32-1)
State law reference— Tampering with utilities, A.C.A. § 16-121-101 et seq.
Sec. 106-2. - Wastewater utility treatment works rates.
(a)
(1)
That the city hereby establishes rates to be charged for services furnished by the system, which the city council
finds and declares to be fair, reasonable and necessary to be charged to all users who contribute wastewater to
the system. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the purpose of operating and maintaining
the system, including replacement ("OM & R"). (Replacement is defined as expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances during the useful life of the system necessary to maintain the
capacity and performance for which they were designed and constructed.)
(2)
All users of the System shall be charged the following monthly rates per 100 CF or portions thereof of metered
water consuruption with the following minimum charge for 400 CF. All sewer users shall be classified by the
city council as residential, commercial, or industrial:
Inside City Limits Outside City Limits
Per 100 CF 400 CF min. Per 100 CF 400 CF min.
$1.69 $ 6.67 $ 2.53 $ 10.12
The above rates include a charge of $0.53 per 100 CF or a portion thereof of metered water consumption for
debt service with a $2.12 minimum charge for 400 CF for debt service. The remainder of the rates are allocated
to OM & R. User charge methodology for OM & R is as follows:
Total annual OM&R (cost in $/100 CF) = Total annual OM &amp / R;Number of 100 CF sold annually
(3)
In the case of significant industrial customers (defined as any nonresidential customer which normally
discharges wastewater to the system in quantities of 25,000 gallons per day or greater or whose wastewater
contains, or has the potential to contain, toxic pollutants, restricted pollutants, or noncompatible pollutants),
when the wastewater characteristics exceed certain parameters, the following penalties shall apply (which
penalties may be in addition to any other penalties permitted by law):
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
336/543
Biochemical oxygen demand ("BOD"), per pound of BODs discharged for waste strength concentrations greater
than 250 mg/1, i.e. (BODS 250) × (0.00624) × (CCF) .....$0.86
Total suspended solids ("TSS"), per pound of TSS discharged for waste strength concentrations greater than 250
mg/l, i.e. (TSS 250) × (0.00624) × (CCF) .....0.12
pH, per CCF for all discharges for which the pH is greater than 11 or less than 5, i.e. (CCF) × ($1.23) .....1.23
Fats, oils, and greases ("FOG"), per pound of fats, oils and greases for wastewater discharges exceeding 100
mg/l of fats, oils and greases, i.e. (FOG 100) × (0.00624) × (CCF) .....0.31
Other limited parameters. The following parameters are limited in concentration by the sewer committee through
regulation:
Cadmium, Chromium, Copper, Cyanide, Lead, Mercury, Nickel, Silver, Zinc, Arsenic, Selenium, Boron,
Molybdenum.
A charge of $0.12 per CCF per parameter shall be made for all wastewater exceeding the local discharge limits
set by the sewer committee as authorized by ordinance, i.e. (CCF) × (0.12).
The above charges shall be based on sample test results by the utility. A spilt of any sample used for the purpose
of establishing charges shall be made available to the user upon prior written request.
The payment of the above charges shall not be considered justification for discharges in excess of local
discharge limits set by the sewer committee or compensation for any damages caused by said excessive
discharge.
(4)
Users shall be deemed to be inside city limit users for the purposes of the rates to be charged (i) when they are
physically located within the city limits of North Little Rock, or (ii) when they are physically located within the
then existing territorial boundaries of an improvement district that received services from the system on
November 13, 1995. Any User not deemed to be an inside city limit user shall be deemed to be an outside user.
(5)
The following rate schedule shall be applied to the acceptance of petroleum contaminated waters (defined as any
water approved by the utility, pursuant to guidelines established by the sewer committee, for disposal in the
system that is part of the remediation of a gasoline or diesel contaminated site and/or is a temporary short term
discharge(s) into the system:
Quantity (Gallons) Rate ($/Gal.)
For the first 0—5,000 $0.25
For the next 5,001—25,000 0.06
For the next 25,001 or above 0.006
(6)
In the case of customers obtaining water exclusively from the waterworks system covering the city ("waterworks
system"), the computation shall be based upon the water consumption records of the waterworks system.
(7)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
337/543
In the case of customers obtaining water from sources other than the waterworks system there shall be
determined the amount of water obtained by such customers from other sources and the amount so determined
shall be used (together with the amount reflected by the waterworks system records if the customer also obtains
water from the waterworks system) in making the computation.
(8)
For residential customers (defined as single family residences or multimetered, multi-family residences or
apartments all of which utilize meters less than one inch) only, the sewer charge each month will be based on the
average monthly consumption for the months of October, November, December, January, February and March
(winter month period). In the case of residential users which were not on a meter during the previous winter
month period, the rates shall be computed on actual water usage until such time as an average monthly winter
usage can be calculated. In the case of other users not on a metered basis, the city shall establish water
consumption based on a comparison of the nonmetered users with a metered user of a similar class.
(9)
None of the facilities or services afforded by the system shall be furnished without a charge being made
therefore.
(10)
The costs of operation and maintenance for all flows not directly attributable to users (such as
infiltration/inflow) shall be distributed among users on the same basis as operation and maintenance charges.
(b)
In the event any special fee or charge is assessed against the Utility by any entity or governmental agency or
department which fee is assessed on a per customer or per meter basis, then the sewer committee, based upon a
finding that the assessment of such fee may affect the efficient and effective operation of the system in
compliance with all applicable laws and regulations that may be applicable to the utility from time to time, may
pass the assessment of such fee to the customer as a line item charge stated separately on the customer's monthly
bill.
(c)
Based upon a finding determining the reasonable costs of evaluating and taking action with respect to permits,
license applications and connections of facilities to the system; of implementing, inspecting and enforcing the
terms and conditions of permits, licenses and variances thereof; and of any depreciation or continuing operations
and maintenance expenses incurred or to be incurred by the utility in operating any facilities, the sewer
committee shall have the power to establish reasonable fees for connection of facilities to the system and for the
initial issuance, annual review and modification of discharge permits or other license or permits reasonably
required by the sewer committee to properly operate the system efficiently and effectively in compliance with all
laws and regulations that may be applicable to the utility from time to time. The sewer committee may require
that any fee assessed pursuant to this section shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit or license or
connection to the system.
(d)
(1)
The city will continuously monitor the revenues of the system, including, specifically, the adequacy of its rates
and delinquent billings, and will take appropriate steps to remedy any delinquent billings or inadequacy of rates.
The city will make a full review annually of the rates and charges of the system.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
338/543
The city shall at all times fix, charge and collect rates and charges for services furnished by the system,
including increasing rates and charges as necessary, which shall provide revenues sufficient to at least: (1) pay
the city's annual costs of OM & R; (2) pay annual debt service; and (3) provide the necessary bond coverage.
(e)
Vacant, unoccupied but metered property, whether or not using the system, shall be subject to a service charge
equal to the minimum monthly charge for the respective class of properties. Vacant, unoccupied and unmetered
property not actually using the system shall not be subject to a charge, but the burden of demonstrating vacancy,
nonuse and lack of meter to the utility, shall rest upon the owner of the property.
(f)
(1)
All bills for sewer services shall be rendered monthly. In the event payment in full is not made on or before the
tenth day following the original date of billing, a ten percent penalty shall be added to the bill. If any sewer
charge is not paid within 30 days after the same is due, the customer will be notified in writing by the utility
which notice shall state where, during which hours of the day, and before whom disputed bills appropriately may
be considered. If the user waives the opportunity to be heard, suit may be brought to collect the amount due,
together with the expenses of collection and a reasonable attorney's fee, and/or water and/or wastewater services
may be discontinued until such bill is paid.
(2)
Any customer who feels that his charge is unjust and inequitable may make written application to the utility
requesting a review of his charge. Said written request shall, when necessary, show the actual or estimated
average flow and/or strength of his wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based,
including how the measurements or estimates were made. Review of the request shall be made by the utility and
if substantiated, the charges for that customer shall be recomputed based on the revised flow and/or strength data
and the new charges shall be applicable to the next billing cycle/period.
(g)
A financial management system shall be established and maintained by the city to document compliance with
federal regulations pertaining to the revolving loan. The system will account for all revenues generated and
expenditures for OM & R.
The city will review the user charges at least annually and revise the rates as necessary to ensure that adequate
revenues are generated to pay the costs of operation and maintenance including replacement and that the system
continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement costs
among users and user classes.
(h)
That each user shall be notified at least annually, in conjunction with the regular bill, of the sewer use rate and
the portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment. Costs shall be broken down to
show the OM & R costs attributed to that user.
(i)
That by the tenth of each calendar month, an amount of $41,666.67 will be transferred to the Rehabilitation
Fund, but only in the event all transfers have first been made into the funds for OM & R and for debt service.
(j)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
339/543
The provisions of this section are separable, and is a section, provision, or phrase shall be declared invalid, such
declaration shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this section.
(k)
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to affect the charges for services for improvement districts or other
areas that are subject to a court order.
(Ord. No. 7239, §§ 1—12, 8-23-99)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7239, §§ 1—12, adopted Aug. 23, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new
§ 106-2 was at the editor's discretion.
Secs. 106-3—106-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - BILLING AND ACCOUNTING
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 106-26. - Utilities accounting department.
There is hereby created the utilities accounting department. The personnel classification system of this
department shall be that of Ordinance No. 4751, as amended, and all employees of this department shall be
employees of the city, with all rights, benefits and privileges thereunto appertaining.
(Code 1980, § 32-21)
Cross reference— Departments and similar agencies, § 2-326 et seq.
Sec. 106-27. - Separate accounting.
The personnel of the utilities accounting department shall separately account for customers' payment of electric,
sanitation, water and sewer portions of individual billings.
(Code 1980, § 32-71)
Sec. 106-28. - Disconnection schedule.
(a)
Customers who fail for a period of one billing cycle from billing date to pay to the city the charges assessed for
electric energy shall be given a five-day disconnect notice which shall appear on the customer's next billing to
which gross amounts established by city ordinance shall be applicable.
(b)
Simultaneously with the disconnect notice required in the subsection (a), a notice shall likewise be given for
water service if the city has not received payment in full for water and sewer services.
(c)
Customers who, for any reason, tender payment of water and sewer charges during a billing cycle shall be
subject to having only electric services disconnected.
(d)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
340/543
If the utilities accounting department head determines that a customer has failed and refused to pay sanitation
fees only, such failure shall be deemed a failure to pay for electric services, and all rules pertaining to electric
disconnects shall be applicable.
(Code 1980, § 32-72)
Sec. 106-29. - Reconnection charges; penalties.
(a)
Reconnection. The charges for reconnection of the indicated services shall be as shown below:
(1)
Water, $50.00;
(2)
Electricity, $50.00.
(b)
Penalties.
(1)
Electrical current:
a.
The fine for cutting, removing or in any manner making ineffective any seal on an electric meter shall be not less
than $50.00 nor more than $100.00.
b.
The fine for illegal restoration of service after service has been terminated for nonpayment of a utility bill shall
be not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00.
c.
The fine for illegally obtaining electricity without proper deposit or proper authorization from the utilities
accounting department or the electric department shall be not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00.
d.
The fine for obtaining electricity by use of jumper wires or any other means which bypass or eliminate the meter
device, either partially or completely, shall be not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00.
e.
The fine for theft of a meter shall be $250.00.
f.
The fine for illegally obtaining electricity by use of an unauthorized meter shall be not less than $250.00 nor
more than $500.00. An unauthorized meter shall be defined as one not issued by the city electric department or
not furnished by the city electric department for use at the location where it was discovered.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
341/543
g.
The fine for tampering with a metering device or changing the normal installed position of a meter device in any
fashion which causes the normal, accurate recording of utility service received to be falsified shall be not less
than $250.00 not more than $500.00.
h.
For any person in possession of the premises as owner, occupant or tenant who is found to have an electric meter
tampered with in violation of this section or receiving electricity as a result of some method of diversion
described in this subsection (b)(1), such receipt of electricity shall be deemed prima facie evidence of an intent
to defraud or deprive the electric department from recovering proper charges or payment for such electrical
power.
(2)
Water:
a.
The fine for cutting, removing or in any manner making ineffective any meter shall be not less than $50.00 nor
more than $100.00.
b.
The fine for illegal restoration of service after service has been terminated for nonpayment of a utility bill shall
be not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00.
c.
The fine for illegally obtaining water without proper deposit or proper authorization from the water department
shall be not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00.
d.
The fine for obtaining water by use of any means which may bypass or eliminate the meter device, either
partially or completely, shall be not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00.
e.
The fine for theft of a meter shall be $250.00.
f.
The fine for malicious damage or theft of any part of a metering device, either partially or completely, shall be
not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00.
g.
The fine for tampering with a metering device or changing the normal, accurate recording of utility service
received to be falsified shall be not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00.
(c)
Reconnection for nonpayment. The charges to reconnect electric services following a disconnect for nonpayment
shall be as follows:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
342/543
(1)
During normal working hours, a reconnect fee of $25.00 will be charged. Reconnection of services may be made
the same day when the customer or other authorized party requests reconnection between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30
p.m. and makes payment of the reconnect fee and balance due at the city services building by 4:30 p.m. of that
day.
(2)
During other hours, and in cases of emergency, a reconnect fee of $50.00 will be charged when the customer or
other authorized party requests reconnection and makes payment of the reconnect fee and balance due at the city
services building during normal working hours.
(d)
Late fee. A late fee in the amount of five percent of the current month's bill will be assessed if payment is not
received within 24 hours of the due date reflected on the customer's invoice.
(Code 1980, § 32-73; Ord. No. 7501, §§ 1, 2, 12-9-02)
Sec. 106-30. - Additional charges.
The city hereby adopts Ordinance No. 4619 pertaining to electric department service charges, and the ordinances
and rules and regulations of the city water department not in conflict with this chapter, particularly water deposit
amounts pertaining to commercial customers.
(Code 1980, § 32-76)
Secs. 106-31—106-40. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - FUNDS
Sec. 106-41. - Revenue funds.
The provisions of Ordinance No. 3096 establishing a sewer revenue fund; Ordinance No. 3623 establishing a
sewer and electric revenue fund; Ordinance No. 2926 establishing an electric revenue fund; Ordinance No. 3961
establishing a sanitation revenue fund; and Ordinance No. 2927 establishing a water revenue fund to the contrary
notwithstanding, all revenues derived from the electric department, sanitation department, sewer department,
and the water department (collectively referred to in this division as the "utilities system") shall be paid into a
special fund, which is hereby created and designated as the North Little Rock Utilities System Revenue Fund.
Such revenues from the utilities system so deposited shall be accounted for and paid in the manner set forth in
this division. The city council has found and determined that joint accounting for and billing for revenues
derived from the utilities system will result in substantial economies of scale, and removal of duplicative
functions of each utility constituting the system, all of which will redound to the benefit of ratepayers and
taxpayers of the city; provided that nothing in this division shall be construed to be a waiver, amendment,
abandonment, alteration, repledge, cross-pledge, or additional pledging of those specific pledges of waterworks
revenues, electric revenues, sewer revenues, sewer and electric revenues or sanitation revenues made in prior
Ordinance Nos. 3096, 3623, 2926, 2927 and 3961, or surplus system revenues in Ordinance No. 3962, all as
amended. The city council has further found and determined that the interrelated activities of the utilities
comprising the utilities system are interrelated municipal activities as was previously found in Ordinance Nos.
3692 and 3623, and such interrelation allows the handling of revenues in the manner set forth in this division.
(Code 1980, § 32-51)
Sec. 106-42. - Custodians and handling of funds.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
343/543
The treasurer and the mayor shall be custodian of the revenues derived from the operation of the utilities system
and shall be required to give bond only as may be provided by other city ordinance. All moneys received by the
treasurer and mayor from the operation of the utilities system shall be deposited by them in such depositories as
shall from time to time be designated by the utilities accounting department, provided that all such depositories
shall hold membership in the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; and all deposits in any depository in
excess of the amount insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be secured by bonds or other
direct or fully guaranteed obligations of the United States of America.
(Code 1980, § 32-52)
Sec. 106-43. - Insufficient funds account.
(a)
There shall be paid from the utilities system revenue fund in December 1976, the sum of $2,000.00 and in
January 1977, the sum of $1,500.00 into a special fund which is hereby created and designated as the North
Little Rock Utilities System Insufficient Funds Account, in order to provide a reserve account resulting from the
negotiation to the utilities accounting department of any checks, drafts or remittances subsequently dishonored
for any reason.
(b)
The custodian of the fund created by this section shall be the utilities accounting department manager, who shall
be the primary signatory on all checks drawn from the insufficient funds account; provided, there may be
additional authorized signatories for this account designated by the utilities accounting department manager with
the approval of the utilities accounting department.
(Code 1980, § 32-53)
Sec. 106-44. - Findings of council.
The city council has found and determined that the charges assessed as stated in this division are necessary and
proper expenses for billing customers of the utilities system and are less than the aggregate costs of billing for
each component of the utilities system when serviced individually. Further, the city council has found and
determined that the methodology of billing and paying for the costs thereof will not affect the ability of the city
to make payments to reserves established by prior city ordinance for bonded indebtedness secured by utility or
surplus utility revenues.
(Code 1980, § 32-54)
Sec. 106-45. - Payments from utilities system revenue fund to other funds.
(a)
After the weekly deposit into the utilities operation and maintenance fund as stated in this division, there shall be
paid from the utilities system revenue fund by the city treasurer and mayor all remaining funds on deposit pro
rata according to billings to the respective revenue funds established by previous city ordinance, specifically the
waterworks revenue fund, the sewer and electric revenue fund, the electric revenue fund, and the sanitation
revenue fund.
(b)
Payments from the utilities system revenue fund shall be made by check or voucher, signed by the city treasurer
and the mayor, and drawn on the depository with which the moneys in such fund shall have been deposited, and
each such check or voucher shall briefly specify the purpose of the expenditure.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
344/543
(c)
Payments from the utilities system operation and maintenance fund shall be by check or voucher signed by the
utilities accounting department manager.
(d)
All checks or vouchers drawn on the utilities system revenue fund shall briefly state the nature or purpose of the
expenditure.
(Code 1980, § 32-55)
Sec. 106-46. - Utilities system deposit fund.
(a)
There is hereby transferred from the electric department and the water department, the electric department
deposit fund and the water department deposit fund. All funds so transferred shall be deposited by the custodian
thereof into a special fund which is hereby created and designated as the North Little Rock Utilities System
Deposit Fund.
(b)
The custodian of the utilities system deposit fund shall be the utilities accounting department manager; payments
from the deposit fund shall be by check or voucher signed by the department manager.
(c)
The city shall from time to time cause the funds on deposit in the utilities system deposit fund, less an amount
reasonably anticipated to be necessary for disbursement, to be invested and reinvested in direct obligations, the
principal of which and the interest of which would be unconditionally guaranteed by the United States of
America or in bank certificates or time deposits, or any other security which is a lawful investment of municipal
funds under the laws of the state.
(d)
Moneys held for credit of the utilities system deposit fund shall be held in a depository or depositories
designated, provided that all such depositories shall hold membership in the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, and all deposits in any depository in excess of the amount insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation shall be secured by bonds or other direct obligations of the United States of America.
(e)
The utilities accounting department manager shall make recommendations regarding the investment of such
funds, and he shall solicit information from at least five banks or savings and loan institutions before making any
recommendations of this nature, and shall recommend that bank or savings and loan institution at which the
funds shall draw the highest and most satisfactory rate of interest.
(Code 1980, § 32-56)
Secs. 106-47—106-55. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - DEPOSITS
Sec. 106-56. - Meter deposits.
The meter deposits for the indicated services shall be as shown below:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
345/543
(1)
Water—Residential:
a.
Owner .....$ 10.00
b.
Nonowner .....20.00
(2)
Electric:
a.
Residential:
1.
New applicant. No deposit, provided that the new applicant can deliver an approved letter of credit from the
applicant's previous electric utility in a form approved by the electronic department.
2.
With adverse credit history or no appropriate letter of credit .....100.00
3.
Persons residing in North Little Rock Housing Authority property .....50.00
b.
Multiple dwelling:
Two-unit complex .....55.00
Three-unit complex .....75.00
Four-unit complex .....95.00
Five-unit complex .....115.00
Six-unit complex .....135.00
Seven or more units: See nonresidential deposits.
c.
Nonresidential customer: A cash deposit not to exceed two estimated average bills is to be obtained prior to
furnishing service to a commercial or industrial customer. As an alternative to a cash deposit, if the amount
required exceeds $200.00, the customer may furnish a surety bond, or a letter of guarantee from an acceptable
principal or parent company, or an irrevocable letter of credit from a local bank.
d.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
346/543
The electric department general manager, or his designate, is authorized to set deposit rates, and, specifically, to
accept and set deposit rates for transferees from the AP&L system or other providers. Also, the general manager
or his designate shall review all nonresidential deposits semiannually to determine if the amount of deposit or
surety bond on file is adequate in view of the then current credit experience with the customer.
(Code 1980, § 32-74; Ord. No. 6829, § 1, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 6852, § 1, 10-24-94)
Sec. 106-57. - Additional deposits.
(a)
For existing customers, and as a condition for continuation of electric service, a deposit may be required or the
deposit amount increased if any of the following conditions occurred during the last 12 months:
(1)
Service has been discontinued for failure to pay a past due billing;
(2)
Two insufficient fund checks have been returned from the bank to the electric department or utilities accounting
department;
(3)
The customer has failed to pay his electric bill by the due date six times within the last 12 months;
(4)
The customer has misrepresented himself for the purpose of obtaining service; or
(5)
The customer has engaged in unauthorized or fraudulent use, such as tampering with meter or other NLRED
property, in an attempt to deprive NLRED of electric service revenue. If fraudulent use exists, NLRED shall
request an additional deposit, subject to refund, as provided in this division, plus a nonrefundable payment for
damage, plus proof of payment of all fees or fines assessed by the code enforcement officer.
(b)
When any commercial customer is disconnected for nonpayment and the amount of cash deposit or surety bond
which was originally secured is determined to be inadequate, then a total deposit amount or surety bond
equivalent to two estimated maximum bills may be required, at the discretion of the head of the electric
department or his designate. The methodology for computing any additional deposit shall be to subtract from the
sum determined by twice the highest bill for any one billing period the deposit amount on file and rounding up
to the nearest multiple of $5.00. For example:
Twice the highest month's bill ..... $198.16
Current deposit ..... 50.00
$148.16
Additional required deposit ..... 150.00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
347/543
(c)
When any residential customer is disconnected for nonpayment and the amount of cash deposit which was
originally secured is inadequate, then a total deposit amount, equivalent to two estimated maximum bills may be
required. The method for computing the additional deposit shall be to subtract from the sum determined by twice
the highest bill for any one billing period the deposit amount on file and rounding up to the nearest multiple of
$5.00. See example in subsection (b) of this section.
(Code 1980, § 32-75; Ord. No. 6829, § 1, 8-22-94)
Sec. 106-58. - Basis for deposits not to be discriminatory.
A deposit will not be required from a customer based on income, geographical location of service, family
relationship, race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, age, public assistance status, or other arbitrary
criteria.
(Code 1980, § 32-77)
Sec. 106-59. - Payment of interest on commercial and industrial security deposits.
(a)
The city council hereby authorizes the payment of interest on all cash security deposits made by customers
served under rate classifications other than the residential rate (the payment of interest on residential deposits
being authorized under other legislation), with interest calculated on such deposits at the rate of six percent per
annum simple interest calculated from January 1, 1987, or each anniversary thereof.
(b)
The city council hereby authorizes an annual payment of interest authorized by this section in the form of a
credit on the customer's bill each January, unless the customer discontinues service, at which time he shall be
refunded his deposit along with accrued interest taking into consideration any unpaid amount due the city.
(Code 1980, § 32-78)
Sec. 106-60. - Refund of deposit.
Deposits will not be refunded until service is terminated and the final billing is paid in full. At the time of
termination, the customer may request that his deposit be applied to the final billing.
(Code 1980, § 32-79)
Sec. 106-61. - Failure to post deposit.
Failure to post the required deposit (or additional deposit) for service shall be a good and sufficient reason for
refusing electric service to a new applicant or to discontinue electric service to an existing customer.
(Code 1980, § 32-80)
Secs. 106-62—106-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
348/543
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 18-96 et seq.
Sec. 106-81. - Service charge on unclaimed electrical deposits.
Any and all unclaimed electric deposits after the expiration of one year from the date of the last electrical service
rendered on behalf of such deposit shall be charged a monthly service charge of $1.00. The service charge
amount shall be placed in the city's general fund.
(Code 1980, § 32-101)
Sec. 106-82. - Illegal restoration or obtaining of electrical current.
(a)
The following practices or acts are hereby declared to be unlawful and are prohibited by the city council:
(1)
The cutting, removing or in any manner making ineffective any seal or locking band or lock on an electrical
meter.
(2)
Restoration of service by any means after service has been terminated for nonpayment or obtaining electricity
without making the proper deposit with the electric department or receiving proper authorization from the
utilities accounting department or the electric department.
(3)
Obtaining electricity by use of jumper wires, or by any other means which bypass a metering device either
partially or completely.
(4)
Damaging or tampering in any manner with any part of an electrical metering device belonging to the city.
(5)
Changing or altering the normal installed position of a metering device in any fashion which causes the normal
accurate recording of utility service received to be falsified.
(6)
Obtaining electricity by use of a metering device which is not authorized and installed by the electric
department.
(7)
The reception of electrical power without proper authorization from the electric department or the utilities
accounting department.
(b)
Any person found guilty of violating any part of this section may be required to make restitution to the electric
department for the cost of electrical services obtained in violation of this section, for the costs incurred by the
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
349/543
electric department in calculating this amount, and for any damage caused by the violator to property of the
electric department or the city.
(c)
Any person in possession of any premises as owner, occupant or tenant who is found to have an electric meter
which has been tampered with or altered in violation of this section, or found to be receiving electricity as a
result of some method of diversion described in this section, shall be presumed to have knowingly violated the
terms of this section. Such receipt of electricity shall be deemed prima facie evidence of an intent to defraud or
deprive the electric department of recovering the proper charges or payment for such electric service.
(Code 1980, § 32-102)
Sec. 106-83. - Electrical rates.
(a)
That upon adoption, the electrical rates for customers of the North Little Rock Electric Department shall be the
same as the rates for customers of Entergy as of January 1, 1997, taking into account all tariffs and riders
approved by the public service commission as of January 1, 1997.
(b)
That the annual discount for residential customers shall remain at ten percent annually and for small business
customers at five percent annually.
(c)
That a superdiscount of an additional ten percent for residential customers and an additional five percent for
small business customers shall be in full force and effect for the billing months of June, July, August and
September. Therefore, the total discount for residential customers during June, July, August and September will
be 20 percent and for small business customers, ten percent.
(Ord. No. 7024, §§ 1—3, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 7187, § 1, 12-14-98)
Secs. 106-84—106-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - WATER
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
Cross reference— Plumbing and gas codes, § 18-366 et seq.
State Law reference— Waterworks generally, A.C.A. § 14-234-101 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 106-121. - Water committee.
There is established a water committee.
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies, § 2-486 et seq.
State law reference— Waterworks commissions, A.C.A. § 14-234-301 et seq.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
350/543
Sec. 106-122. - Water department rate schedule.
The following schedule of rates is hereby established for the North Little Rock Water Department:
(1)
Effective date. This rate schedule shall become effective for water billed on or after January 1, 2000.
(2)
Meter measurement. Except for public fire services, all water used shall be measured through water meters. The
size of each service to the customer shall be determined by the water department commensurate with its estimate
of the amount of water to be used for the premise. One cubic foot of water is equal to 7.48 gallons weighing 62.5
pounds avoirdupois.
(3)
Monthly minimum charge. The monthly minimum charges which includes payment for the first 200 cubic feet of
water used, are as follows:
Effective January 1, 2000 to December 31, 2000:
Meter
size
Inside
city
Outside
city
5/8" 4.77 6.39
¾" 6.15 8.24
1" 8.75 11.72
1½" 14.79 19.81
2" 23.98 32.14
3" 44.36 59.44
4" 72.15 96.68
6" 142.70 191.22
8" 241.36 323.42
10" 347.50 465.65
12" 632.88 848.06
Effective January 1, 2001, to December 31, 2001:
Meter
size
Inside
city
Outside
city
5/8" 5.06 5.87
¾" 6.52 7.56
1" 9.27 10.76
1½" 15.67 18.19
2" 25.42 29.50
3" 47.02 54.56
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
351/543
4" 76.48 88.74
6" 151.26 175.52
8" 261.47 303.31
10" 376.46 436.69
12" 685.63 795.33
Effective January 1, 2002:
Meter
size
All
customers
5/8" 5.34
¾" 6.89
1" 9.79
1½" 16.56
2" 26.86
3" 49.68
4" 80.80
6" 159.83
8" 282.39
10" 406.58
12" 740.48
(4)
Additional monthly charges. In addition to the monthly minimum charge, the following rates shall apply to the
amount of water used in excess of 200 cubic feet:
Effective January 1, 2000 to December 31, 2000:
Inside city
charges per
100 CF
Outside city
charges per
100 CF
The next 3,100 cf or less 1.48 1.99
The next 30,000 cf or any part
thereof
1.35 1.81
The next 90,000 cf or any part
thereof
0.99 1.33
All over 123,300 cf 0.72 0.96
Effective January 1, 2001 to December 31, 2001:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
352/543
Inside city
charges per
100 CF
Outside city
charges per
100 CF
The next 3,100 cf or less 1.57 1.83
The next 30,000 cf or any part
thereof
1.43 1.66
The next 90,000 cf or any part
thereof
1.05 1.22
All over 123,300 cf 0.76 0.88
Effective January 1, 2002:
Per 100 CF
The next 3,100 cf or less 1.66
The next 30,000 cf or any part thereof 1.51
The next 90,000 cf or any part thereof 1.11
All over 123,300 cf 0.80
All water used by the City of North Little Rock shall be paid for at the rate of 0.515 cents per 100 cubic feet of
water actually used and there shall be no monthly minimum charge for said usage.
(5)
Nonresident consumers. The term "outside city" used in the foregoing rates refers to any consumer receiving
service outside the municipal boundaries, but does not refer to customers who are municipal or governmental
agencies, including but not limited to improvement districts and rural water agencies, who purchase water for
resale.
Outside city customers who are municipal or governmental agencies purchasing water for resale shall be charged
contractual rates as recommended from time to time by the North Little Rock Water Commission and adopted by
the city council. The rates to be charged customers who are municipal or governmental agencies purchasing
water for resale, commencing January 1, 2000, shall be as follows:
Municipal or governmental agencies purchasing water for resale:
1.
Meter minimum. The monthly meter minimum charged such customers shall be the minimum set forth herein for
outside city customers for the size meter utilities by the municipal or governmental agency purchasing water for
resale.
2.
Rate. In addition to the monthly minimum charge, the following rates shall apply to the amount of water used in
excess of 200 cubic feet, the municipal or governmental agency purchasing water for resale shall pay the sum of
$0.87 per hundred cubic feet for water purchased, commencing January 1, 2000.
3.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
353/543
Increase in rates. Any increase in rates by the Little Rock Municipal Waterworks shall be automatically passed
on to such customers by increasing the monthly minimum charge and the additional monthly charge herein set
forth. The rates will be adjusted by the percentage necessary to provide the additional revenue requirements of
the water department to meet any increase in rates from its supplier.
4.
Contracts. The commissioners of the North Little Rock Water Department are hereby authorized and directed to
enter into appropriate contracts with its municipal and governmental agency customers who purchase water for
resale for the sale and purchase of water at the rates set forth herein.
(6)
Private fire service. Fire service connections for private premises shall pay the following annual fire service
charges:
Effective January 1, 2000, through December 31, 2000:
Inside city
charges
Outside city
charges
Automatic sprinkler system—
Minimum charge
1,000 heads or less 71.55 95.88
Additional heads, per each unit 0.07 0.09
Fire Hydrants, per each unit 61.70 82.68
Standpipe openings
1¼" diameter (or smaller), per
each unit
14.00 18.76
1½" diameter, per each unit 21.78 29.19
2" diameter, per each unit 35.78 47.95
2½" diameter, per each unit 71.55 95.88
Fire connection, minimum charge 71.55 95.88
Effective January 1, 2001, through December 31, 2001:
Inside city
charges
Outside city
charges
Automatic sprinkler system—
Minimum charge
1,000 heads or less 74.66 86.61
Additional heads, per each unit 0.08 0.09
Fire hydrants, per each unit 64.38 74.68
Standpipe openings
1¼" diameter (or smaller), per
each unit
14.61 16.95
1½" diameter, per each unit 22.72 26.36
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
354/543
2" diameter, per each unit 37.33 43.30
2½" diameter, per each unit 74.66 86.61
Fire connection, minimum charge 74.66 86.61
Effective January 1, 2002:
Inside city
charges
Automatic sprinkler system—Minimum charge
1,000 heads or less 77.63
Additional heads, per each unit 0.08
Fire hydrants, per each unit 66.94
Standpipe openings
1¼" diameter (or smaller), per each unit 15.19
1½" diameter, per each unit 23.63
2" diameter, per each unit 38.18
2½" diameter, per each unit 77.63
Fire connection, minimum charge 77.63
(7)
New service connection. The charges applicable for all new service connection shall be established from time to
time by the North Little Rock Water Commission.
(8)
Billing and payment. Bills for water consumption, with the exception of private fire service connections referred
to above, shall be rendered and paid monthly. If water bills are not paid on or before the tenth business day
following the original date of billing a ten percent penalty shall be added to the bill. If a bill for service is not
paid within 20 days after the billing date, water service for the affected premises may be discontinued. In such
an event the water department may levy a delinquent service charge to be set from time to time by the water
commissioners. Payments for private fire service shall be due in semi-annual installments in advance on the first
day of January and July of each year. At the request of the private service customer the annual payments for
private fire service protection can be divided equally among the 12 months and added to their normal monthly
water bill.
(Ord. No. 7257, § 1, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 7268, § 1, 1-24-00)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 7257, § 1, adopted Nov. 22, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion herein as a new
§ 106-122 was at the editor's discretion.
Secs. 106-123—106-130. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTIONS BETWEEN PRIVATE AND PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIES
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
355/543
Sec. 106-131. - Permit.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or permit to be made, or to maintain, any cross connection between a
privately owned water supply system and a public water supply system serving the city without having first
obtained a written permit from the city council.
(b)
Before approval shall be given to maintain any cross connection, the person desiring to maintain or to make or
have such cross connection made shall file with the city clerk an application in writing therefor, accompanied by
the written approval of the state department of health, and shall annex to such application plans showing the
fixtures to be maintained or installed and the existing or proposed location thereof.
(Code 1980, § 32-241)
Sec. 106-132. - Safety of private supply; checkvalves to minimize commingling of waters.
No cross connection shall be permitted unless the private supply which is connected or which it is proposed to
connect physically to the public water supply system is shown by regular analyses or otherwise to be safe for
human consumption, and any permit granted under this division shall be upon condition that the installation be
provided with double checkvalves, gate valves, bleeder and test valves to reduce to a minimum the possibility of
a mingling of the waters of a private supply system with the waters of a public supply system.
(Code 1980, § 32-242)
Sec. 106-133. - Cross connections with sewerage system prohibited; backflow precautions.
No plumbing fixture, device or fitting shall be installed which is so constructed that a cross connection between
the public water supply and drainage system, soil or waste pipe will be made, so as to permit or make possible
the backflow of sewage, polluted water or waste into the water supply system. The inlets from the public water
supply system on every plumbing fixture, device or construction shall be so placed and maintained as to be at all
times above the maximum level of the water that can be held or stored in such fixture, device or construction;
provided, however, that such requirement shall not apply to any fixture, device or construction equipped with an
effective antisiphonage device which operates automatically without any moving parts, thus preventing the
backflow into the water supply line of the contents held or stored in such fixture, device or construction.
(Code 1980, § 32-243)
Sec. 106-134. - Cross connections with swimming pool water prohibited.
No interconnection of any kind between the public water supply system and the recirculating system of a
swimming pool, or the pool structure below the flow line in the pool, will be permitted. An effective air brake or
vent shall be installed to prevent pool water being siphoned or discharged into the potable water supply system.
(Code 1980, § 32-244)
Sec. 106-135. - Director of public works to report location of cross connections; removal.
The director of public works shall file with the city council a report in writing setting forth the location of the
premises on which there exists a cross connection between a privately owned water supply and the public water
supply system serving the city, giving the names of both the owner and the occupant of the premises, and if such
owner or occupant has not made application to the city council for the privilege of maintaining such cross
connection, the city council shall cause the city clerk to notify such owner, occupant or both, as the case may be,
to forthwith discontinue and eliminate such cross connection.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
356/543
(Code 1980, § 32-245)
Secs. 106-136—106-155. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
Cross reference— Trash containers and waste materials at North Little Rock Municipal Airport, § 14-141;
plumbing and gas codes, § 18-366 et seq.
State Law reference— Municipal sewage systems, A.C.A. § 14-235-201 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 106-156. - Wastewater treatment committee.
The construction of improvements to the sewer system, the custody, operation and maintenance of the sewer
system, and the collection of revenue for the services rendered thereby shall be handled and supervised by a
wastewater treatment committee, such committee being one and the same as the sewer committee, provided that
any improvements, extensions, or betterments to the sewer system of the City of North Little Rock beyond the
corporate limits of the City of North Little Rock shall be made only after express approval of the city council by
resolution approved by a majority of the members elected to the city council. The wastewater treatment
committee shall be composed of five members who shall each serve a five-year term. Should any position on the
committee be vacant due to expiration, removal, or any other reason, the mayor shall nominate a person to fill
said vacancy. The mayor shall consider the following criteria when making a nomination:
(a)
Residency of the nominee. The mayor shall attempt to nominate persons that will balance the representation of
each ward on the committee.
(b)
Recommendations of council members. The mayor shall consider the recommendations of the council members
from the ward of the person to be considered for appointment or reappointment.
(c)
Representation of society. The mayor shall attempt to nominate persons that will balance the representation of
the different sections of the North Little Rock populous.
(d)
Qualifications. The mayor shall consider the qualifications and reasoning abilities of persons to be nominated to
the committee.
The nominee shall only be appointed to the committee if such appointment is approved by a resolution reflecting
a majority vote of the duly elected and qualified members of city council.
(Ord. No. 7545, §§ 1, 4, 5-12-03)
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies, § 2-486 et seq.
State law reference— Sewer committee, A.C.A. § 14-235-206 et seq.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
357/543
Sec. 106-157. - Schedule of rates for disposal of petroleum contaminated waters.
The following rate schedule is hereby adopted for the disposal of petroleum contaminated waters:
Quantity
(gallons)
Rate
(per gallon)
0 to 5,000 $0.20
5,001 to 25,000 0.05
25,000 and over 0.005
(Code 1980, § 32-150)
State law reference— Arkansas Hazardous Waste Management Act of 1979, A.C.A. § 8-7-201 et seq.
Secs. 106-158—106-170. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION AND USE REQUIREMENTS
Subdivision I. - General Provisions
Sec. 106-171. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Authority means the city.
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge
from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer means the extension for the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also
called "house connection").
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water.
Compatible pollutant means such pollutants as BOD, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria, and other
such pollutants as are now or may be in the future specified and controlled in the city's NPDES permit for its
wastewater treatment works for which such works have been designed and used to remove such pollutants.
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration during
which the only pollutant added to the water is heat.
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of
foods.
Jurisdiction means all areas within ten miles of the city limits of the city on the north side of the Arkansas River,
exclusive of the jurisdiction of the cities of Jacksonville, Sherwood, and Maumelle New Town. This area
includes, but is not limited to, the territories lying within the White Oak Basin, the Five Mile Creek Basin, the
Kellogg Creek Basin, the Woodruff Creek Basin, and the Dark Hollow Basin.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
358/543
Licensed master plumber means any person skilled in the installation of plumbing and licensed as a master
plumber by the state board of health.
Manager means the manager of the city's wastewater utility, who shall be the authorized administrative
representative of the sewer committee.
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water.
O and M means operation and maintenance.
Other wastes means decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar,
chemicals, and all other substances except sewage and industrial wastes.
POTW means any sewage treatment works and the sewers and conveyance appurtenances discharging thereto,
owned and/or operated by the authority.
Private disposal system means that facility owned, operated and maintained by any person for the purpose of
collecting and disposing of sewage within the property owned by such person.
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, handling, cooking and dispensing of food
that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any diameter.
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility.
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and watercarried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not
admitted intentionally.
Sewage means the water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, storm or other
waters as may be present.
Sewer means any pipe, conduit, ditch or other device used to collect and transport sewage or stormwater from
the generating source.
Sewer system means the North Little Rock wastewater utility as operated by the sewer committee of the city.
Sewerage means the system used for the purpose of collecting and conveying the sewage and the treatment
works used for the processing and treatment of sewage.
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater,
subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would
not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of
the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat
domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
359/543
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial
wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater pollution
control plant."
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Code 1980, § 32-141)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 106-172. - Sanitary disposal of wastes required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any insanitary manner on public
or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(Code 1980, § 32-142)
Sec. 106-173. - Discharge of untreated wastes into natural outlet prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the jurisdiction of the wastewater utility any sewage
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this division, as amended.
(Code 1980, § 32-143)
Sec. 106-174. - Unlawful use of private sewer systems.
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code 1980, § 32-144)
Sec. 106-175. - When connection required.
The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes situated within the utility jurisdiction is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this division within 90 days after date of official notice to connect, provided that such property is within 300 feet
of an accessible sewer.
(Code 1980, § 32-145)
State law reference— Sewer connections, A.C.A. § 14-235-301 et seq.
Sec. 106-176. - Operation and maintenance by owner.
The owner of any building which is connected to the public sanitary sewer shall be required to operate and
properly maintain the building drains and building sanitary sewer in accordance with all provisions of this
division at no expense to the wastewater utility.
(Code 1980, § 32-149)
Secs. 106-177—106-185. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Building Sewers and Connections
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
360/543
Sec. 106-186. - Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any
public sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the wastewater
utility.
(Code 1980, § 32-166)
Sec. 106-187. - Classes of permits; fees.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: one class for residential services and one class for
commercial service and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the wastewater utility. The permit application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
manager. A permit and inspection fee of $100.00 for a residential building sewer application and $150.00 for an
industrial or commercial building sewer application shall be paid to the wastewater utility at the time the
application is filed. When the application is complete, and all fees associated with the permit have been paid, the
sewer committee may issue the permits.
(Code 1980, § 32-167)
Sec. 106-188. - Permit application; supervision of work.
Each application for a building sewer shall be signed by the licensed master plumber responsible for the work to
be performed as shown on the application. The work done under the permit shall be supervised by the licensed
master plumber.
(Code 1980, § 32-168)
Sec. 106-189. - Costs and expenses.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(Code 1980, § 32-169)
Sec. 106-190. - Separate sewer for each building; exceptions.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except as follows:
(1)
Where multiple buildings are constructed in an apartment complex or condominium on a single lot or tract of
land which cannot be subsequently subdivided and sold in parcels, the individual buildings may be connected to
a collector building sewer provided that only one person is responsible for maintenance of the building sewer.
(2)
Temporary buildings, mobile homes or similar portable structures may be connected to a building sewer
installed to serve a previously constructed permanent building provided that both the permanent and temporary
buildings are located on the same lot.
(Code 1980, § 32-170)
Sec. 106-191. - Conformance with codes and regulations.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
361/543
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sanitary sewer and the methods to be used
in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the rules and
regulations of the wastewater utility, the building and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules or regulations of
the city. In the absence of code provisions or amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
(Code 1980, § 32-171)
Sec. 106-192. - Use of existing building sewers with new buildings.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination
and testing by the wastewater inspector, to meet all requirements of this division and other rules and regulations
of the wastewater utility.
(Code 1980, § 32-172)
Sec. 106-193. - Elevation.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer
or public sanitary sewer.
(Code 1980, §§ 32-146, 32-173)
Sec. 106-194. - Connection of roof downspouts.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other
sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sanitary sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to the public sanitary sewer, and all such connections existing on August 14,
1989, shall be removed immediately.
(Code 1980, §§ 32-147, 32-174)
Sec. 106-195. - Test tees and plugs, when required.
Test tees and plugs shall be installed where the building sewer connects to a wye or stub from the public sanitary
sewer in order that a hydrostatic test may be performed by the licensed master plumber or his representative in
the presence of the manager or his representative. If connection is made to a manhole, no test tee need be
installed.
(Code 1980, § 32-176)
Sec. 106-196. - Size of connection.
Building sewers shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer not smaller than six inches and only through wyeshaped
connections.
(Code 1980, § 32-177)
Sec. 106-197. - Connection to manhole.
If the building sewer is connected to a manhole, it shall be inserted through the wall not more than two feet
above the bottom or a satisfactory drop shall be installed. The connection shall be thoroughly patched inside and
out with Portland cement mortar to make a tight connection.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
362/543
(Code 1980, § 32-178)
Sec. 106-198. - Excavations.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city public works department.
(Code 1980, § 32-179)
Sec. 106-199. - Conformance with rules and regulations.
The connection of the building sewer into a public sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the city
plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the wastewater utility. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the sewer committee before installation.
(Code 1980, § 32-148)
Sec. 106-200. - Inspections; connection; approval.
The applicant for the building sewer connection permit shall notify the manager when the building is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sanitary sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of
the manager or his representative. No work shall be covered until the inspection and tests have been made and
written approval given.
(Code 1980, § 32-175)
Secs. 106-201—106-210. - Reserved.
Subdivision III. - Private Sewage Disposal
Sec. 106-211. - Where systems may be used.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 106-175, the building sewer shall
be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this subdivision.
(Code 1980, § 32-156)
Sec. 106-212. - Construction permit; inspection fee.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written
permit from the office of the wastewater utility, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, test results, and such other information as deemed necessary by the sewer committee. A permit
and inspection fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the wastewater utility at the time the application is filed.
(Code 1980, § 32-157)
Sec. 106-213. - Permit effective upon satisfactory completion of installation; inspection.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to
the satisfaction of the sewer committee when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground
portions are covered.
(Code 1980, § 32-158)
Sec. 106-214. - Compliance with health and ecological requirements.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
363/543
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the state department of health and the state department of pollution control and ecology. No
permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the property is less than 12,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet without specific written approval which shall become a part of the permit.
(Code 1980, § 32-159)
Sec. 106-215. - Connection to public sewer required when available.
At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal
system, as provided in section 106-175, a direct connection shall be made by the owner to the public sewer in
compliance with this division, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable materials.
(Code 1980, § 32-160)
Sec. 106-216. - Operation and maintenance of system by owner.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at
no expense to the wastewater utility.
(Code 1980, § 32-161)
Sec. 106-217. - Additional requirements.
No statement contained in this subdivision shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that
may be imposed by the city health department or other authority.
(Code 1980, § 32-162)
Secs. 106-218—106-230. - Reserved.
Subdivision IV. - Disconnecting Sewers
Sec. 106-231. - Prerequisite to moving or demolition of building.
Before any dwelling or other building having a connection to the wastewater utility sanitary sewer system is
moved or demolished, the building sanitary sewer shall be disconnected at the adjacent property line. The
remaining portion of the building sanitary sewer leading into the public sanitary sewer shall be sealed and made
watertight.
(Code 1980, § 32-185)
Sec. 106-232. - Permit, inspection and approval.
(a)
Prior to the disconnection of any building sanitary sewer, a permit shall be obtained from the office of the
wastewater utility. A permit and inspection fee of $50.00 shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
(b)
After the disconnection seal is made and before the work is covered, the manager shall be notified. No work
shall be covered until the inspection has been made and the work approved. Written notice of approval will be
given.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
364/543
(Code 1980, § 32-186)
Secs. 106-233—106-245. - Reserved.
Subdivision V. - Enforcement and Penalties
Sec. 106-246. - Enforcement procedures.
Whenever the manager finds that any person has violated or is violating this division, or any prohibition,
limitation or requirement contained in this division, he may serve upon such person a written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the satisfactory correction
thereof.
(Code 1980, § 32-191)
Sec. 106-247. - Show cause hearing.
(a)
If a violation of this division is not corrected by timely compliance, the manager may order any person who
causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause before the sewer committee why service should not be
terminated. A notice shall be served on the offending party, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held
by the sewer committee regarding the violation, and directing the termination of service. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
(b)
A legal quorum of the sewer committee shall conduct the hearing under this section and take the evidence. The
sewer committee may designate any of its members or any employee of the wastewater utility to:
(1)
Issue in the name of the sewer committee notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in any such hearing.
(2)
Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations and/or findings of the sewer committee, to any court.
(c)
At any public hearing under this section, testimony taken before the sewer committee must be under oath and
recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or
any party to the hearing upon payment of the cost of production.
(d)
After the sewer committee has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the party responsible for the
discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated, and such further orders and directives as
are necessary and appropriate.
(e)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
365/543
A discharge in violation of the provisions of this division shall be considered a public nuisance. In addition to
the procedures outlined in this subdivision, nothing in this division shall be deemed to prevent the wastewater
utility from seeking appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the courts of the state in the event of a discharge
in violation of the provisions of this division.
(Code 1980, § 32-192)
Sec. 106-248. - Emergency suspension of service.
The sewer committee may for good cause shown suspend the receipt of wastewater discharge to the POTW and
revoke the wastewater discharge permit of a discharger when it appears to the sewer committee that an actual or
threatened discharge presents or threatens an imminent and substantial danger to the health or welfare of
persons, substantial danger to the environment, interferes with the operation of the POTW, or violates any
pretreatment limits of this article. Any discharger notified of the suspension of service and/or discharge permit
shall, within a reasonable period of time as determined by the sewer committee or its representative, cease all
discharges. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the
time specified, the sewer committee shall take all lawful actions necessary to immediately suspend the access of
the user to the POTW. The sewer committee shall reinstate the service and/or discharge permit upon proof by the
discharger of the elimination of the noncomplying discharges or conditions creating the threat of imminent or
substantial danger as set forth in this section. The discharger shall be charged with reimbursing the authority all
costs incurred in the suspension of service before the service will be reinstated.
(Code 1980, § 32-193)
Sec. 106-249. - Penalty; costs.
Any person who is found to have violated an order of the sewer committee or who willfully or negligently failed
to comply with any provision of this division, and the orders, rules and regulations issued under this division,
shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in
this section, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses
of litigation from the person or entity found to have violated this division or the orders, rules and regulations
issued under this division. Also, any discharger which makes, causes or allows a prohibited discharge which
causes additional expense or cost to handle and treat such discharge or to correct damages caused by such
discharge shall be required to reimburse the authority for such cost or expense.
(Code 1980, § 32-194)
Secs. 106-250—106-260. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Subdivision I. - General Provisions
Sec. 106-261. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Act or the act means the Federal Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33
U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
Authority means the city.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams
per liter.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
366/543
Categorical pretreatment standards means national pretreatment standards or regulations containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency applying to industrial users of
publicly owned treatment works.
Compatible pollutant means such pollutants as BOD, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria, and other
such pollutants as are now or may be in the future specified and controlled in this city's NPDES permit for its
wastewater treatment works for which such works have been designed and used to remove such pollutants.
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration during
which the only pollutant added to the water is heat.
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by
treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
Garbage means the animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving
of foods.
Headworks analysis means an evaluation of the volume and pollutants being received at the entering or influent
sewers for a particular wastewater treatment (or pollution control) plant.
Indirect discharge means the discharge or introduction of nondomestic pollutants from a source, regulated under
section 307(b) or (c) of the act, into the POTW.
Industrial discharger means any nonresidential user who discharges an effluent into the POTW by means of
pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water, intercepting ditches,
and all constructive devices and appliances appurtenant thereto.
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from domestic or sanitary waste.
Interference means the inhibition or disruption of a POTW's sewer system, treatment processes or operations
which may contribute to a violation of any requirement of its NPDES permit.
Jurisdiction means all areas within ten miles of the city limits of the city on the north side of the Arkansas River,
exclusive of the jurisdiction of the cities of Jacksonville, Sherwood and Maumelle. This area includes, but is not
limited to, the territories lying within the White Oak Basin, the Five Mile Creek Basin, the Kellogg Creek Basin,
the Woodruff Creek Basin, and Dark Hollow Basin.
Local limits means the limitations established for the wastewater being discharged by a significant industrial
discharger to the public sewer system.
Manager means the manager of the wastewater utility, who shall be the authorized administrative representative
of the sewer committee.
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
NPDES shall mean the national pollutant discharge elimination system permits program as administered by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or by the state.
O and M means operation and maintenance.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
367/543
Other wastes means decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar,
chemicals, and all other substances except sewage and industrial wastes.
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of
hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.
POTW means any sewage treatment works and the sewers and conveyance appurtenances discharging thereto,
owned and/or operated by the authority.
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging.
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, handling, cooking and dispensing of food
that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any diameter.
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility.
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters
that are not admitted intentionally.
Sewage means the water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, storm or other
waters as may be present.
Sewer means any pipe, conduit, ditch or other device used to collect and transport sewage or stormwater from
the generating source.
Sewer system means the North Little Rock wastewater utility as operated by the sewer committee of the city.
Sewerage means the system used for the purpose of collecting and conveying the sewage and the treatment
works used for the processing and treatment of sewage.
SIC means the classification code of users based on the 1972 (or subsequent) edition of the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual prepared by the Office of Management and Budget.
Significant industrial discharger means any nonresidential user which normally discharges wastewater to the
POTW in quantities of 25,000 gallons per day or greater or whose wastewater contains or has the potential to
contain toxic pollutants, restricted pollutants or noncompatible pollutants.
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent
or in quantity of the flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the
average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
Slugload means any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to
a POTW.
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater,
subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water,
wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater (40 CFR 136), and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
368/543
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as being toxic in regulations promulgated
by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act
section 306(a) or other acts.
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would
not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Upset means an exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of
noncompliance with the standards set forth in this division due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the
discharger, and excluding noncompliance caused by operations error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof.
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of
the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat
domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial
wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater pollution
control plant."
Wastewater utility means the sewer system, wastewater treatment works, and the operation and administration of
such sewer system and wastewater treatment works as operated by the sewer committee of the city.
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Code 1980, § 32-201)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Secs. 106-262—106-270. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Regulation of Discharges
Sec. 106-271. - Surface waters.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface waters, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any public sanitary
sewer.
(Code 1980, § 32-206)
Sec. 106-272. - Waters conveyed to storm sewers or natural outlets.
Stormwater and all unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as
storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the director of public works. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon the approval of the director of public works to a storm sewer
or natural outlet. Such discharges shall also be subject to the approval of other regulatory agencies of authority
such as the state department of pollution control and ecology.
(Code 1980, § 32-207)
Sec. 106-273. - Prohibited and limited discharges.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
369/543
No discharger shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following described
substances into the wastewater treatment system or otherwise to the facilities of the authority:
(1)
Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or
by interaction to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the operation of the POTW.
(2)
Solids or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference
with the operation of the wastewater system.
(3)
Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 11.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the system.
(4)
Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed the
limitations set forth in categorical pretreatment standards or limitations of other standards promulgated by the
administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(5)
Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction are capable of creating
a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and
repair.
(6)
Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable
for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to
the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under section 405 of the act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act, or state standards applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(7)
Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits.
(8)
Any substances with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(9)
Any liquid, wastewater or vapor at temperatures higher than 65 degrees Celsius (150 degrees Fahrenheit) and/or
which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference; but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104
degrees Fahrenheit).
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
370/543
(10)
Any slugload, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a
single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the POTW.
(11)
Any unpolluted water, including but not limited to noncontact cooling water.
(12)
Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as to exceed
limits established by the authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(13)
Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
(14)
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between zero degrees Celsius (32
degrees Fahrenheit) and 65 degrees Celsius (150 degrees Fahrenheit).
(15)
Any water or waste containing garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of
any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review
and approval of the sewer committee.
(16)
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether
neutralized or not.
(17)
No discharger shall discharge wastewater to the public sewer system which shall cause the POTW to which the
sewer system is tributary to fail to meet the NPDES discharge limits for the POTW, or fail to meet the limits
imposed by the Arkansas Water Quality Standards (latest revision). The sewer committee of the wastewater
utility shall adopt and impose discharge limits for any and all users of the system, as required to meet these
standards. The discharge limits shall be technology based limits predicated on the capability of the respective
treatment facility to receive and to treat the wastewater load, or headworks loading, and (i) to meet the required
discharge standards, (ii) to prevent interference with the function and efficiency of the various treatment
processes, and (iii) to prevent contamination of the treatment plant waste sludges which would prevent their
ultimate disposal by landfill. The sewer committee shall establish limits for industrial dischargers based on an
allocation of the treatment plant capacity to all industrial users without regard to the flow or type of discharge.
Commercial and residential users which are not classified as significant users shall not be so allocated. The
allowable industrial contribution shall be the difference between the technology based allowable headworks
factor of safety or reserve capacity established by the sewer committee. However, the sewer committee shall
have the authority to require the selective further reduction of a contaminant by the greater contributors of that
contaminant to the POTW if the headworks loading of the contaminant exceeds the capability of the POTW to
meet the discharge standards.
The headworks analysis may include, but shall not be limited to the following parameters:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
371/543
Biochemical oxygen demand Phenols
Total suspended solids Arsenic
Cadmium Selenium
Lead Boron
Copper GCMS organics
Nickel Barium
Silver Manganese
Zinc
The sewer committee shall establish local industrial discharge limits such that the following headworks
concentrations are not exceeded for each respective POTW in milligram per liter:
Parameter Faulkner Lake
Pollution
Control
Plant
Galloway
Pollution
Control
Plant
Five Mile
Creek
Pollution
Control
Plant
White Oak
Bayou
Pollution
Control
Plant
Biochemical oxygen
demand
250 250 250 250
Total suspended solids 250 250 250 250
NH—N — — — —
Cadmium 0.04 1.00 0.09 0.02
Chromium 1.36 1.00 1.01 1.01
Copper 1.27 1.00 0.32 0.84
Cyanide 0.12 0.10 0.07 0.07
Lead 0.203 0.10 0.10 0.10
Mercury 0.11 0.10 0.006 0.007
Nickel 1.16 1.00 1.01 1.01
Silver 0.31 0.25 0.25 0.10
Zinc 0.31 0.31 0.30 0.30
Phenols 54.2 50. 50.5 50.5
Arsenic 0.11 0.10 0.07 0.07
Selenium 0.04 — 0.034 0.085
In addition, no discharger shall discharge wastewater containing any measurable trace amount of the following:
Antimony Pesticides
Beryllium Rhenium
Bismuth Strontium
Cobalt Tellurium
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
372/543
Fungicides Tin
Herbicides Uranyl ion
Molybdenum
(18)
Any materials which exert or cause the following:
a.
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime
residues, or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
b.
Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dyes, wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
c.
Excessive biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, and/or chlorine demand such as to cause an
unusual load on the treatment plant and which interferes with the functioning of the treatment processes.
d.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a slug as defined in this division.
(Code 1980, § 32-208)
Sec. 106-274. - Compliance with pretreatment standards.
National categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to the act shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial categories. An application for
modification of the national categorical pretreatment standards may be considered for submittal to the regional
administrator by the authority, when the authority's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of
the pollutants as defined in 40 CFR 403.7. All national categorical pretreatment standards adopted after the
promulgation of this division shall be adopted by the authority as a part of this division.
(Code 1980, § 32-209)
Sec. 106-275. - Special conditions.
The following special discharge conditions shall be appropriate for this division:
(1)
State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers which are subject
to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this division or any other applicable ordinance.
(2)
No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way, nor mix separate waste streams for
the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
373/543
compliance with the standards set forth in this division.
(Code 1980, § 32-210)
Sec. 106-276. - Accidental discharge; notice requirements.
(a)
Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or
substances established by this division. Where deemed to be necessary by the authority, facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and
expense. Detailed plans prepared by a registered professional engineer showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the authority for review, and shall be approved by the
authority before construction of the facility. No new discharger who proposes to discharge to the POTW after the
effective date of this division shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge
protection procedures have been approved by the authority. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures by the authority shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify its facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this division.
(b)
A discharger shall notify the authority immediately upon the occurrence of a slugload, or accidental discharge of
substances prohibited by this division. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof,
type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Any discharger who discharges a slugload of
prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of
any fines imposed by the authority on account thereof under state or federal law.
(c)
Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the discharger's premises, advising employees
whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may
cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedure. Emergency notification
contacts and procedures shall be specified within the discharger's permit.
(Code 1980, § 32-211)
Sec. 106-277. - Handling of deleterious wastes.
(a)
Actions of sewer committee. If wastewaters containing any substance described in section 106-273 are
discharged or proposed to be discharged into the sewer systems of the authority, the sewer committee through
the manager may take any action necessary to:
(1)
Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
(2)
Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the
objectionable characteristics or substance so that the discharge will not violate the provisions of this division.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
374/543
Require the person(s) making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any additional cost or expense incurred
by the authority for handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment system and to reimburse the
authority for any and all cost or expense due to damages caused to the system by the discharge.
(4)
Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this
division.
(b)
Submission of pertinent data to manager. Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows prior to
discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system is required, plans, specifications and other pertinent
data or information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall first be submitted to the manager
for review and approval. Such approval shall not exempt the discharge of such facilities from compliance with
any applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any governmental authority. Any subsequent
alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall not be made without due notice to
and prior approval of the manager.
(c)
Responsibility for operation and maintenance. If pretreatment or control of waste flows is required, such
facilities shall be maintained in good working order and operated as efficiently as possible by the owner or
operator at his own cost and expense, subject to the requirements of these rules and regulations and all other
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(d)
Right-of-entry for inspection and sampling. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes of this division, the
manager or his designated representative, upon the presentation of credentials, may enter upon any property or
premises at reasonable times for the purpose of:
(1)
Copying any records required to be kept under the provisions of this division, during normal business office
hours;
(2)
Inspection of any monitoring equipment or method; and
(3)
Sampling any discharge of wastewater to the treatment works.
(e)
Right-of-entry for installing, supervising or recovering equipment. The manager or his designated representative,
representatives of the state department of pollution control and ecology, and/or representatives of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, upon presentation of credentials, may enter upon the property or
premises of a discharger at reasonable times for the purpose of installing, supervising and recovering monitoring
equipment for wastewater discharges to the POTW.
(f)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
375/543
Right-of-entry during emergencies. The manager or his designated representative may enter upon the property at
any hour under emergency conditions. The condition of what constitutes an emergency condition shall be at the
discretion of the manager.
(g)
Protection from accidental discharge. Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or operator's own cost and expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
manager for review, and shall be approved by him before construction of the facility. Review and approval of
such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify his
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division.
(h)
Noncompliant discharge procedure. If, for any reason, a facility does not comply with or will be unable to
comply with any prohibition or limitations in this division, the facility responsible for such discharge shall
immediately notify the manager so that corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment system. In
addition, a written report addressed to the manager detailing the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge,
the quantity and characteristics of the discharge, and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges, shall
be filed by the responsible industrial facility within five days of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge.
(Code 1980, § 32-212)
Sec. 106-278. - Reports, records and inspections.
(a)
Discharge reports.
(1)
Every significant industrial user shall file a periodic discharge report at such intervals as are designated by the
manager. The manager may require any other industrial users discharging or proposing to discharge into the
treatment system to file such periodic reports.
(2)
The discharge report shall include, but, at the discretion of the manager, shall not be limited to, nature of
process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operation, concentrations of
controlled pollutants, or other information which relates to the generation of waste. Such reports may also
include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid materials stored on-site even though they are not
normally discharged. In addition to discharge reports, the manager may require information in the form of a selfmonitoring
report.
(b)
Records and monitoring.
(1)
All industrial users who discharge or propose to discharge wastewaters to the wastewater treatment system shall
maintain such records of production and related factors, effluent flows, and pollutant amounts or concentration
as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this division and any applicable state or
federal pretreatment standards or requirements.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
376/543
(2)
Such records shall be made available upon request by the manager. All such records relating to compliance with
pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency upon
demand. A summary of such date indicating the industrial user's compliance with this division shall be prepared
quarterly and submitted to the manager.
(3)
The owner or operator of any premises or facility discharging industrial wastes into the system shall install at his
own cost and expense suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the accurate observation, sampling and
measurement of wastes. Such equipment shall be maintained in proper working order and kept safe and
accessible at all times.
(4)
The monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on the industrial user's premises outside of the
building. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the manager may
allow such facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, with the approval of the public agency
having jurisdiction over such street or sidewalk, and located so that it will not be obstructed by public utilities,
landscaping, or parked vehicles.
(5)
When more than one user can discharge into a common sewer, the manager may require installation of separate
monitoring equipment for each user. When there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and
characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the manager may require that separate
monitoring facilities be installed for each separate discharge.
(6)
Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance
with the manager's requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications.
(c)
Inspection, sampling and analysis.
(1)
Compliance determinations with respect to section 106-273, prohibitions and limitations, may be made on the
basis of either instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of wastewater. Composite samples may be
taken over a 24-hour period, or over a longer or shorter time span, as determined necessary by the manager to
meet the needs of specific circumstances.
(2)
Sampling and laboratory analysis of industrial wastewater samples shall be performed in accordance with 40
CFR 136, with any subsequent amendments. Analysis of those pollutants not covered by this document shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established and/or approved by the state department of pollution
control and ecology.
(3)
Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose of compliance determination with respect to section 106-273,
prohibitions and limitations, will be done at such intervals as the manager may designate. However, it is the
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
377/543
intention of the manager to conduct compliance sampling or to cause such sampling to be conducted for all
major contributing industries at least once for every one-year period. Sampling and analysis of all categorical
industries shall be conducted at time intervals no greater than monthly. Such monitoring of categorical industries
may be through required self-monitoring by the industry, by scheduled monitoring by the utility, or both.
(Code 1980, § 32-213)
Sec. 106-279. - Discharge permit.
(a)
Application. Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the manager an
application on the form prescribed by the manager and accompanied by any applicable fee. In support of this
application, the user shall submit the following information:
(1)
Name, address and SIC number of applicant.
(2)
Volume of wastewater to be discharged.
(3)
Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those set forth in section 106-273, as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory.
(4)
Time and duration of discharge.
(5)
Average and minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(6)
Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation.
(7)
Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials and types of
materials which are, or could be, discharged.
(8)
Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production.
(9)
Number and type of employees, and hours of work.
(10)
Any other information as may be deemed by the manager to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
378/543
The manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After
evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to
terms and conditions provided in this section.
(b)
Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all
other regulations, user charges and fees established by the authority. The conditions of wastewater discharge
permits shall be uniformly enforced in accordance with this division and applicable state and federal regulations.
Permit conditions will include the following:
(1)
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the system.
(2)
The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(3)
Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(4)
Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities, and specifications for monitoring programs.
(5)
Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical reports and plant records relating to wastewater
discharges.
(6)
Daily average and daily maximum discharge rates, or other appropriate conditions when pollutants subject to
limitations and prohibitions are proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge.
(7)
Compliance schedules.
(8)
Other conditions to ensure compliance with this division.
(c)
Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued
for a period of less than one year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. If the user is not notified by the
manager 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall automatically be extended for 12 months.
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the manager during the
life of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in section 106-273 are modified and changed. The
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(d)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
379/543
Amendment. The authority reserves the right to amend any wastewater discharge permit issued under this section
in order to assure compliance by the authority with applicable laws and regulations. Within nine months of the
promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of each discharger
shall be subject to such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a discharger subject
to a national categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater
discharge permit, the discharger shall apply for a wastewater permit from the authority within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard by the EPA. In addition, the discharger
with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the authority, within 180 days after the
promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, the information required by this
section. The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance.
(e)
Nontransferability. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation.
(f)
Revocation. Any user who violates the following conditions of his permit or of this division or of applicable
state and federal regulations is subject to having his permit revoked. Violations subjecting a user to possible
revocation of his permit include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1)
Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
(2)
Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(3)
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
(4)
Violation of conditions of the permit.
(g)
Confidentiality of information. Information and data furnished to the authority with respect to the nature and
frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or to other governmental agencies without restriction
unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the sewer committee
that the release of such information would divulge trade secrets or proprietary information of the discharger.
When so requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of the report which may disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
upon written request to government agencies for uses related to this division, the national pollutant discharge
elimination system permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however,
that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the discharger furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. Information specifically designated and
accepted by the sewer committee as being confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency by
the authority until and unless a ten-day written notification is given to the discharger.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
380/543
(Code 1980, § 32-214)
Secs. 106-280—106-290. - Reserved.
Subdivision III. - Enforcement and Penalties
Sec. 106-291. - Enforcement procedures.
(a)
Notice of complaint. Whenever the manager determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there
has been a violation of any of the provisions of this division, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement
contained in this division, he may give written notice to the alleged violator specifying the cause of complaint,
and shall provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the violator to make a satisfactory correction
thereof or submit a compliance schedule for satisfactory correction thereof which is subject to approval by the
manager.
(b)
Compliance requirement. The notice of complaint shall require that the matters complained of be corrected by
timely compliance or that the alleged violator appear before the sewer committee at a time and place specified in
the notice and answer the charges complained of.
(c)
Show cause hearing. Notice shall be served upon the alleged violator specifying the time and place of a hearing
to be held by the sewer committee regarding the violation, and directing the alleged violator to show cause
before the sewer committee why an order should not be made directing the termination of service. The notice of
the hearing shall be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, restricted delivery, at least
ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
(d)
Opportunity to be heard. The manager shall afford an opportunity for a fair hearing to the alleged violator at the
time and place specified in the notice, or any modification of the notice.
(e)
Conduct of hearing. A legal quorum of the sewer committee shall conduct the hearing and take evidence. The
sewer committee may designate any of its members or any employee of the wastewater utility to:
(1)
Issue in the name of the sewer committee notices of the hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in any such hearing.
(2)
Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations and/or findings of the sewer committee to any court.
(f)
Testimony and transcript. At any hearing under this section, the testimony taken before the sewer committee
must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript so recorded will be made available to any
member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the cost of production.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
381/543
(g)
Issuance of order. After the sewer committee has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the party
responsible for the violation(s) directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been
installed or existing treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are properly operated, and such
future orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate. A copy of the order shall be served upon the
alleged violator and on such other persons as shall have appeared at the hearing and made written request for
notice of the order. The order of the sewer committee shall become final and binding on all parties unless
appealed within 30 days after service of the order.
(h)
Reimbursement of costs by discharger. A discharger shall be charged with reimbursing the authority all costs
incurred in the suspension of service and shall pay such charges before the service will be reinstated.
(i)
Nuisance discharge; additional remedies. A discharge in violation of the provisions of this division shall be
considered a public nuisance. In addition to the procedures outlined in section 106-292, nothing in this division
shall be deemed to prevent the wastewater utility from seeking appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
state courts in the event of a discharge in violation of the provisions of this division.
(Code 1980, § 32-221)
Sec. 106-292. - Emergency enforcement procedures.
(a)
Suspension order. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, the sewer committee may issue an
order, for good cause shown, suspending the receipt of wastewater discharge to the POTW and revoke the
wastewater discharge permit of a discharger when it appears to the sewer committee that an actual or threatened
discharge presents or threatens an imminent and substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons,
substantial danger to the environment, interferes with the operation of the POTW, or violates any pretreatment
limits of this division. The sewer committee may, without notice or hearing, issue an order to the discharger,
reciting the existence of such emergency and requiring that such action be taken as it determines to be necessary
to protect the health of such persons or the environment and to meet the emergency, including but not limited to
ordering that the discharger, within a reasonable time as determined by the sewer committee or the manager,
cease all discharges.
(b)
Noncompliance. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within
the time specified, the sewer committee shall take all lawful actions necessary to immediately suspend the access
of the user to the POTW.
(c)
Conditions for reinstatement. The sewer committee shall reinstate the service and/or discharge permit upon
proof by the discharger of the elimination of the noncomplying discharges or conditions creating the threat of
imminent or substantial danger as set forth in this section.
(d)
Hearing. Any person to whom the suspension order is directed shall comply with the order immediately, but, on
written application to the manager or the sewer committee within ten days of the issuance of the order, that
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
382/543
person shall be afforded a hearing before the sewer committee within ten days after receipt of the written
request.
(e)
Action on order. On the basis of the hearing, the sewer committee shall continue the suspension order in effect,
or shall revoke or modify the order.
(Code 1980, § 32-222)
Sec. 106-293. - Public notification.
The sewer committee shall cause to be published annually in the largest daily newspaper published in the county
a notice of industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were significantly violating the provisions of
this division and/or other applicable pretreatment requirements or standards. For the purpose of this section, a
"significant violation" is a violation which remains uncorrected 45 days after notification of noncompliance,
which is part of a pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period; which involves a failure to accurately
report noncompliance; or which resulted in the authority exercising its emergency authority to require the
submittal of notices and self-monitoring reports from an industrial user to assess and assure compliance with
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(Code 1980, § 32-223)
Sec. 106-294. - Violation and noncompliance; penalties and costs.
(a)
Any person who is found to have violated an order of the sewer committee or who willfully or negligently failed
to comply with any provision of this division, or the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder, shall be
fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. For a continuing violation, each day on
which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense and shall be fined an
amount not to exceed $250.00 per day.
(b)
The wastewater utility and/or the sewer committee may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court
reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation from the person or entity found to have violated this division or
the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder.
(c)
Any discharger which makes, causes or allows a prohibited discharge which causes additional expense or cost to
handle and treat such discharge or to correct damages caused by such discharge shall be required to reimburse
the authority for such cost or expense.
(Code 1980, § 32-224)
Chapter 110 - VEGETATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— City beautiful commission, § 2-556 et seq.; environment, ch. 42; removal of uncut weeds,
grass and other unsightly and unsanitary articles, § 42-1; health and sanitation, ch. 54.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
383/543
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, A.C.A. § 14-43-601 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 110-1. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Park trees means trees in public parks having individual names and in all areas owned by the city or to which
the public has free access as a park.
Street trees means trees on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within
the city.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.55(a))
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 110-2. - Permit required for commercial cutting and/or trimming of trees and shrubbery; fee.
All persons engaged in the commercial cutting and/or trimming of trees and shrubbery are to pay an annual
permit fee of $25.00 per year for such privilege; failure to comply with this section shall be subject to all of the
sanctions provided by this Code.
(Code 1980, § 17-1)
Sec. 110-3. - Street trees.
(a)
Tree species. Tree species to be planted will be determined by the tree board with the guidance of the state
forestry commission or other natural resource advisement body. Placement of the trees will be determined by the
board within the limitations set out in this section.
(b)
Spacing. Spacing of trees to be planted will be with the guidance of the state forestry commission, generally as
follows: Trees less than 20 feet high shall be spaced 30 feet apart; trees 30 to 50 feet high shall be spaced 40 feet
apart; trees 50 feet or higher shall be spaced 50 feet apart. Exceptions may be made in special plantings designed
or approved by the tree board.
(c)
Distance from curb to sidewalk. The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be
in accordance with the three tree size classes listed in subsection (b) of this section, and no trees may be planted
closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees,
four feet.
(d)
Distance from street corners and fire plugs. No street tree shall be planted closer than 45 feet to any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer
than ten feet to any fireplug.
(e)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
384/543
Utilities. No street trees other than those less than 20 feet in height may be planted under or within ten lateral
feet of any overhead utility wire or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line,
transmission line or other utility.
(f)
Public tree care. Once planted, the trees become city property. The city shall have the authority to prune,
maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and
public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety or preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds. The city may remove or cause to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe
condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or
other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This subsection does
not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners, provided that the selection and location of
such trees are in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of chapter 102, article VII of
this Code.
(g)
Pruning and corner clearance. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city
shall prune the branches in accordance with chapter 102, article VII of this Code, which are hereby incorporated
in this section by reference, so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the
view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of ten feet above the surface of the street or
sidewalk. Such owners will remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which
constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.55)
Sec. 110-4. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the
city when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the city. The city tree board will notify in writing the owners of such trees.
Removal shall be done by such owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In
the event of failure of owners to comply with such notice, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees
and charge the cost of removal on the owners' property tax notices.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.56)
Sec. 110-5. - Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the tops of the
stumps do not project above the surface of the ground.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.57)
Sec. 110-6. - Interference with city tree responsibility.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with the city, the tree board or any of their agents while engaged in and about the
planting, spraying, cultivating, mulching, pruning or removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on private
grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.58)
Secs. 110-7—110-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - TREE BOARD
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
385/543
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies, § 2-486 et seq.
Sec. 110-31. - Created; term of office; vacancies; compensation.
(a)
Created; composition. There is hereby created and established a tree board for the city, which shall consist of
five members, citizens and residents of this city who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
city council.
(b)
Term of office. The term of the five persons to be appointed to the tree board by the mayor shall be three years. If
a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion
of the term.
(c)
Compensation. Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.51)
Sec. 110-32. - Duties and responsibilities.
It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study, investigate, counsel, develop and/or update annually and
administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan shall be presented annually to the city
council and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the
city. The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and
recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.52)
Sec. 110-33. - Selection of officers; quorum.
The tree board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its
proceedings. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.53)
Sec. 110-34. - Review of decisions by city council.
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the tree board. Any person may
appeal from a ruling or order of the board to the city council, which may hear the matter and make a final
decision.
(Code 1980, § 2-351.54)
Chapter 114 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE
FOOTNOTE(S):
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
386/543
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; ambulance service, § 38-56 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 102; special
service vehicle permits, § 102-5.
State Law reference— Authority to regulate vehicles for hire, A.C.A. § 14-57-301 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 114-1. - Definitions.
(a)
Any automobile or motor-driven vehicle used in the transportation of passengers for hire, other than motor
buses, vans for transportation of handicapped persons, and limousines, shall be included in the term "taxicab."
Provided, however, that the term "taxicab" shall not include a paratransit system operated by the Red Cross in
cooperation with the state department of human services and the county local planning group, when such
paratransit system is for the purpose of providing transportation for persons who are currently on public
assistance and who are signed up for the "Project SUCCESS" program.
(b)
For the purpose of exclusion from the term "taxicab," the terms "limousine" and "limousine service" are hereby
defined as follows:
Limousine means a sedan-type luxury motor vehicle such as stretch Lincoln, stretch Cadillac, Bently, Rolls-
Royce or Mercedes Benz with a passenger capacity of no more than nine persons (including the driver).
Limousine service means the business of renting or leasing a limousine as defined in this section, including the
services of a driver, to a person, solely upon his request or one acting for or on his behalf, to be used by the
persons hiring the vehicle or under their direction and authority for the period of time the vehicle is rented or
leased. Specifically excluded from this definition are vehicles, and the drivers thereof, provided for use in
connection with or attending or participating in any phase of a funeral or funeral service.
(Code 1980, § 30-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 114-2. - Prohibited advertising on CATA bus benches.
No bus benches or bus bench facilities used by Central Arkansas Transit Authority (CATA) shall be used for
advertising. For purposes of this section a listing of bus routes, bus schedules or city approved announcements
shall not be considered advertising.
(Ord. No. 7574, § 1, 8-25-03)
Secs. 114-3—114-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Regulation of taxicabs, A.C.A. § 14-57-301 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
387/543
Sec. 114-26. - Privilege tax.
Each individual approved to operate a taxicab in the city shall pay a privilege tax fee of $150.00 per year, plus an
annual charge of $15.00 per taxicab.
(Code 1980, § 30-23)
Sec. 114-27. - Acceptance of calls.
All persons engaged in the taxicab business shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the
corporate limits of the city as soon as they can do so; and if the services cannot be rendered within a reasonable
time, they shall notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give
the reason therefor. Any holder who refuses to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits at any time the
holder has available taxicabs or fails or refuses to provide the best quality taxicab service shall be deemed to
have failed to satisfy the public convenience and necessity requirements of the taxicab permit issued to such
holder. Any holder failing to provide the services set forth in this article may be required to appear before the
city council or its designated agent to show cause why such permit should not be revoked or suspended.
(Code 1980, § 30-40)
Sec. 114-28. - Display of name of operator.
Each person who drives or operates a taxicab or taxicab business in the city shall display on both sides of each
taxicab operated by him the name of the licensed operator.
(Code 1980, § 30-2)
Sec. 114-29. - Prohibited actions.
(a)
Solicitation of bus riders. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed or authorized to drive or operate a taxicab
on the streets of the city to solicit any person in a passenger zone awaiting transportation by any bus operated by
the authority of the city.
(b)
Scanners and monitoring. The use of scanners and the monitoring of other companies' calls is prohibited.
(Code 1980, § 30-3)
Secs. 114-30—114-40. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE
Sec. 114-41. - Persons eligible.
Any individual shall be allowed to apply for a certificate of public convenience, subject to the restrictions set
forth in this division.
(Code 1980, § 30-21)
Sec. 114-42. - Approval criteria.
The city clerk or revenue officer shall approve or disapprove each application for a certificate of public
convenience. Approval/disapproval shall be based upon the criteria set forth in this division. If the city hires a
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
388/543
revenue officer at some later time, then all duties imposed upon the city clerk by this division shall be
automatically and exclusively assumed by the revenue officer. Any further reference in this division to the duties
of the city clerk would, in that case, be deemed to be entirely those of the revenue officer.
(Code 1980, § 30-22)
Sec. 114-43. - Prerequisites for issuance.
Before any certificate of public convenience and necessity required by this division is issued for the operation of
a taxicab, the owner shall meet with the following provisions:
(1)
Fixed place of business. Every person operating any taxicab within the city shall maintain a fixed location, to be
approved by the privilege tax officer; and, except when carrying passengers, answering calls, going to and from
officially designated taxicab stands, or attending to lawful business of the owner other than the carrying of
passengers for hire, every taxicab shall be kept off the streets of the city, except that they may occupy officially
designated taxicab stands as provided under this division. Such persons must use their home address or their
place of business for service of process and other legal matters.
(2)
Change of business address. Each owner is required to notify the city and the revenue officer immediately upon
change of business address. Failure to so notify is grounds for immediate revocation of such certificate.
(3)
Inspection and approval. No taxicab shall be operated on or over the streets, alleys or public ways of the city
until inspected and approved by the revenue officer, showing that such taxicab complies with the provisions of
this division. Such approval shall be registered with the city. If any taxicab operated on or over the streets of the
city does not comply with the provisions of this division, a hearing before the city council will be called to
determine if the certificate should be revoked or suspended.
(4)
Safety standards. Every taxicab operating on the streets, alleys and public ways of the city shall at all times meet
all safety standards required by state and federal law. The city council is authorized to establish additional
regulations with respect to equipment and maintenance and any other operating rules as appropriate.
(5)
Insurance. Before any taxicab franchise is issued for the operation of a taxicab, the owner shall file with the city
and revenue officer a copy of the policy of insurance issued by some good and solvent incorporated insurance
company licensed to do business in the state, covering separately, or in a schedule attached to such policy, each
taxicab to be operated under the direction of such owner. Such owner is required to maintain the insurance
policy in accordance with state law. The amount of liability insurance required by the city will be that set out in
the Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act (A.C.A. § 27-19-101 et seq.). Each insurance company and owner
is required to notify the city upon lapse or cancellation of any such policy. Upon the lapse of such policy, the
certificate granted to such owner is automatically revoked as of the date the insurance ceases to be in effect; and
it will thereafter be unlawful to operate such taxicab upon the streets, public ways or alleys of the city. Such
liability insurance shall be specifically for the operation of taxicabs or limousines as vehicles for hire, and such
fact shall be expressly indicated upon any policy certificates or evidence of insurance.
(6)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
389/543
Assignment of numbers. The revenue officer shall allocate a sequence of numbers to each company and operator
for the purpose of identifying all cabs. From that sequence, a company shall allocate a number to each of its
vehicles. This number shall be at least four inches in height; letters of the company name shall be at least 1¾
inches in height. Both the number and name of the company shall be permanently affixed to the taxicab, in
contrasting colors, so long as the vehicle is part of a company fleet. Each independently owned cab vehicle must
state that it is an independently operated taxicab.
(7)
Transfer. No certificate granted under this division may be sold, assigned, transferred, leased or mortgaged.
(8)
Applications. Applications for certificates as required by this division shall be filed with the revenue officer.
Such applications shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the trade name under which the applicant
does or proposes to do business, where proposed stands and garages are to be located, number of vehicles the
applicant desires to operate, the design and color of each vehicle, and the lettering and marks to be used thereon.
The application shall be accompanied by the fee as required by the license and privilege tax. Such fee will be
$50.00 per vehicle.
(9)
Factors affecting approval. The revenue officer, before approving an application, shall take into consideration
the following factors:
a.
Financial responsibility of the applicant.
b.
Moral character.
c.
Number of vehicles to be operated.
d.
Make, model, type and ownership of vehicles to be used.
e.
Color scheme to be used.
f.
Effect of additional vehicles upon the traffic congestion, vehicular and pedestrian alike.
g.
Whether taxes have been paid when due.
h.
Whether the applicant proposes to own, rent or lease some other vehicles to be used in operating such service.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
390/543
i.
Total number of taxicab permits in operation.
j.
Whether the requirements of public convenience and necessity can be met and complied with only by the
issuance of additional permits.
k.
The resulting effect upon the business of existing permit holders and upon existing agencies of mass
transportation in the city.
l.
The stipulation that the applicant will operate and continue to operate during the bona fide time that the
certificate shall remain in effect.
m.
Any other factors that the city council may deem relevant.
(Code 1980, § 30-24)
Secs. 114-44—114-55. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Taxicab permits, A.C.A. § 14-57-304.
Sec. 114-56. - Required.
No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned, leased or controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for
hire upon the streets of the city without having first obtained a taxicab permit.
(Code 1980, § 30-30(a))
Sec. 114-57. - Qualifications.
No taxicab permit shall be granted unless the applicant has a chauffeur-for-hire license issued under state traffic
laws.
(Code 1980, § 30-30(b))
Sec. 114-58. - Application.
Any person desiring a taxicab permit shall, under oath, apply in writing to the revenue officer.
(1)
Information required. The applicant shall give his age and home address; shall state whether he has ever been
convicted of violating any city ordinance, state or federal law; and, if so, shall furnish a detailed statement of
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
391/543
such convictions, including the charge, date, place and disposition. The police department shall conduct a
nationwide search of criminal records for all applicants.
(2)
Medical certificate. A qualified physician shall examine the applicant and certify on a form provided by the
bureau that he is physically sound and has good eyesight or has corrected eyesight.
(3)
Fingerprints. For its records, the police department will take fingerprints of each applicant.
(4)
Photographs. Each applicant shall file with the commission two photographs not more than one year old, size
2½ inches by 2¾ inches.
(5)
Fee. A fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the original application is filed.
(Code 1980, § 30-30(c))
Sec. 114-59. - Issuance.
When the application for a taxicab permit is approved, the privilege tax officer shall issue to the applicant a
permit in card form designed by the revenue officer. The photograph of the driver shall be attached to the card.
Each driver will be given a permit number, which will be on such permit.
(Code 1980, § 30-30(c)(5))
Sec. 114-60. - Investigation; not to issue to certain persons.
Before issuing a permit under this division, the revenue officer shall investigate the facts set out in the
application and shall not grant a permit to any person who, in the opinion of the revenue officer, after
investigation, is not physically or morally fit to drive or operate a taxicab in the city.
(Code 1980, § 30-30(d))
Sec. 114-61. - Bars to issuance.
A permit under this division shall not be issued if the applicant has been convicted of:
(1)
Manslaughter, or negligent homicide, resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle.
(2)
Driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. For purpose of this section, a
nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction. However, any conviction under this subsection shall not be a
bar to issuance of a permit if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of application, or
upon recommendation of the city council, if the conviction occurred more than three years from the date of
application for a permit.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
392/543
Any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle is used.
(4)
Failure to stop and render aid as required under the laws of this state, or leaving the scene of an accident as
specified by the laws of this state.
(5)
Perjury or false swearing in making any statement under oath in connection with the application for a driver's
permit.
(6)
Any law involving violence, theft or any form of stealing, or any crime involving moral turpitude that is
reasonably related to the permit, within five years preceding the filing of the application for this permit.
(7)
Possession by a driver within the taxicab of beer, whiskey or wine, or drugs or other stimulants not specifically
prescribed for the driver, or of lottery tickets, gambling equipment or paraphernalia, stolen goods or any
contraband property of any kind.
(Code 1980, § 30-30(e))
Sec. 114-62. - Revocation or suspension.
(a)
Hearing. The city council may hold a hearing to revoke or suspend a company's permit for:
(1)
Violation of any provision of this article.
(2)
Violation of any criminal laws of the city or state or laws of the United States. A certificate may also be
suspended by the city council if the holder thereof has had excessive complaints registered regarding the
operation of a taxicab company, has violated any provisions of this article or has discontinued operation for
more than 20 days.
Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given 14 days' notice of a hearing to show cause why such
action should not be taken.
(b)
In cases of emergency; injunction. The city council has the power to automatically revoke a permit issued under
this article in the case of an emergency without a hearing. It also has the power to obtain an injunction prior to a
hearing in the event of an emergency.
(c)
Failure of company to operate. The failure of any company to operate for any period of 90 consecutive days
shall result in revocation of the taxicab permit.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
393/543
(Code 1980, §§ 30-31—30-33)
Secs. 114-63—114-75. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
State Law reference— Regulation of taxicab rates, A.C.A. §§ 14-57-302, 14-57-303.
Sec. 114-76. - Zone fares.
(a)
Zone fares for taxicab service in the city shall not exceed $1.00.
(b)
Zone fares for taxicab service shall not exceed $0.65 within and between each of the zones in addition to the first
zone.
(Code 1980, § 30-41(a), (b))
Sec. 114-77. - Meter rates.
(a)
The passenger will have the option of choosing meter rates for exclusive rides as opposed to zone rates.
(b)
If the meter rate is chosen, the rate will not exceed $0.90 for the first three-ninths of a mile, with an additional
$0.20 for each two-ninths of a mile with a $12.00 per hour traffic and time clock.
(Code 1980, § 30-44)
Sec. 114-78. - Additional passengers.
An additional charge of $0.25 may be made for each passenger who is more than seven years of age and who is
the member of a business or social group on a joint mission with the person paying the fare.
(Code 1980, § 30-41(c))
Sec. 114-79. - Waiting time; baggage.
A charge of $1.00 may be made for each portion of ten minutes' waiting time the vehicle for hire is required to
make at the request of the passenger. A maximum charge of $12.00 an hour shall be in effect. No additional
charge shall be required for baggage.
(Code 1980, § 30-41(d))
Sec. 114-80. - Display.
No person shall operate a taxicab which does not display the rate fares charged on the outside of the vehicle and
the current zone chart on the inside of the vehicle.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
394/543
(Code 1980, § 30-42)
Sec. 114-81. - Receipts.
Any person accepting a fare for taxicab service in the city shall give to the person paying the fare upon request a
receipt evidencing the payment of such fare, the date thereof, and the signature of the person to whom the fare is
paid.
(Code 1980, § 30-43)
Secs. 114-82—114-100. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - LIMOUSINES
Sec. 114-101. - Provisions of chapter applicable to limousines.
Limousines and any individuals or businesses who undertake to operate a limousine for hire shall be subject to
all regulations and laws applicable to taxicabs, except for sections 114-26, 114-43(1), (6) and (7), and article II,
division 4 of this chapter.
(Code 1980, § 30-51)
Sec. 114-102. - Privilege license fee.
Limousines are subject to a privilege license fee of $250.00, as currently set forth in section 98-83.
(Code 1980, § 30-52)
Sec. 114-103. - Soliciting fares; parking in taxi stands.
Limousines are prohibited from soliciting fares from taxi stands or on any street within the city and are also
prohibited from parking in taxi stands.
(Code 1980, § 30-53)
Sec. 114-104. - Decal required; display; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a limousine service within the city without first obtaining and
displaying on the limousine a decal issued by the city upon full compliance with all application and fee
requirements. Such decal may be in the form of the same decal as that which is issued for taxicabs, until such
time as a different decal is prescribed by law. Such decal shall be displayed on limousines in the same manner as
is required for taxicabs; provided, that this section shall not apply to limousines which are operated under proper
permit from any city with which this city has a reciprocal agreement for limousine service.
(Code 1980, § 30-54)
Secs. 114-105—114-110. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7253, § 1, adopted Nov. 8, 1999, did not specifically amend ch. 114 of this Code;
hence inclusion as new §§ 114-111—114-123 was at the editor's discretion.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
395/543
Sec. 114-111. - Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section:
Certificate holder means any person holding one or more certificates of convenience and necessity issued by the
city council for the operation of horse-drawn vehicles.
For hire means the provision of services, or the offering of the services, of a horse-drawn vehicle for the
payment of money or other consideration.
Horse-drawn vehicle means a wagon, coach or other vehicles which is powered in whole or in part by one or
more horses, mules, or other animals.
Person means any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association of persons of any kind.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-112. - Operation requirements generally.
The city council is authorized and empowered to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. The rules and regulations shall be in writing, and shall be mailed to all certificate holders and their
employees, and the public at the office of the mayor. Any changes in the rules and regulations shall be published
by the city clerk and mailed to each certificate holder.
(1)
The director of the department of public works may summarily withdraw the authorization granted in this
section from any person who he finds is not operating in accordance with the regulations of the city including
but not limited to regulations with respect to public safety, insurance and equal employment opportunity or who,
by its operation, is engaging in unfair or disruptive competition. Notice of withdrawal shall be sent by registered
mail to the certificate holder's listed office, to the chief of police of the city and shall be posted in the city hall
building.
(2)
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a horse-drawn vehicle within the city for any purpose after notice
of withdrawal of privileges is posted in city hall.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-113. - Application for certificate of convenience and necessity—Requirements.
An application for a certificate of convenience and necessity shall be addressed to the city clerk. This application
shall be in writing, verified by the affidavit of the applicant, or if the applicant be a corporation, partnership or
association of persons of any kind by its duly authorized officer or agent, and shall state the following facts:
(1)
The full name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if a
corporation or association of persons, the names and addresses of all the officers and directors thereof;
(2)
What, if any, previous experience the applicant has had, or if the applicant is a partnership, the partners therein
have had, or if the applicant is a corporation or other association of persons, the officer and directors have had in
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
396/543
horse-drawn vehicle operations;
(3)
The number of such vehicles the applicant desires to operate;
(4)
The passenger capacity of each vehicle;
(5)
The insurance to be carried, the amount of the insurance and the company issuing the policy.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-114. - Application hearing—Determination by city council.
(a)
Upon the filing of an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity, the city council shall conduct a
hearing thereon to determine the public convenience and necessity. Notice of this hearing shall be given to the
police department, to each city council member, and to all other interested persons at least three days before the
date set for the hearing. The kind of notice, the place of hearing and all facts connected with or relating to the
hearing, shall be regulated by the city council.
(b)
The city council shall have power to issue or refuse to issue any certificate of convenience and necessity as the
public welfare, convenience or necessity may require. In determining whether public convenience and necessity
require the licensing of horse-drawn vehicles for which application may be made, the city council shall take into
consideration whether the demands of the public require the proposed or additional horse-drawn vehicle service
within the city or in any particular part of the city; that existing service is not sufficient to properly meet the
needs of the public; the financial responsibility of the applicant; the number, kind, type of equipment and the
color scheme proposed to be used; the increased traffic congestion upon the streets of the city which may result,
and whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved by the
granting of the additional license; and other relevant facts as the city council may deem advisable or necessary.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-115. - Fees.
If the city council shall find that the public convenience and necessity requires the operation of horse-drawn
vehicles, or additional vehicles, and shall issue its certificates to such effect, it shall be the duty of the city clerk
to issue to the applicant a license for each vehicle authorized by the certificate of convenience and necessity
issued by the city council. Upon issuance of the licenses, the applicant shall pay an annual license tax in the sum
of $30.00 for each vehicle. This license and attachments including, but not limited to any city council restriction
shall be in the possession of the operator of the horse-drawn vehicle at all times when the vehicle is on a public
right-of-way. If any license is issued after the first day of December in any license year, the applicant shall pay a
license tax of one-half of the above mentioned sum for the remainder of the license year. This license tax shall
be due and payable on the first day of June of each year, and shall expire one year thereafter, but the license shall
be renewed from year to year, upon the payment of the required fee.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-116. - Discontinuance of service—Transfer of certificates.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
397/543
(a)
No person who had been licensed to operate horse-drawn vehicles may discontinue all or any of them without
first filing with the city clerk a statement, verified by affidavit, of the number of vehicles he desires to
discontinue operating, and the reasons therefore, and obtaining permission from the city council to discontinue
operation as set forth in the statement. The withdrawal of any vehicle from operation, for the purpose of
conditioning, overhauling or repairing shall not be considered discontinuing operation under this section.
(b)
No holder of a certificate of convenience and necessity may sell, assign, lease or otherwise transfer the rights
and privileges granted thereunder to any other person without first having been granted permission to do so by
the city council.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-117. - Suspension or revocation of certificate of convenience and necessity and licenses.
Any certificate of convenience and necessity and horse-drawn vehicle licenses which have been issued to any
person may be revoked by the city council, upon a hearing, after three days' notice to the certificate holder.
(1)
If such person has failed, or shall fail, to file with the Secretary of State any report required by the Arkansas
Code;
(2)
The city council shall find operation of the vehicles thereby authorized inconsistent with public convenience and
necessity, or with public safety and welfare;
(3)
For any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other law by the holder of the certificate of license,
or by any person in the operation of the vehicles.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-118. - Offices required.
Each certificate holder is required to have and maintain an office to which can be directed any reports of lost
articles, complaints, inquiries, and related matters, and shall maintain a listing in such business directories as are
commonly available to the public.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-119. - Safety and health.
(a)
All horse or other animals used to draw vehicles for hire in the city shall be made available for examination by a
veterinarian upon 48 hours notice. Failure to allow such examination shall be grounds for suspension of the
operating permit issued hereunder.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
398/543
Each harness shall be equipped with a leather diaper. Each operator of a horse-drawn vehicle shall ensure that
any feces deposited on the public right-of-way or any private property within the city is cleaned up immediately
after such deposit or as soon thereafter as is reasonable.
(c)
All carriages shall display the international sign for slow-moving vehicles on the rear of such vehicle.
(d)
All restrictions and requirements for motorized vehicles contained in the city ordinances, or as amended; shall
apply to horse-drawn vehicles except those which by nature, could have no application.
(e)
The carriage shall not operate during the nonholiday weekday rush hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-120. - Insurance required—Accident report.
(a)
Every applicant for a license to operate a horse-drawn vehicle, whether the vehicle is to be operated by the
owner or some other person, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter shall maintain and file with the
city clerk for each vehicle to be operated a policy of liability insurance which meets the requirements of this
chapter.
(b)
Insurance required by this part shall be carried in a firm which has been duty licensed or permitted to do an
insurance business in the state, and shall be kept and maintained continually in force and effect so long as the
applicant shall be licensed to operate vehicles on the streets of the city.
(c)
Insurance as required herein shall be a policy of liability insurance in the sum of $25,000.00 because of bodily
injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and in the sum of $10,000.00 because of injury to
or destruction of property of others in any one accident.
(d)
There shall be attached to all liability insurance policies issued pursuant to the requirements of this part, the
following endorsement, or its equivalent:
"In consideration of the premium stated in the policy to which this endorsement is attached, the company hereby
waives a description of the vehicles to be insured hereunder and agrees to pay any final judgment for personal
injury, including death, resulting therefrom, or damage to property, caused by any and all vehicles operated by
the assured pursuant to the horse-drawn vehicle license issued by the City of North Little Rock, within the limits
set forth in the schedule shown hereon, and further agrees that upon its failure to pay any such final judgment,
the judgment creditor may maintain an action in any courts of competent jurisdiction to compel such payment.
Nothing contained in the policy or any endorsement thereon, nor the violation of any of the provisions thereof by
the assured, shall relieve the company from liability hereunder or from the payment of such judgment. The
policy to which this endorsement is attached shall not expire, nor shall cancellation take effect until after ten
days' notice in writing by the company shall have been given to the Director of the Community Planning
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
399/543
Department in the City of North Little Rock at its office in City Hall, said ten days notice to commence to run
from the date notice is actually received at the office of the Director. Attached to and forming a party of policy
number____________, issued by Company to ____________."
(e)
The certificate holder, on or before the fifth day of each month, shall file with the director a report if there was
an accident in the preceding month showing the number of accidents in which any horse-drawn vehicle owned
and/or operated by him was involved, the nature of the damage, if any, to person or property resulting therefrom,
the name and address of an persons who have outstanding claims because of any horse-drawn vehicle accident,
and whether any claims were settled during the preceding month.
(f)
The failure to file the required report within the time provided for, or the filing or causing or intentionally
permitting the filing or causing the filing of a false report, shall be a violation and shall also be ground for
forfeiting the principal's certificate of convenience and necessity and forfeiting his license.
(g)
If any policy of insurance covering any or all of the vehicles authorized to be operated under a certificate of
convenience and necessity fails to replace it immediately with another policy of insurance fully complying with
the provisions of this chapter, the certificate of convenience and necessity and the licenses issued thereunder
shall be ipso facto suspended. The certificate of convenience and necessity may be reinstated by the city council
upon application, with or without a hearing, upon compliance in full with all the provisions of this chapter. If the
city council reinstates the certificate of convenience and necessity, the director of the community planning
department, upon notice from the city council, shall reinstate the license issued thereunder.
(h)
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any horse-drawn vehicle for hire upon any
public street in the city unless the required policy of insurance for the vehicle shall have been filed with the city
clerk, and be in full force and effect.
(i)
In the event of any final judgment against the owner or operator of any horse-drawn vehicle for injury to or
death of, any person, or damage to property from the negligence of the owner or operator or for any reason
regardless of fault, remaining unsatisfied for a period of 30 days, the city council, upon complaint of the owner
of the judgment, or of any other person shall forthwith revoke the certificate of convenience and necessity and
all vehicle licenses of the owner or operator.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-121. - Rules and regulations promulgation.
The city council is authorized and empowered to determine and prescribe just, reasonable, safe, adequate and
proper regulations, practices, equipment and service to be in force, to be observed, and to be used in the
operation of horse-drawn vehicles, and to so fix and prescribe the same by order entered in its records, and to be
served on each owner or operator by mailing a copy thereof to the owner or operator, or in such other manner as
the city council by rules may prescribe; and thereafter it shall be the duty of every owner or operator to observe
and obey by all of its officers, agents and employees within 30 days after receipt of such order. The city council
is also authorized to prescribe its procedure and that of its officers in the administration of this chapter, the form
of all applications and reports required in this part, and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to the
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
400/543
uniform and orderly manner in which the privileges conferred by certificates of convenience and necessity shall
be exercised by the holders thereof.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-122. - Stops and stands.
(a)
The city council, with the approval of the director of the public works department, if in the public right-of-way,
is authorized and empowered to establish designated stops and stands for horse-drawn vehicles, and to issue
permits therefor.
(b)
For the purpose of taking on and discharging passengers, a horse-drawn vehicle shall stop at the far corner of all
intersections, and while so stopped shall keep as close to the right-hand curb as practicable, and shall take on and
discharge passengers as quickly as possible, so as not to unreasonably interfere with traffic.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Sec. 114-123. - Penalty for violation.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with, or who permits or causes any person in his or its employ to
violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this part, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Ord. No. 7253, § 1, 11-8-99)
Chapter 118 - ZONING
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Airport zoning, § 14-51 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; flood damage
prevention, § 50-36 et seq.
State Law reference— Municipal zoning, A.C.A. § 14-56-146 et seq.
Sec. 118-1. - Planning, zoning and sign ordinances saved from repeal.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this code affects any of the following:
(1)
Section 22-33 of the North Little Rock Municipal Code, 1980 edition, being the adoption of the master plan for
Burns Park.
(2)
Sections 24-16, 24-17, 24-20 and 24-25 of the North Little Rock Municipal Code, 1980 edition, pertaining to the
planning commission.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
401/543
Ordinance No. 7674, being the city's sign ordinance.
(4)
Ordinance No. 7697, as amended, being the city's zoning ordinance.
(5)
Ordinance No. 6907, pertaining to appeals from the planning commission relative to ingress and egress.
(6)
Ordinance No. 7643, pertaining to requirements for subdivision surveys including horizontal control standards,
vertical control standards, monumentation and digital file submittals.
(Code 1980, §§ 22-33, 24-16, 24-17, 24-20, 24-25, 27-1—27-11, 27-31—27-34, 27-51—27-54, 27-71—27-76,
27-91—27-102; Ord. No. 3171, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 6907, 7-10-95; Ord. No. 7643, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 7674, §§ 1,
2, 11-22-04; Ord. No. 7697, 3-17-05)
Sec. 117-1. - Table of permitted uses.
Permitted uses in the various zoning districts are as follows:
Floodprone
I-1 I-2 I-3 C-
1
C-
2
C-
3
C-
4
C-
5
O-
1
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
R-
5
R-
6
Abattoir (7) X
Abrasives manufacturing (7) X
Abstractors (5) X X X X X
Academy, dancing (6) X X X X
Academy, riding * (4) X X X X X
Accessories and apparel
store
(6) X X X X
Accountants (5) X X X X X
Acetylene manufacturing (7) X
Acetylene storage (8) X
Acid manufacturing (7) X
Acoustical material
manufacturing
(7) X X X
Acoustical material
storage
(8) X X X
Adding machines (see
Business machines)
Addressing and mailing
service (see Office
service)
Adjusters (5) X X X X X
Advertising display
manufacturing
(5) X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
402/543
Advertising offices,
agencies
(6) X X X X X
Advertising photo
studios
(5) X X X X
Agricultural implements:
Distribution and
display
(6) X X X X X
Manufacturing (7) X
Repair and service (6) X X X X X
Sales (6) X X X X X
Agricultural operations
(see Farmland)
Agricultural tillage,
contractors
* (8) X X X
Air conditioning
equipment:
Custom fabrication
and installation
(7) X X X X X
Mass unit production (7) X
Air express service (7) X X X X X X
Air express service
garage
(7) X X X X
Air express service
warehouse
(8) X X X X
Airline companies office (6) X X X X X X X X
Airplane:
Beacons * X X X X X X X X X
Manufacture (7) X
Markers * X X X X X X X
Repair and storage (7) X X X X
Sales and display * (6) X X X X X X
Airplane ground schools (5) X X X X
Airplane part sales (6) X X X X
Airports, private * (7) X X X X X
Airports, public * (7) X X X
Alcohol production plant X
Aluminum
manufacturing (see
Metals)
Aluminum recycling
operation
X X
Aluminum recycling
pickup station
X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
403/543
Ambulance service
garages
(6) X X X X X
Ambulance substations X X X X X
Ammonia manufacturing (7) X
Ammonia storage (8) X
Ammunition
manufacturing
(7) X
Amphitheater
(commercial)
* (3) X X X X
Amphitheater
(municipal)
* (3) X X X X
Amusement arcades (6) X X
Amusement parks * X X X X
Aniline color or dye
manufacturing
(7) X
Animal boarding (6) X X X X
Animal breeding
(commercial)
(6) X X X
Animal hospital (6) X X X
Animal hospital and pet
motel, class I
X
Antiques, sales (6) X X X X
Apartment hotels (2) X X X
Apartments (2) X X
Apiary (bees) * (7) X
Apothecary (5) X X X X X X X
Apparel and accessories
store
(6) X X X X
Appliance store (6) X X X X
Appraisers (5) X X X X X
Aquarium, including but
not restricted to sales
(3) X X X X
Architects (5) X X X X X
Armored car service
garages
(7) X X X X X
Armored car service
office
(7) X X X X X
Armory (4) X X X
Army and navy goods
sales
(6) X X X
Army and navy
installations
* (7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
404/543
Arsenal, government
property
(7) X
Art gallery, commercial
sales
(6) X X X
Art museum, municipal (2) X X X
Art museum, private (2) X X X
Art needlework (5) X X X X
Art school, commercial (5) X X X
Art school institute
(public)
(5) X X X X
Artificial flower
manufacturing
(7) X X
Artificial limbs
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Artificial limbs sales and
service
(6) X X X X X
Artists, commercial and
display
(5) X X X X
Artists' materials and
supplies
(6) X X X X
Asbestos, manufacturing (7) X
Asbestos and asbestos
products, storage
(8) X X X
Asbestos products, sales (6) X X X X X X
Ash dumps (except
nuclear wastes)
* X
Asphalt and asphalt
products processing
(7) X
Asphalt siding, shingles,
roofing, manufacturing
X X X
Asphalt siding, shingles,
roofing, storage and sales
(8) X X X X X
Assayers (see
Laboratories)
Assembly halls (4) X X X X X
Associations, clubs and
lodges (private)
(3) X X X
Asylums, private (5) X
Asylums, public (5) X
Athletic clubs (3) X X X X
Athletic fields, city
property
* X X X X X X X X
Athletic fields, private
property
* X X X X X X X X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
405/543
Auction (6) X X X X
Auction, antique and
furniture house (confined
to within building), no
sales between 6:00 p.m
and 9:00 a.m.
X
Auction, antique and
furniture house (confined
to within building)
X
Auction house, antique X
Auctioneers' auditorium (6) X X X X
Auditorium, private
institutional
(4) X X X X
Auditorium, public (4) X X X X
Auditorium, theaters and
commercial
(4) X X X
Auto courts (3) X X
Automobiles:
Assembly (7) X X
Bodies, sales (new) (6) X X X X
Bodies, sales (used) (6) X
Garages, driveyourself
(7) X X
Garages, public (7) X X X
Glass shops X
Laundry (7) X X X X X X
Laundries, four-stall
maximum, selfoperated
X X X X X X
Manufacture (7) X
Muffler shops X
Outdoor sales lots * (6) X X
Parking
(commercial)
* X X X X X
Parts and supplies
(new), sales
(6) X X X X X
Parts and supplies
(used), sales
(6) X X X
Rentals (garage) X X X
Repair: brakes,
electrical, painting,
radiators,
upholstering, etc.
(7) X X X X X
Sales from X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
406/543
showrooms
Salvage (not allowed
in city limits)
(7)
Service stations (6) X X X X X X
Showrooms (6) X X X X
Storage, dead
(warehouse)
(7) X
Storage, live * (8) X X X
Awnings fabrication (7) X X X X
Baby shops (6) X X X X
Bag cleaning (7) X X
Bag jobbers (burlap) (7) X
Baggage (see Express
companies, warehouses)
Bags, burlap
manufacturing
(7) X
Bags, paper
manufacturing
(7) X
Bakers and baked goods,
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Bakery store,
manufacturing, limited to
goods retailed on
premises only
(6) X X X X
Ballfields * (4) X X X X X X X X X X
Ballparks (commercial) * (4) X X X X
Ballrooms (4) X X
Balls and bearings
manufacturing
(7) X
Balls and bearings sales (6) X X X X X
Balls and bearings
storage
(8) X X X X X
Band shell * (4) X X X X
Bank equipment
manufacturing (see
Metals)
Banks and trust
companies
(6) X X X X X X
Barbecue, bulk
preparation and sales
(7) X X
Barbecue stand, roadside
sales
(6) X X X X
Barbers (6) X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
407/543
Barbers' supplies,
distribution, dealers
(7) X X X
Barge, gasoline, retail
sales
(6) X X X X
Barge terminal, private
(see under industry it
serves)
Barge terminal, public (7) X X X X
Barrel manufacturing,
wood
(7) X
Baseball park, private * (4) X X X X X X
Baseball park, public * (4) X X X X
Bathhouse, private
commercial
(5) X X X
Bathroom accessories
display and sales
(6) X X X
Bathroom accessories
manufacturing
(7) X
Baths, mineral springs (5) X X X
Baths, public (5) X X X
Baths, Turkish (private) (5) X X
Battery service (7) X X X X X X
Beach, private
commercial
* (4) X X
Beach, public (4) X X
Bearings (see Balls and
bearings)
Beauty culture schools (5) X X
Beauty shop equipment
sales
(6) X X
Beauty shops (6) X X X X X
Bed manufacturing (see
Furniture manufacturing)
Beer and ale distributor,
wholesale and storage
(8) X X X
Beer, brewing (7) X
Beer parlors (6) X X X
Beet sugar,
manufacturing
(7) X
Belting, manufacturing (7) X
Belting, repairing (7) X X X
Beverages, bottling (7) X X X X X
Beverages, wholesale (8) X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
408/543
and storage
Bible institute (4) X X X X X
Bibles, sales (6) X X X X
Bicycles, manufacturing
(see Metals)
Bicycles, repair (6) X X X X
Bicycles, sales (6) X X X X
Billiard parlors (4) X X X
Billing machines (see
Business machines)
Biologics (see Drugs)
Biomass fuel plant X
Bird hospitals (see
Animal hospital)
Biscuit companies,
manufacturing
(7) X X
Biscuits, wholesale and
storage
(8) X X
Blacksmiths (6) X X X X X
Blast furnaces (7) X
Bleacheries, cloth
processing
(7) X
Bleaching compound
manufacturing
(7) X
Blind people's home,
private
(5) X X
Blind people's home,
public
(5) X X
Blood banks (5) X X X
Blooming mill (see
Metals)
X
Blower and blower
systems (see Air
conditioning equipment)
Blueprinting and
supplies
(7) X X X
Boardinghouse (3) X
Boardwalk, amusement,
commercial
(4) X X X X
Boat club (4) X X X
Boat manufacturing (7) X X X
Boats, motors,
accessories (sales)
X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
409/543
Boats, pleasure, storage (7) X X X X
Boilers, manufacturing (7) X
Boilers, repairing (7) X X
Boilers, sales (6) X X
Boilers, storage (8) X X X
Bolts and nuts,
manufacturing
(7) X
Bolts and nuts, sales
(hardware)
(6) X X X X
Bonding companies (5) X X X X X
Bones, reduction or
distillation
(7) X
Book publishing, offices (5) X X X
Book publishing,
printing
(7) X X X
Bookbinders (7) X X X
Bookkeeping machine
sales (see Business
machines sales)
Booksellers (6) X X X X
Bookstore (6) X X X X
Boots (see Shoes)
Botanical gardens * (2) X X X X X X X X X
Bottle manufacturing (7) X
Bottlecaps and seals,
manufacturing
(7) X
Bottlecaps and seals,
sales
(6) X X X
Bottled gas,
manufacturing
(7) X
Bottled gas, storage and
distribution
(8) X
Bottles, wholesale (7) X X X
Bowling alleys (4) X X X
Boxes, paper,
manufacturing
(7) X
Boxes, sales (6) X X
Boxes, wood,
manufacturing
(7) X
Braces, orthopedic,
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Braces, orthopedic, sales (6) X X X X
Brake lining (7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
410/543
manufacturing
Brakes (see
Automobiles)
Brass foundry (see
Metals)
Breweries (7) X
Brick kilns (7) X
Brick storage * (8) X X X
Broadcasting station (7) X X X X X
Broadcasting studio (4) X X X
Brokerage house (5) X X X
Bronze manufacturing
(see Metals)
Brooms, manufacturing (7) X X
Brushes, manufacturing (7) X X
Brushes, sales (6) X X X X
Buffets (see Restaurants)
Buggy manufacturing (7) X X
Building and loan
associations
(5) X X X X
Building contractors,
equipment and material
storage
* (8) X X X X
Building contractors'
offices
(7) X X X X X X X
Building materials,
wholesale and storage
(8) X X
Buildings, office (5) X X X X X X X X X
Bungalow courts (for
transients, see Tourist
courts; for permanent
residents, see
Apartments)
Burglar alarm systems,
installation
(7) X X X X
Burglar alarm watching
service
(7) X X X X
Burlap processing (7) X
Business college
(private)
(5) X X
Business machines:
Distribution and
sales
(6) X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
411/543
Manufacture (7) X X
Repair and service (6) X X X X
Storage and
wholesale
(8) X X X X X
Busline depots, intercity * X X
Busline shops, garage,
repair
(7) X X
Butane distributors * (7) X
Butane manufacturing,
sales and storage
* (8) X
Butcher shops (6) X X X X
Butcher's supplies and
sales
(6) X X X X
Butter and cheese
manufacturing
(7) X X
Button covering (fabrics) (7) X X X
Button manufacturing,
metal, plastics
(7) X X
Cabinetmakers (7) X X X
Cafes (restaurants only) (4) X X X X X X X
Cafes (selling alcoholic
beverages)
(4) X X X
Calcimine (see
kalsomine)
Camera fabrication (7) X X X X X
Camera manufacturing (7) X X X
Camera shop (6) X X X X
Can manufacturing (see
Metals)
Candle manufacturing (7) X
Candy manufacturing (7) X X X X
Candy shops (retail) (6) X X X X
Candy, wholesale
distribution
(7) X X X
Cannery (7) X
Canvas goods
(fabrication)
(7) X X X X
Canvas goods sales (6) X X X X
Canvas manufacturing (7) X X
Cap and hat
manufacturing (see Hats)
Car barns (7) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
412/543
Car manufacture (see
Automobiles)
Car manufacture,
railroad
(7) X
Carbide manufacturing (7) X
Carbide sales and
distribution
(7) X
Carbonic gas
manufacturing
(7) X
Carbonic gas sales and
storage
* (8) X
Carbonic ice, bulk sales
and distribution
(7) X
Carbonic ice,
manufacturing
(7) X
Carburetors (see
Automobiles)
Carpenters, contractor's
office
(7) X X X
Carpenters' shops and
power woodworking
(7) X X X
Carpet and rug cleaners
and storage
(8) X X X X
Carpet layers (7) X X X
Carpet manufacture (7) X
Carpets and rugs,
warehouses
(8) X X X
Carpets and rugs,
wholesale
(7) X X X
Carriage and wagon
manufacture
(7) X
Cartage (see Freight)
Carton manufacturing (7) X X
Casein manufacture (7) X
Cash registers (see
Business machines)
Caskets, metal,
manufacturing
(7) X X
Caskets, retail sales (6) X X
Caskets, wood,
manufacturing
(7) X X
Cast iron pipe
manufacture
(7) X
Casters (see Bearings)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
413/543
Casting foundry (see
Metals)
Cat and dog hospital (see
Animal hospital)
Caterers (7) X X X
Catholic school (see
Schools)
Cattle shed (7) X X X
Caustic soda
manufacture
(7) X
Celluloid manufacturing (7) X
Cellulose manufacturing (7) X
Cement manufacturing (7) X
Cement products
manufacturing (pipe,
blocks, etc.)
X X
Cement storage (8) X X X
Cemeteries * X
Cesspool builders and
service equipment yard
* (8) X X
Cesspool builders and
service offices
(7) X X X X
Chair manufacture (see
Furniture)
Chairs, folding, rental (6) X X X
Chairs, physiotherapy,
sales
(6) X X X
Chalk manufacturing (7) X
Chandler, ship's (6) X X X X X
Charcoal manufacturing
and pulverizing
* (7) X X
Checkwriters and
checksigners (see
Business machines)
Cheese manufacturing (7) X X
Chemicals and drugs
manufacturing
(7) X
Chemicals and drugs
storage and distribution
(8) X X X
Chemists, analytical and
consulting (see
Laboratories)
Chewing tobacco
manufacturing
(7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
414/543
Chicken farm * (7) X
Child care center and
play school
(5) X X X
Children's and infant's
wear, sales
(6) X X X X
Chinese laundry (6) X X X X
Chiropodists (5) X X X X X
Chiropractors (5) X X X X X
Chlorine manufacturing (7) X
Chocolate and cocoa
products manufacturing
(7) X
Christian Science
practitioners
(5) X X X X X
Christian Science
reading rooms
(3) X X X X X
Churches and Sunday
school buildings
(3) X X X X X X X X X X
Cider and vinegar
manufacture
(7) X
Cigar stores (6) X X X X
Cigarette manufacture (7) X X
Cigarette service (7) X X
Cigars, manufacturing (7) X X
Cigars, wholesale and
storage
(8) X X X
Circus grounds * (4) X X
City buildings (7) X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Clay products,
manufacturing
* (7) X
Cleaners and shirt
laundry, 20 boiler
horsepower maximum
X X X X
Cleaning and dyeing
distribution shops
(6) X X X X
Cleaning and dyeing
processing
(7) X X X X
Cleaning compounds
manufacturing
(7) X
Cleaning compounds
storage
(8) X X
Clinics, private (5) X X X X X
Clinics, public (5) X X X X X X
Clock factory (7) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
415/543
Cloth, weaving and
spinning
(7) X
Clothing, manufacturing (7) X X
Clothing, wholesale and
distribution
(8) X X
Clubs, private, social or
fraternal
(3) X X X X
Clubs, supper and
amusement
(4) X X X
Coal and coke yards * (7) X X
Coal mining (7) X X
Coal tar distillates or
products
(7) X
Cocktail lounges (4) X X X
Coffee, roasting (7) X X
Coffee, wholesale and
storage
(8) X
Coffin manufacturing
(see Caskets)
Coin dealers (5) X X X X
Coin machines,
manufacturing
(7) X X
Coin machines, rental
and service
(7) X X X
Coke ovens,
manufacturing
(7) X
Cold storage (7) X X X X X
Coliseum, city (4) X
Coliseum, private,
commercial
(4) X X
Collection agencies (5) X X X X
College, private (5) X X X X X
College, public (5) X X X X X
Comfort station (4) X X X X X X X X X X
Commissary contractors (7) X X X
Commission house,
office
(5) X X X X
Community centers (4) X X X X X
Concrete (bulk),
manufacturing
* (7) X
Concrete contractors,
storage and yards
* (8) X X X
Concrete plant (covered X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
416/543
hopper type)
Concrete plant readymix,
covered hopper type
X
Concrete products (pipe,
beams) manufacturing
(7) X X
Concrete products,
storage
* (8) X X
Concrete, transit mixed * (7) X X
Condensed milk
manufacture
(7) X
Condominiums X
Confectioners,
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Confectioners, retail (6) X X X X
Confectioners, wholesale (7) X X X
Conservatory,
commercial, botanical
* (4) X X X X X X X X
Conservatory, musical
(see Schools)
Consulates (7) X X
Container (paper)
manufacturing
(7) X X
Contractors' equipment
and supplies, sales
* (6) X X
Contractors' equipment
and supplies, storage
(8) X X
Contractors' office X X X X X X
Convents (3) X X X
Conveyors, sales (7) X X X
Cooler pads,
manufacturing (see Air
conditioning equipment)
Coolers (see Air
conditioning equipment)
Cooperage works (7) X
Copper manufacture (see
Metals)
Cordage mill (7) X
Corrugated metal
manufacturing (see
Metals)
Corsets and brassieres,
manufacturing
(7) X X
Corsets and brassieres, (6) X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
417/543
sales
Cosmetics, compounding
only
(6) X X
Cosmetics,
manufacturing
(7) X X X
Costume rentals (6) X X X X
Cotton ginning (7) X
Cotton spinning and
weaving
(7) X X
Cotton storage (7) X X
Cottonseed products,
manufacturing
(7) X X
Cottonseed products,
storage
(8) X X
Country clubs * (4) X X X
County buildings (7) X X X X X X X X X X X X
Cranes, storage yard (see
Contractors' equipment
and supplies)
Crating service (7) X X X
Creameries (see Dairy)
Credit reporting bureaus (5) X X X X
Credit union bureaus (5) X X X X
Crematories X
Creosote treatment or
manufacturing
(7) X
Crockery manufacturing (7) X
Crockery sales (6) X X X X
Crop dusting equipment
yards
* (8) X X X X
Culverts, concrete (see
Concrete products)
Curio shops (6) X X X X
Curtain cleaners (see
Cleaning)
Dairies, distributing (7) X X
Dairies, pasteurization (7) X X
Dairies, retail sales of
products
(6) X X X X
Dairy equipment and
supplies manufacturing
(7) X X
Dairy farm * (7) X
Dairy products, (7) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
418/543
manufacturing
Dairy products, sales (6) X X X X
Dancehall (4) X X X
Dancing instruction (5) X X X X X
Dates (fruits)
(processing)
(7) X
Dead stock collectors (7) X
Decoration, display room
and office
(5) X X X X
Decoration, workshop
and equipment yard
(7) X X X X
Delicatessens (6) X X X X
Delivery service office (7) X X X X X X X
Dental laboratories (5) X X X X
Dental supplies (7) X X
Dentists (5) X X X X X
Department store (6) X X X X
Department store
warehouse
(8) X X
Desks, manufacturing (7) X X
Desks, sales (6) X X X X
Detective agencies (5) X X X X X
Detention home (5) X
Dextrine manufacturing (7) X
Diaper supply service (7) X X X
Dictating machines sales
(see Business machines)
Diesel engines,
manufacturing
(7) X
Diesel engines service,
equipment and supplies
(not manufacturing)
(8) X X X
Disinfectants,
manufacturing
(7) X
Disinfectants, storage
and wholesale
(8) X X X X
Dispensary, private clinic (5) X X X X X
Dispensary, public (5) X X X X X X
Display designers and
builders' shops
(7) X X X
Disposal plants (sewage) * (7) X X
Distillation of coal, (7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
419/543
wood, bones
Distillers (7) X
Distillers, distribution,
warehouse
(7) X X
Distributing service,
garages
(7) X X X X
Dock, amusement pier * (4) X
Dock, private shipping
company
* (7) X X X X
Dock, public * (7) X X
Dock, serving an
industry (see industry or
public utility)
Doctors' offices (5) X X X X X
Dog and cat hospitals
(see Animal hospital)
Dog pound (5) X X X X
Dolls, repairing (7) X X X X
Doors, metal,
manufacturing
(7) X
Doors, sash and trim,
wood, manufacturing
(7) X X
Dormitory buildings
(institutional)
(3) X X X X X X X X
Draperies, manufacturing (7) X X
Draperies, sales (6) X X X X
Drawing materials, sales (6) X X X X
Dress shop, sales (6) X X X X
Dressmakers, custom (5) X X X X
Drilling companies
offices
(5) X X X X X
Drilling company
equipment yards
* (8) X X
Drive-in markets * (6) X X
Drive-in restaurants * (6) X X X X X
Drive-in theaters * X X
Driving range, golf * (4) X X
Driving schools, auto (5) X X X X
Drugless physicians (5) X X X X X
Drugs (compounding
only)
(6) X X X X
Drugs, manufacturing (7) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
420/543
Drugs, retail sales (6) X X X X
Drugs, wholesale storage (8) X X X
Dry cleaning
establishment (depot
only)
(6) X X X X
Dry cleaning
establishment, bulk,
processing
(6) X X X
Dry goods X X X X
Dry goods, wholesale or
storage
(8) X X X X
Dry ice manufacturing
(see Carbonic gas
manufacturing)
Dumps * (7) X X
Duplicating machines
and supplies (see
Business machines)
Dyeing, commercial bulk (7) X X X
Dyeing, custom (6) X X X
Dyestuffs, manufacturing (7) X
Eating, drinking, no live
entertainment (see Cafes)
(4)
Eggs, poultry farms (7) X X X X X
Eggs, storage and
processing
(7) X X
Electric contractors'
offices
(7) X X X X X
Electric contractors'
shops
(7) X X
Electric equipment,
assembly
(7) X X
Electric equipment,
manufacturing
X
Electric equipment, sales (6) X X X X
Electric light and power
companies, office and
billing
(5) X X X X
Electric light and power
companies, yards
* (7) X X
Electric plating (7) X X
Electric refrigeration
lockers
(7) X X X
Electrical appliances,
manufacturing
(7) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
421/543
Electrical appliances,
repair
(6) X X X
Electrical appliances,
sales
(6) X X X X
Electrical appliances,
wholesale
(8) X X X
Electrolysis (see Beauty
shops and Electric
plating)
Eleemosynary building,
private
(2) X X X
Eleemosynary building,
public
(4) X X X X
Elevators, grain (7) X X X
Elevators, manufacturing (7) X
Embalming
establishment
(4) X X
Emery cloth and
sandpaper manufacturing
(7) X
Employment agencies (5) X X X X
Enameling and painting,
bulk production
(7) X X
Enameling and painting,
custom
(7) X X
Engine manufacturing (7) X
Engineers, offices (5) X X X X X
Engravers (7) X X X X
Entertainment bureaus (5) X X X X
Envelope manufacture (7) X X
Excelsior, manufacturing (7) X
Excelsior, storage and
distribution (bulk)
(8) X X
Exhibition buildings,
commercial
(4) X X X
Exhibition buildings,
public
(4) X X X X
Explosives,
manufacturing
(7) X
Explosives, storage and
distribution
(8) X
Express companies,
garages
(7) X X X X
Express companies,
office only
(5) X X X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
422/543
Express companies,
warehouses
(8) X X X
Exterminating and
fumigating, commercial
shop
(7) X X X
Exterminator and insect
poison manufacturing
(7) X
Extrusion of metals (7) X
Fabrics, synthetic (see
Cellulose manufacturing
and Plastic
manufacturing; Leather,
artificial)
Fabrics, weaving and
spinning
(7) X X
Fairgrounds * X
Fallout shelter X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Farm implements and
machinery assembly (see
Agricultural implements)
Farm implements and
machinery sales (see
Agricultural implements)
Farm labor contractors (7) X X X X X
Farmland:
Apiary * X
Crops (field and
truck)
* X
Dairy * X
Fruits (see specific
fruit)
Livestock * X
Nurseries * X
Orchards (fruits and
nuts)
* X
Poultry * X
Fat rendering (7) X
Federal offices (4) X X X X
Feed (grains)
manufacturing and
processing
(7) X X
Feed, retail distribution
and sales offices
(6) X X X
Feed, wholesale and
storage
(8) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
423/543
Felt, building insulation
manufacturing
(7) X
Felt, fabric
manufacturing
(7) X X
Fences, metal,
fabrication
manufacturing
(7) X
Fences, metal, wholesale
and storage
* (8) X
Ferry docks, passenger (4) X X
Ferry docks, railroad * (7) X X X X
Fertilizers, natural,
storage
* (8) X X
Fertilizers,
manufacturing
(7) X
Fertilizers, processed,
storage only
(8) X X
Filing equipment and
supplies sales (see Office
equipment)
Filling station, gasoline * (6) X X X X X X
Film and microfilm,
processing and sales
X X X X
Filters, fabrication (7) X X
Finance companies, loan
offices
(5) X X X X
Fire brick manufacturing (7) X
Fire clay products
manufacturing
(7) X
Fire escape contractors (7) X X
Fire protection
equipment and supplies,
sales
(7) X X
Fire station (7) X X X X X X X X X X
Fireproofing,
manufacturing
(7) X
Firewood storage (8) X X X
Fireworks or explosives,
manufacturing
(7) X
Fish, wholesale (6) X X
Fish, curing (7) X
Fish hatchery, state * (7) X
Fish markets, public (4) X X X X
Fish store, retail (6) X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
424/543
Fish packing or storage (7) X
Fishing tackle fabrication (7) X X X
Fixture manufacturing
(see Metals)
Flags and banners,
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Flats (five or more
families)
(3) X X
Floor materials
(linoleums),
manufacturing
X
Floor materials and
laying, sales
(6) X X X X
Floor polish and wax
manufacturing
(7) X
Floor refinishing,
contractors, shop
(7) X X X X
Florists greenhouses and
nurseries
* (6) X X
Florists, sales (6) X X X X
Flour and grain storage
and elevators
(7) X X
Flour mills X
Food locker (no
processing) (see Electric
refrigeration lockers)
Food processing
(general, see under
product listing)
Food products, brokers
and distributors
(5) X X X
Food products, retail
sales
(6) X X X X
Food products,
warehouse
(8) X
Forest land * X X X X X X X X X X X
Forge plants (7) X
Foundries (7) X
Fraternity houses (3) X X X X
Freight depot (see also
Express companies)
(7) X X X X X X
Freight forwarders'
warehouses
(8) X X X
Freight traffic service (5) X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
425/543
offices
Frozen foods, processing (7) X X
Frozen foods, wholesale
storage and distribution
(6) X X X
Fruit stores, retail (6) X X X X
Fruit and vegetable juice,
processing
(7) X X
Fruit and vegetable
market, retail
* (6) X X
Fruit and vegetable
market, wholesale
* (6)
Fruits and vegetables,
processing (general, see
under product listing)
Fuel distributing station,
gasoline
* (7) X X X X X X
Fuel storage (see product
stored)
Funeral directors (4) X X
Funeral parlors, homes (4) X X X
Fur dyeing, finishing and
apparel (no tanning)
(7) X X X
Fur preparation (tanning) (7) X
Fur warehouse (8):
Fur garments X X X
Raw hides X X X
Furnace, manufacturing
(see Metals)
Furnaces, cleaning and
repairing shops
(7) X X
Furnaces, display and
sales
(6) X X X X
Furnished rooms (2) X X
Furniture, bulk
manufacturing, metal,
wood
(7) X X
Furniture, cleaners (5) X X X
Furniture, custom
fabrication
(6) X X X X
Furniture, display and
sales
(6) X X X X
Furniture, repairing and
refinish
(6) X X X
Furniture, sales (6) X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
426/543
Furniture, used (6) X X X X
Furniture, wholesale and
storage
(8) X X X
Furs, custom cleaning,
remodeling, repairing
and storage
(7) X X X X
Furs, manufacturing,
cutting and assembly
(7) X X X X
Furs, retail sales (6) X X X X
Game preserves * X X
Garage, equipment, sales (6) X X
Garage, public storage X X
Garage, repair (6) X X X
Garbage, reduction,
scavenging
(7) X
Gardening supplies,
packaged fertilizers only
(6) X X X X
Garment factory (7) X X
Gas appliances, sales (6) X X X X
Gas, bottled,
manufacturing
(7) X
Gas, butane,
manufacturing
(7) X
Gas companies' offices (6) X X X X X
Gas tanks, illuminating (7) X
Gas wells, natural * (7) X
Gasholders, illuminating
public utility company
(7) X
Gasoline, bulk storage
tanks
(7) X
Gasoline, refineries (7) X
Gasoline, retail sales * (6) X X X X X X
Gelatin manufacture (7) X
Gift shops (6) X X X X
Glass manufacturing,
window and plate
(7) X
Glass products from
glass stock
(6) X X
Glassblowing, bulk
processing
(7) X
Glassblowing, custom (7) X X X
Glucose manufacture (7) X
Glue and fertilizer (7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
427/543
manufacturing
Glue size or gelatine
manufacturing
(7) X
Golf clubs, private * X X X X X X X X X X X
Golf course, public * X X
Golf, miniature * (4) X X X X X X
Golf practice driving
range
* (4) X X
Government buildings (4) X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Grain elevator (7) X
Graphite manufacture (7) X
Gravel pits * (7) X
Grease and tallow
manufacture
(7) X
Greenhouses
(commercial)
(6) X X
Grist mill (7) X
Grocers, retail (6) X X X X
Grocers, warehouse (8) X X
Grocers, wholesale (7) X X X
Guest homes (3) X X X
Gunpowder
manufacturing
(7) X
Guns, sales (6) X X X
Gunsmiths, repairs (6) X X X
Gutta percha
manufacturing
(7) X
Gymnasiums, private,
commercial
(4) X X X
Gymnasiums, private
clubs or institutional
X X X
Gymnasiums, public (4) X X X
Gypsum or plaster of
Paris manufacturing
(7) X
Hair products factory (7) X
Hairdressing (6) X X X X
Halls, assembly,
institutional
(4) X X X X X
Halls, commercial (4) X X X X
Halls, public (4) X X X X X
Hand laundries, all work
on premises (Chinese)
(6) X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
428/543
Hangars (see Airports)
Hardware,
manufacturing (see
Metals)
Hardware, retail sales,
new and used
(6) X X X X
Hardware, wholesale (7) X X X
Harness repair (7) X X X X
Harness sales (6) X X X
Hat and cap, retail sales (6) X X X X
Hat cleaners and
renovators
(6) X X X X
Hat manufacturing, cloth (7) X X
Hat manufacturing, felt (7) X X
Hatcheries (7) X X
Hay and straw, sales,
storage
(8) X X
Health center, charitable
or institutional
(4) X X X X X X X
Health center, public (4) X X X
Health food products,
sales
(6) X X X X
Heating and ventilating
apparatus, assembly
(7) X X
Heating and ventilating
apparatus, sales
(6) X X X X
Heating and ventilating
apparatus, storage
(8) X X
Heating contractors'
offices
(7) X X X X X X
Heavy castings,
manufacturing
(7) X
Heliport X X X X X X X X
Hemstitching (5) X X X X
Herbs, sales (6) X X X X
Hide and tallow
manufacturing
(7) X
Hobby shop (6) X X X X
Hoists, equipment
storage
(8) X X
Home furnishings store (6) X X X X
Homes, children's,
charitable institutional
(5) X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
429/543
Homes, children's, public (5) X X X
Homes, old age,
charitable institutional
(3) X X X
Homes, old age, public (3) X X X
Horse, dog and cat
hospital
(5) X X X
Horseradish
manufacturing
(7) X
Horseshoeing (7) X X X X X
Hose manufacturing (7) X
Hosiery manufacturing (7) X X
Hosiery sales and
repairing
(6) X X X X
Hospital service
organizations
(7) X X X X
Hospitals, private (4) X X X X X X
Hospitals, public (4) X X X X
Hotel equipment,
assembly and custom
fabrication
(7) X X
Hotel equipment,
supplies and sales
(6) X X
Hotels (3) X X X
House furnishings, sales (6) X X X X
House movers equipment
storage, yards
* (8) X
House of correction X
House wreckers * (8) X
Household appliances,
sales
(6) X X X X
Housing, public, project X
Hydrochloric acid
manufacturing
(7) X
Ice, manufacturing (7) X
Ice, package, sales (6) X X X X
Ice cream, manufacturing (7) X X
Ice cream shops (6) X X X X
Ice skating rink (4) X X X X X
Ice storage, retail
distributor
(7) X X X X
Imported goods, retail
sales
(6) X X X X
Imported goods, (8) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
430/543
warehouse
Incineration of animals
and garbage
(8) X
Indexing systems and
supplies, sales
(6) X X X X
Indian goods, wholesale
and retail
(6) X X X
Industrial school, general
instruction, correctional
(4) X
Industrial truck body
manufacturing
(7) X X
Infirmary, public (4) X X X X
Infirmary, private (4) X X X X
Ink mixing and
packaging
(7) X X
Insane asylum (4) X
Insecticides,
manufacturing
(7) X
Insecticides,
manufacturing (nontoxic)
X
Insecticides, storage and
distributing
(8) X X X
Institute (Bible) (4) X X X X
Institutional building (5) X X X X
Insulation, contractors'
equipment yards
(7) X X
Insulation materials,
manufacturing
(7) X
Insulation materials,
storage and wholesale
(8) X X X
Insurance offices (5) X X X X X
Intercommunicating
systems sales (see
Business machines)
Interior decorators,
display and sales
(7) X X X X X X
Interior decorators,
workshops
(7) X X X X
Iron, custom decorative
wrought iron shops
(7) X X
Iron fabrication (see
Metals)
Iron foundry (7) X
Irrigation companies and (7) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
431/543
equipment
Jails, city (4) X
Janitors' supplies, storage
and warehouse
(8) X X X
Japanning and
shellacking works
(7) X X
Jewelers, bulk
manufacturing
(7) X X
Jewelers, retail sales,
custom manufacturing
(6) X X X X
Jobbers, bulk materials (7) X X
Jukeboxes (see Coin
machines)
Junk dealers, yards (not
allowed in city limits)
* (7)
Jute mills (7) X
Kalsomine
manufacturing
(7) X
Kennels (5) X X X X
Kerosene manufacturing
or storage
(7) X
Key shops (6) X X X X
Kindergarten (4) X X
Kindling factory (7) X
Knit goods manufacture (7) X X
Labor unions, offices (5) X X X
Laboratories, analytical
and chemical
(7) X X
Laboratories, clinical (5) X X X X X
Laboratories,
commercial analytical
(7) X X
Laboratories, dental (5) X X X X X
Laboratories,
experimental and
research
(7) X X
Ladies' wear,
manufacturing
(7) X X
Ladies' wear, sales (6) X X X X
Lampblack
manufacturing
(7) X
Landscape architects,
offices
(5) X X X X X
Landscape gardeners and
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
432/543
contractors (same as
Nurseries)
Lard manufacturing (7) X
Lath manufacturing (7) X
Laundries, collecting
shops
(6) X X X X
Laundries, hand
(Chinese)
(6) X X X X
Laundries, processing (7) X
Laundries, self-service (6) X X X X
Laundry equipment and
supplies storage
(8) X X
Lawn furniture, sales (6) X X X X
Lawn mower repair
shops
(6) X X X X
Lawyers, offices (5) X X X X X
Lead manufacturing (see
Metals)
Lead (white) and oil
manufacturing
(7) X
Leather, artificial or
synthetic, manufacturing
(7) X
Leather findings (7) X
Leather goods, custom
repairing (see Shoe
repairing)
Leather goods
manufacturing,
fabrication
(7) X X
Leather goods
manufacturing, tanning
(7) X
Leather goods, sales,
custom or handicraft
manufacturing
(6) X X X X
Letters, duplicating and
mailing (see Office
service)
Libraries, institutional,
religious
(2) X X X X X X X
Libraries, private, rental (2) X X X X X X X X X X
Libraries, public (2) X X X X X X X
Lighthouse X
Lighting and power
plants
(8) X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
433/543
Lighting fixtures,
manufacturing (see
Electrical and Metals)
Limb (artificial)
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Lime manufacturing (7) X
Lime storage (8) X X X
Linen goods
manufacturing, spinning,
weaving
(7) X X
Linen supply laundry
service
(7) X
Linens, sales (6) X X X X
Linoleum manufacturing (7) X
Linoleum sales (6) X X X X
Linoleum storage (8) X X X
Linseed oil
manufacturing
(7) X
Liquor, dispensing bar (4) X X X
Liquor, distilleries (7) X
Liquor, package sales (6) X X X X
Liquor, storage and
wholesale
(8) X X
Lithographers (7) X X
Livery stables (7) X X
Livestock, sales and
shipping
* (8) X X X X
Livestock, slaughter (8) X
Livestock supplies,
storage and wholesale
(8) X X X
Loan company offices (5) X X X X
Loan or pawn shops (6) X X
Lockers, food storage
(no processing)
(6) X X X
Lockers, food storage
with processing
(7) X X
Locksmiths repair shops (6) X X
Locomotive
manufacturing
(7) X
Lodge halls (4) X X X X X
Lodginghouse (3) X X X
Loft buildings (7) X X
Lubricating compounds, (7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
434/543
manufacturing
Lubricating compounds,
storage
(8) X
Lubricating oil
manufacturing
(7) X
Lubrication business X X X X
Luggage manufacturing X
Luggage sales (6) X X X X
Lumber, bulk processing (8) X
Lumber, cabinetworking (7) X X X
Lumber, storage yard * (8) X X
Lumber, used and
wholesale
* (7) X
Lunchrooms (4) X X X X X X X
Macaroni manufacturing (7) X X
Machine shops (7) X X
Machine tools,
manufacturing
(7) X
Machine tools, storage (8) X X X
Machinery, manufacture
(see Metals, Business
machines)
Machinery, rental * (7) X X X
Machinery, used, storage * (8) X X X
Machinery dealers, sales
and showrooms
(6) X X X X X X
Magazine sales (6) X X X X
Magnetos (see
Automobiles or
Airplane)
Mail order house (6) X X
Malleable casting
manufacturing
(7) X
Malt extracts
manufacturing
(7) X
Marble, quarry
processing
* X
Market, stock and bond (5) X X X X
Massage establishment (5) X X X X
Matches, manufacturing,
wholesale and storage
(7) X
Maternity homes, private (4) X X
Mattress manufacturing (7) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
435/543
Mausoleums X
Meat and fish retail sales (6) X X X X
Meat and fish wholesale
market
(6) X X X X X
Meat packers (7) X
Meat, storage (7) X X X
Meat, wholesale (6) X X X
Medical clinics, private
institutional
(5) X X X X X
Medical clinics, public (5) X X X X X
Medical equipment sales
and supply
X X X X X
Medical laboratories (see
Laboratories)
Medicines,
manufacturing (see
Drugs)
Membership clubs (see
Clubs)
Memorial home parks
(cemeteries)
X
Men's clothing
manufacturing
(7) X X
Men's clothing sales (6) X X X X
Merchandise brokers'
office and display
(5) X X X X
Messenger service (6) X X X X
Metal polish
manufacturing
(7) X
Metals:
Bulk metal
processing and
castings
(7) X
Extraction (mining) * X X
Extrusions of shapes (7) X
Galvanizing (7) X
Heavy castings,
primary processing
(7) X
Light fabrication
from standard shapes
(7) X X
Machine shop
operations
(7) X X
Nonferrous, storage
(inside building, no
X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
436/543
incineration)
Ore reduction and
foundries
(7) X
Plating, bulk (7) X
Plating, custom and
replating
(7) X X
Products fabrication
and assembly (nonnuisance
in
character)
X X
Rolling mills (7) X
Sharpening (6) X X X
Meters, manufacturing (7) X X
Milk bars (refreshment
stands, except roadside
types)
(4) X X X X
Milk bottling plant (7) X X
Milk distributing
stations, commercial (see
Dairies)
Milk pasteurization (7) X X
Milliners, custom and
sales
(6) X X X X
Milliners, wholesale and
manufacturing
(7) X X
Millinery and dress
furnishing shop
(6) X X X X
Milling equipment,
showrooms, sales
(7) X X
Mills (see material
processed)
Mills, flour and grain (7) X
Mills, jute (7) X
Millwork
(woodworking),
manufacturing
(7) X X
Millwork, sales and
storage
(7) X X X
Mimeographing (see
Office service)
Mineral water distillation
and bottling
(7) X X
Mining * X X
Mining machinery,
wholesale, storage
* (8) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
437/543
Mining machinery and
supplies, display and
sales
* (7) X X
Ministorage buildings X X X
Mirrors, bulk
manufacturing
(7) X
Mirrors, resilvering,
custom work
(7) X X X
Missions, religious (4) X X X X
Model construction
supplies, manufacturing
(7) X X
Model construction
supplies, sales
(6) X X X X
Molasses manufacturing (7) X
Monastery (3) X X X
Monuments,
manufacturing
(7) X
Monuments, sale and
display
* (7) X X X
Mortar, bulk preparation
and sales
(7) X X
Mortuary (4) X X
Motels (4) X X X
Motion picture
equipment, sales and
display
(6) X X X X
Motion picture
equipment, storage and
manufacturing
(7) X X
Motion picture studios (7) X X
Motion picture theaters (4) X X X
Motor freight company
garages
(7) X X X
Motor freight company
offices
(7) X X X X X
Motor freight company
warehouses
(8) X X X
Motor truck repairing
(see Automobiles)
Motor truck sales and
display (see
Automobiles)
Motor truck supplies,
truck supplies (parts),
sales (see Automobiles)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
438/543
Motorcycle
manufacturing (see
Automobiles)
Motorcycles, repairing
and sales
(6) X X X X
Movers, garages (7) X X
Movers, warehouses (8) X X
Multigraphing,
commercial
(5) X X X
Museums (2) X X X X
Music instruction,
commercial
(5) X X X
Musical institutes and
foundations,
noncommercial
(4) X X X X
Musical instruments,
repairing and sales
(6) X X X X
Nail manufacturing (see
Metals)
Natatorium (see Pool)
Naturopathic physicians (5) X X X X X
Naval supplies, sales,
army or navy (not
surplus)
(6) X X X
Needle manufacturing
(see Metals)
News dealers (6) X X X X
News service (5) X X X X
Newsstands (6) X X X X
Newspaper advertising
sales
(5) X X X X
Newspaper printing (7) X X X
Nightclubs (see Clubs)
Nitrating of cotton or
other materials
(7) X
Nitric acid or its
derivatives,
manufacturing
(7) X
Noodle manufacturing (7) X X
Notions, manufacturing
and wholesale
(7) X X
Notions, retail (6) X X X X
Novelties, manufacturing
and wholesale
(7) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
439/543
Novelties, retail (6) X X X X
Nurseries, agricultural (8) X
Nurseries, landscape (6) X X X X
Nurseries, wholesale X X X X
Nursery schools (child) (5) X X X
Nurses homes (see
Hospitals)
Nursing homes (6) X X X
Nut shop (4) X X X X
Nuts, edible, processing (7) X X X X
Nuts, industrial,
processing
(7) X
Office building (5) X X X X X X X X
Office equipment
manufacturing (see also
Business machines)
X X
Office equipment sales (6) X X X X
Office furniture
equipment and supplies,
sales and showroom
(6) X X X X
Office furniture
manufacturing
(7) X X
Office furniture, storage
and warehouses
(8) X X X
Office service
(stenographic service,
letter preparation,
addressing and mailing,
duplicating,
multigraphing,
mimeographing, machine
tabulation, research and
statistical)
(5) X X X X
Oil and gas stations * X X X X X X
Oil burners, installation
and repair
(7) X X
Oil burners,
manufacturing
(7) X
Oil burners, sales and
showroom
(7) X X X X X
Oil, fuel, storage * (8) X
Oil refinery (7) X
Oil, vegetable,
processing
(7) X
Oil wells X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
440/543
Oilcloth manufacturing (7) X
Oiled, rubber or
synthetic leather goods
manufacturing
(7) X
Old people's home,
private
(5) X X X
Old people's home,
public
(6) X X X
Oleomargarine
manufacturing
(7) X
Olives, processing (7) X
Opera house, civic
building
(4) X X X X
Opera house, private
corporation
(4) X X X X
Optical goods,
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Optical laboratories X
Optician (5) X X X X X
Opticians, sales (6) X X X X X
Optometrists, sales (6) X X X X X
Ordnance manufacturing (7) X
Ore dumps and elevators * X
Ore reduction (7) X
Organ manufacturing (7) X
Ornamental metalwork,
custom hand fabrication
(7) X X
Ornamental metalwork,
mass production
(7) X
Orphan asylum, private
institution
(3) X
Orphan asylum, public (3) X
Orthopedic appliances,
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Orthopedic shoe repair (6) X X X X
Osteopathic physicians
and surgeons
(5) X X X X X
Outdoor theaters,
commercial
* X X
Outdoor theaters, public * X X X
Overall manufacturing
(clothing)
(7) X X X
Oxygen equipment, (7) X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
441/543
rental and distribution
Oxygen production and
storage
(7) X
Package (liquor) store (6) X X X X
Packing and crating
service, fabrication
(7) X X X
Packing and crating
service, sawmill
operations
(7) X X
Packing plants (meat) (7) X
Paint and varnish, bulk
storage, warehouse
(8) X X X
Paint and varnish,
manufacture
(7) X X
Paint and varnish, retail
sales
(6) X X X X
Paint shops, automobile
(see Auto repair)
Painters' equipment and
supplies shops,
wholesale and storage
(7) X X X X X
Painting contractors,
office only
(7) X X X X X X
Painting equipment and
supplies, retail sales
(6) X X X X
Palmistry X
Paper manufacturing (7) X
Paper products,
manufacturing (cartons,
containers)
(7) X X
Paper products,
wholesale and storage
(8) X X X X X
Paper storage (8) X X X
Paraffin (same as
Petroleum)
(7) X
Parish house (3) X X X X X X X X X X X
Parking lots, commercial * X X X
Parking lots, private * X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Parks, amusement,
private
* X X X X
Parks, public * X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Parochial schools (5) X X X X X X X X X
Pattern shop (7) X X
Paving contractors' * (8) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
442/543
equipment, storage
Paving materials storage
yard
* (8) X X
Pawnbroker (6) X X
Pencil factory (7) X
Penny arcades (4) X X
Perfumery
manufacturing
(7) X
Peroxyline (plastics)
manufacturing
(7) X
Pet shops (sales only) (6) X X X X
Petroleum refining (7) X
Petroleum storage,
wholesale
(8) X
Pharmaceutical products
manufacturing
(7) X
Pharmacy (6) X X X X X
Philatelist (5) X X X X
Phonograph records,
manufacturing
(7) X
Phonograph records,
sales
(6) X X X X
Phonographs, sales (6) X X X X
Photoengraving company (7) X X
Photographers,
commercial, studios
(5) X X X X
Photographic equipment
and supplies, retail sales
(6) X X X X
Photographic supplies
fabrication (no film)
(7) X X
Photo-printers, retail (7) X X X X
Photostat print shops (7) X X X
Physical therapy clinic (5) X X X X X
Physicians' and surgeons'
exchanges
(5) X X X X X
Physicians' and surgeons'
offices
(5) X X X X X
Piano manufacturing (7) X
Piano sales (5) X X X X
Piano tuning, repairing (7) X X
Pickles, processed,
wholesale and storage
(8) X X X
Pickles, processing (7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
443/543
Picric acid or its
derivatives,
manufacturing
(8) X
Picture framing, custom (6) X X X X
Pier (see Dock)
Pies, bulk, commercial
bakery
(7) X X X X
Pigeon raising (7) X
Pin manufacturing (see
Metals)
Pipe, concrete,
manufacturing
(8) X X
Pipe, concrete, storage * (8) X X
Pipe coverings,
contractors' shops
(7) X X
Pipe fittings, storage and
wholesale
(8) X X
Pipe, metal,
manufacturing
(7) X
Pipe, metal, storage * (8) X X
Pipe, used, storage and
sales
* (7) X X X
Pipeline companies'
offices
(5) X X X X
Planing mill (7) X
Plaster, manufacturing (7) X
Plaster, wholesale and
storage
(8) X X
Plasterers, contractors'
yards
(7) X X
Plastic and plastic
products, manufacturing
(7) X
Plastic and plastic
products, sales and
demonstration
(6) X X X
Plating works, bulk
(galvanizing)
(7) X
Plating works, precious
metals
(7) X X
Playgrounds, public * X X X X X X X X X X X X
Plow manufacturing (see
Metals)
Plumbers' shops (7) X X X X
Plumbing fixtures and (6) X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
444/543
supplies, display and
sales
Plumbing fixtures and
supplies, wholesale and
storage
(8) X X
Pole and shaft
manufacturing (see
Metals)
Police station (7) X X X X
Pool hall (4) X X X
Pool, swimming, public * (4) X X X X X X X
Pool, swimming, private,
commercial
* (4) X X X X X X X
Popcorn, dispensing
popped
(6) X X X X X
Popcorn, dispensing unpopped
(7) X X X
Post office (7) X X X X X
Poster illustration, studio (7) X X X X
Potash works (7) X
Potato chips,
manufacturing
(7) X
Poultry and egg store (no
slaughtering, etc.)
(6) X X X X
Poultry feed
manufacturing
(7) X
Poultry raising * X
Poultry slaughter and
dressing
(7) X
Poultry supplies,
wholesale and storage
(6) X X X
Pressing shops (6) X X X
Printers (7) X X
Printers' equipment and
supplies, wholesale
(7) X X
Printers' ink,
manufacturing
(7) X
Prison (city only) and
penitentiary
(4) X
Produce (garden), retail
sales
(6) X X X X
Produce (garden),
wholesale
(6) X X
Produce warehouse (7) X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
445/543
Property management
offices
(5) X X X X
Protection service (5) X X X X
Provident association (5) X X X X
Public relations
consultants
(5) X X X X
Public storage garages X X X X
Public utility plants (7) X X
Publicity service (5) X X X X
Publishers' offices (5) X X X X X
Pumice manufacturing (7) X
Pumps, repairing and
rental
(7) X X X X
Pumps, retail sales and
display
(6) X X X X
Pyroxylin manufacturing (7) X
Quarries * X X
Quilt manufacturing (7) X X
Racetrack * X X
Radiator manufacturing
(see Metals)
Radiator repair (see
Automobiles)
Radio (see Electrical)
Radio broadcasting
stations
(7) X X X X X
Radio broadcasting
studios
(7) X
Radio equipment (see
Electrical)
Radio equipment
appliances, assembly,
manufacturing (see
Electrical)
Radio equipment
assembling
(7) X X
Radio repair shop (6) X X X X
Radio, retail sales (6) X X X X
Radio studios (7) X X X
Rags, bulk collection and
storage
(7) X
Rags, processing (7) X
Railroad agents (7) X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
446/543
Railroads, service and
repair yard
* X X
Ranches, cattle and
sheep
* X
Ranches, guest X
Ranges and stoves, sales (6) X X X X
Raw hides and skins,
treatment
(7) X
Real estate sales office (6) X X X X X
Recreation centers,
public
(4) X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Reduction of garbage,
offal
(7) X
Reduction of ore (7) X
Refreshment stands
(nonalcoholic and not
roadside types)
(4) X X X X X
Refrigeration equipment,
custom installation
(7) X X
Refrigerator
manufacturing (see
Metals)
Refrigerators, sales (6) X X X X
Refrigerators, servicing (7) X X X X X
Refrigerators, wholesale,
storage
(8) X X X
Refuse dump * (8) X X
Religious art goods sales (6) X X X X
Rendering works (not
allowed in city limits)
(7)
Research laboratories
(see Laboratories)
Reservoirs * (7) X X
Residence, one-family (1) X X X X X X
Residence, over four
families
(2) X X
Residence, three and four
families
(2) X X
Residence, two-family (2) X X
Resort hotels (3) X X X
Rest homes, private (3) X X X
Restaurant equipment
and supplies, sales
(6) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
447/543
Restaurants (4) X X X X X X X
Retail markets (6) X X X X
Retail stores and shops X X X X
Rice cleaning and
polishing
(7) X
Riding academies * X X X X X
Riding equipment sales (7) X X X
Rink skating (4) X X
Roadbuilding equipment
sales
* (7) X X
Roadbuilding equipment
storage yard
* (8) X X
Roadside sales stand,
food and agricultural
products
(6) X X
Roadside sales stand,
food and drink
(6) X X
Roadside sales stand,
souvenirs
X X
Rock crushing (7) X X
Roller skating rink (4) X X
Rolling mills (7) X
Roofers, contractors'
offices
(7) X X X X X X
Roofing materials,
storage and sales
(8) X X
Roominghouse (3) X
Rope manufacturing,
rope walk
(7) X
Roundhouse (7) X
Row house, private (2) X X
Rowing club (see Clubs)
Rubber products
manufacturing
(7) X
Rubber products salvage (7) X
Rubber stamps
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Rubbish removal, private
equipment and storage
* (7) X
Rug cleaners (7) X X X X
Rug manufacturing (7) X
Saddle factory (7) X X
Saddlery shops, custom, (7) X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
448/543
handmade
Safe depositories (4) X X X X X X
Safe, opening and repairs (7) X X
Safes, sales (6) X X X X X
Sail loft, fabrication (8) X X
Saloon (4) X X X
Salt refining (7) X
Salvage companies
equipment and storage
yard (except garbage,
rubbish, rags or
putrescible material (see
Junk dealers yards and
Scavenger) (not allowed
in city limits)
* (8)
Salvation Army (5) X X X X
Sanatoriums, private (4) X X
Sanatoriums, public (4) X X
Sand and gravel,
extraction
* X
Sand and gravel,
processing and storage
* X X
Sandpaper
manufacturing
(7) X
Sauerkraut,
manufacturing
(7) X
Sausage manufacturing (7) X
Savings and loan
associations
(6) X X X X
Sawdust manufacturing (7) X
Sawmill (8) X
Scaffolds, equipment
storage
(8) X X
Scales, commercial
weighing
X X X X
Scavenger, equipment,
storage yard
(8) X X
School equipment and
supplies, wholesale
(7) X X
Schools:
Art, commercial (5) X X X
Art, institute (5) X X X X
Aviation, ground
(see Airplane)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
449/543
Beauty (5) X X X
Business and
commercial, private
(5) X X X
Correctional (penal) X
Correspondence and
stenographic
(5) X X X
Dancing, private (5) X X X X
Flight instruction
(see Airplane)
Health, gymnastic,
private
(5) X X X X
Kindergarten (2) X X
Music, private (2) X X X
Music institutes (5) X X X X
Parochial (2) X X X X X
Physically
handicapped
(2) X X X X X X X
Private, academic (2) X X X X X X
Public, trade (2) X X X
Vocational X X X
Scrap iron storage yard * (8) X
Scrap metal (junk),
processing (not allowed
in city limits)
(7)
Scrap metal (junk),
storage only (not allowed
in city limits)
* (8)
Screens, doors and
windows manufacturing
(7) X X X
Screw and bolt
manufacturing
(7) X
Secondhand goods,
personal and furniture
(6) X X X X
Secretarial schools (see
Schools)
Seed, retail garden
supplies
(6) X X X X
Seed treatment,
processing, extraction of
oil
(7) X
Seed, wholesale sales (7) X X X X
Self-service laundry (6) X X X X
Septic tanks, contractors,
construction
(7) X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
450/543
Septic tanks, servicing
and cleaning equipment
yard
* (7) X
Service station
equipment, wholesale
X X X X
Service stations
(gasoline)
* (6) X X X X X X
Sewage disposal
systems, private
* X X X X
Sewage disposal
systems, public
* (7) X X X X X
Sewer pipe
manufacturing, concrete
(7) X X
Sewer pipe
manufacturing, tile and
terracotta
(7) X X
Sewer pipe storage * (8) X X
Sewer service,
equipment yard
* (8) X X
Sewing machines, sales
and repairing
(6) X X X X
Sheetmetal work, custom
fabrication
(7) X X X
Shell grinding (7) X
Shellac manufacturing (7) X
Shingle manufacturing (7) X
Ship storage yard * (8) X X X X
Shipping company,
docks
* (8) X X X X
Shipping company,
office only
(5) X X X X
Shipyard * (7) X
Shirt factory (7) X X
Shoddy manufacturing (7) X
Shoe blackening
manufacturing
(7) X
Shoe repairing (6) X X X X
Shoe repairing
equipment and supplies,
wholesale
(7) X X X X
Shoes, manufacturing,
bulk
(7) X
Shoes, retail sales (6) X X X X
Shoes, rubber,
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
451/543
manufacturing (see
Rubber products)
Shoeshine stands (6) X X X X
Shooting gallery (4) X X
Shovel manufacturing
(see Metals)
Sightseeing tours,
garages
X X
Sightseeing tours,
passenger depot
X X X
Sign erectors,
contractors' shops
(7) X X
Sign painters, shops (7) X X X
Signs, maintenance
service shop
(7) X X X
Signs, neon and metal
fabrication
(7) X X
Silk manufacturing (7) X
Size manufacturing (7) X
Skating rink (4) X X
Skylights, custom
manufacturing
(7) X X
Slag pile * X
Slate quarry * X
Slaughterhouses (7) X
Slip covers, custom
manufacturing
(5) X X X X
Slot car racing
establishments
X X X X
Smelting or refining of
metals
(7) X
Snuff manufacturing (7) X
Soaps, manufacturing (7) X
Soaps, wholesale and
storage
(7) X X X
Social centers (4) X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Soda ash manufacturing (7) X
Soda compound
manufacturing
(7) X
Soda fountain supplies,
wholesale
(7) X X
Soda water
manufacturing
(7) X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
452/543
Soft drink stand (4) X X X X X X X X
Soot blower
manufacturing
(7) X
Sorority houses (2) X X X X X X X
Sound systems and
equipment sales
(6) X X X X
Sound systems, rental
and service
(7) X X X X
Soybean oil
manufacturing
(7) X
Specialties shops X X X X
Spices, processing (7) X
Spices, wholesale and
storage
(8) X X
Spinning mill (7) X X
Sporting goods,
manufacturing
(7) X X
Sporting goods, retail
sales
(6) X X X X
Sportswear, retail sales (6) X X X X
Spraying supplies
equipment yard
* (8) X X
Springs, auto (see
Automobiles)
Springs, metal,
manufacturing
(7) X
Springs, replacement and
repairs
(7) X X X X
Stables (7) X X
Stadium * (4) X
Stair builders, metal (7) X X
Stair builders, wood (7) X X
Stamp dealers (5) X X X X
Starch manufacturing (7) X
State office building (4) X
Stationers, retail sales (6) X X X X
Steambaths, private (5) X X
Steamship agency office (5) X X X X
Steel awnings, custom
manufacturing
(7) X X
Steel erectors' equipment
yards
* (8) X
Steel fabrication, heavy (7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
453/543
sections
Steel fabricators, light
sections
(7) X X
Steel manufacturing,
rolling mills, etc.
(7) X
Steel tank manufacturing (7) X
Stenographer schools
(see Schools)
Stenographers, public (5) X X X X X
Stock and bond brokers (5) X X X X X
Stock and bond market
(exchange)
(5) X X
Stockyards (livestock) * (7) X X X X
Stone crushing * (7) X X
Stone cutting and
screening
(7) X
Stone quarry * X
Storage warehouse (8) X X
Storage yards, bulk
material
* (8) X X
Storage yards, equipment * (8) X
Store and office fixtures,
contractors' shops
(7) X X X
Storefront construction
shops
(7) X X
Stove polish,
manufacturing
(7) X
Stoves and ranges,
manufacturing
(7) X
Stoves and ranges,
wholesale storage
(8) X X
Structural steel
manufacturing
(7) X
Sugar refining (7) X
Sulphuric acid
manufacturing
(8) X
Surgical supplies,
wholesale distributors
(8) X X X
Surveyors (5) X X X X X
Sweeping compound
manufacturing
(7) X
Swimming pools,
commercial
* (4) X X X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
454/543
Swimming pools, public * (4) X X X X X X X
Synagogue (3) X X X X X X X X
Syrup and preserve
manufacturing
(7) X X X
Tabulating machines (see
Business machines)
Tack manufacturing (see
Metals)
Tackle shop, marine
supplies
(6) X X X
Tailors, custom (5) X X X X
Tallow rendering (7) X
Tank coating equipment
yard
(8) X
Tanks, erection,
contractors' yard
* (7) X
Tanks, fabrication (7) X X
Tanneries (7) X
Tar, distillation or
manufacturing
(7) X
Tar roofing or
waterproofing,
manufacturing
(7) X
Taverns (4) X X X
Tax consultants (5) X X X X X
Taxicab garages X X
Taxicab stands * X X X X
Taxicab storage, repair X
Taxidermists (5) X X X
Tea and spice packing (7) X X X
Tea and spice retail sales (6) X X X X
Tearooms (4) X X X X
Telegraph companies,
offices
(7) X X X
Telephone companies,
offices
(7) X X X
Telephone switching
station
X X X X
Television sales and
repair
(6) X X X X
Television studio (see
Radio)
Tenements, over four (2) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
455/543
families
Tennis courts, private
rental
* (3) X X X
Tennis courts, public * (3) X X X X X X X X X X X
Tent show area * (4) X X
Tents and awnings
manufacturing
(7) X X X X
Tents and awnings sales (6) X X X X
Termite control
contractor shops
(7) X X X
Terracotta manufacturing (7) X
Terrazzo contractor
shops
(7) X X X X
Textile mills (7) X X
Theaters (4) X X X
Theaters, outdoor (drivein)
* X X
Theatrical agencies (5) X X X X
Thermometers,
manufacturing
(7) X
Tile contractors, storage * (8) X X
Tile manufacturing,
decorative
(7) X X
Tile manufacturing,
structural
(7) X X
Time recorders (see
Business machines)
Tin products,
manufacturing (see
Metals)
Tin refining, ore
reduction
(7) X
Tin shop, fabrication (7) X X
Tinfoil manufacturing (7) X
Tire repairing, equipment
and supplies
(7) X X X
Tires, manufacturing (7) X
Title insurance
companies
(5) X X X X X
Tobacco, chewing,
manufacturing or
treatment
(7) X
Tobacco, cigarette,
manufacturing
(7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
456/543
Tobacco curing (8) X
Tobacco, retail (6) X X X X X X X X X X
Tobacco, wholesale,
storage
(8) X X
Tombstones,
manufacturing
(7) X
Tombstones, sales and
display
* (7) X X
Tool grinding and
sharpening
(6) X X X
Tools, wholesale and
distribution
(7) X X X X
Tortillas, manufacturing,
wholesale
(7) X X
Tourist courts (3) X X X X
Tourist homes (3) X X X
Tours, garages X X
Tours, offices and
passenger depots
(4) X X X
Towels, supply service (7) X X X
Toys, manufacturing (see
wood, metal, plaster or
paper manufacturing)
Toys, retail sales (6) X X X X
Tractors, rental (7) X X X
Tractors, retail sales,
display
* (6) X X X X X
Trailer camps and courts * X
Trailers, repairing * (7) X X X
Trailers, sales * (7) X X
Transfer business (7) X X X
Travel bureaus (6) X X X X
Truck freight movers
(see also Express
companies)
(7) X X X X X
Trucks (same as
Automobiles)
Trunks, custom repair
and retail sales
(6) X X
Trunks, manufacturing (7) X X
Trusses, manufacturing,
custom and retail
(7) X X
Trust companies (6) X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
457/543
Turpentine
manufacturing
(7) X
Two-family dwelling (2) X X X
Typewriters, sales, rental,
repairing, parts and
supplies (see Business
machines)
Umbrella fabrication (7) X X
Umbrella sales (6) X X X X
Undertakers (4) X X
Underwear, wholesale
manufacturing
(7) X X
Uniforms, rental (7) X X X
United States
government offices
(4) X X X X X X X X X X
Upholsterers, custom (5) X X X
Upholsterers, supplies,
sales
(7) X X X X
Used cars, sales (see
Automobiles)
Vacuum cleaners, sales
and repair
(6) X X X X
Valves (same as Balls
and bearings)
Variety stores, retail (6) X X X X
Varnish manufacturing (7) X
Vegetable market, retail (6) X X X X
Vegetable market,
wholesale
(6) X X X
Vegetables and fruits,
processing (see Foods)
Vending machines,
distributors and repairs
(see Coin machines)
Venetian blinds and
window shades, retail
sales
(6) X X X X X
Venetian blinds, custom
manufacturing,
installation
(7) X X X
Ventilating equipment
(see Air conditioning
equipment)
Veterinarians, clinics (5) X X X
Veterinarians, office only (5) X X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
458/543
Veterinarians, supplies,
sales
(6) X X X
Vinegar manufacturing (7) X
Vocational school (2) X X X X
Vulcanizers (see Tires)
Wagon manufacturing (7) X
Wagon shop, repairs (7) X X X X
Wallboard,
manufacturing
(7) X
Wallboard, wholesale
and storage
(8) X X
Wallpaper,
manufacturing
(7) X
Wallpaper, sales, display (6) X X X X
Warehouses (8) X X
Washing machines, sales
and display, custom
repairing
(6) X X X X
Washing powder,
manufacturing
(7) X
Washing soda,
manufacturing
(7) X
Waste paper products,
manufacturing
(7) X
Watches, manufacturing (7) X X
Watches, sales and
repairing
(6) X X X X
Water coolers (drinking
fountains), repairs and
service
(7) X X X X
Water, distilled,
processing
(7) X
Water heaters, service
and repairing
(7) X X X X
Water, mineral, drinking
or curative, bottling and
distribution
(7) X X X
Water softening
equipment, service and
repairs
(7) X X X X X
Water supply systems,
contractors' shops
(7) X X
Waterproofing materials
manufacturing
(7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
459/543
Wax processing (7) X
Waxed container
manufacturing
(7) X X
Weaving and mending,
custom
(5) X X X X
Weaving, handicraft (5) X X X X
Weaving mills (7) X X
Weighers, commercial (7) X X X X X
Welding, commercial (7) X X X
Welding, equipment and
supplies, storage
(7) X X X
Welding shop (7) X X X
Well drilling, equipment
yard
* (8) X X
Wharf, amusement pier * (4) X
Wharf, private shipping
company
* X X X X
Wharf, public * X X
Wharf, serving an
industry (see industry)
Wheelchairs, rentals and
service
(7) X X X X
White lead
manufacturing
(7) X
Wholesale produce
storage or market,
commercial
(6) X X
Winches, equipment
rentals
(7) X X
Window cleaners service (5) X X X
Window display
installations, studio and
shops
(7) X X X X
Window glass
installation shop
(7) X X
Window shades, sales
and repairing
(6) X X X X X
Wines, distillation (7) X
Wines, package retail
sales
(6) X X X X
Wines, storage,
distribution and bottling
(8) X X X
Wire rope and fencing
fabrication
(7) X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
460/543
Wood preserving,
treatment
(8) X
Wood products
manufacturing, bulk
(8) X
Wood pulp
manufacturing
(7) X
Wood, storage yard * (8) X X
Woodworking, cabinet
and custom millwork
(7) X X X
Woodworking,
equipment, wholesale
(7) X X X
Woodworking, sawmill,
bulk, processing
(8) X
Wool processing (7) X
Wool scouring or pulling (7) X
Wool spinning and
weaving
(7) X X
Worsted goods
manufacturing
(7) X X
Woven goods,
fabrication and assembly
(7) X X
Woven goods,
manufacturing mills
(7) X X
Wrecking contractors'
yards (outside of city)
* (8)
X-ray apparatus,
manufacturing (see
Electrical appliances)
X-ray laboratories (see
Laboratories)
Yacht club, private (3) X X X X X
Yacht club, public
facilities
(3) X X X X X
Yeast cultivation, bulk (7) X
YMCA (3) X X X
YWCA (3) X X
YMHA (3) X X
YWHA (3) X X
Zinc products,
manufacturing (see
Metals)
Zinc refining (7) X
Zoological gardens,
public
* X X X X X X X X X
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
461/543
Zoos, private commercial * (6) X X X X X
(Ord. No. 3171, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3206, § 1, 9-10-62; Ord. No. 3332, § 1, 9-23-63; Ord. No. 3361, § 1, 1-13-64;
Ord. No. 3368, § 1, 3-23-64; Ord. No. 3396, § 1, 9-14-64; Ord. No. 3407, § 1, 9-14-64; Ord. No. 3445, § 1, 4-
26-65; Ord. No. 3517, § 1, 5-23-66; Ord. No. 3605, § 1, 5-22-67; Ord. No. 3611, § 1, 7-10-76; Ord. No. 3671, §
1, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 3699, § 1, 9-23-68; Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 4-27-70; Ord. No. 3875, § 1, 1-19-71; Ord. No.
4006, § 1, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 4049, § 1, 4-10-72; Ord. No. 4056, § 1, 4-24-72; Ord. No. 4300, § 1, 12-10-73;
Ord. No. 4459, § 1, 10-29-74; Ord. No. 4471, § 1, 12-23-74; Ord. No. 4510, § 1, 5-12-75; Ord. No. 4513, § 1, 5-
12-75; Ord. No. 4516, § 1, 5-27-75; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 5-27-75; Ord. No. 4520, § 1, 6-9-75; Ord. No. 4527, §
1, 6-23-75; Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 4-26-76; Ord. No. 4553, § 1, 4-26-76; Ord. No. 4625, § 1, 3-8-76; Ord. No.
4716, § 1, 1-24-77; Ord. No. 4717, § 1, 2-14-77; Ord. No. 4769, § 1, 5-23-77; Ord. No. 4847, § 1, 1-9-78; Ord.
No. 4955, § 1, 5-29-79; Ord. No. 4971, § 1, 5-29-79; Ord. No. 5120, § 1, 9-8-80; Ord. No. 5176, § 1, 11-24-80;
Ord. No. 5560, § 1, 8-22-83; Ord. No. 5613, § 1, 1-9-84; Ord. No. 5614, § 1, 1-9-84; Ord. No. 5651, § 1, 4-9-84;
Ord. No. 5821, § 1, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 5837, § 1, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 5934, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 6338, § 1, 7-10-
89; Ord. No. 6353, § 1, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 6661, § 1, 11-9-92)
Secs. 117-2—117-27. - Reserved.
DIVISION 1. - REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC DISTRICTS
Subdivision I. - General Provisions
Sec. 117-28. - Limitation of external uses in certain districts.
(a)
This section shall apply to all residential zones, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6, and to commercial zone C-1.
(b)
Limitation of external uses in such zones shall be as follows. Within not more than two years from the date on
which the following provisions become effective, every use shall be made to comply with the following
limitations:
(1)
No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gasses shall be stored on any lot, except as required directly
for and as part of any heating devices or appliances, on the same lot.
(2)
All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products permitted as a part of a dwelling or C-1
commercial use shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or screen adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent
property.
(3)
No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the
lot by normal, natural causes or forces.
(4)
All materials or wastes incidental to any permitted or legal nonconforming use which might cause fumes or dust
or which constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects, shall
be stored outdoors only in closed containers.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
462/543
(Ord. No. 3171, § 701.2, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-29. - Permitted encroachments on setback spaces in certain districts.
(a)
Permitted encroachments on setback spaces in residential zones R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6, and
commercial zone C-1, are as provided in subsection (b) of this section.
(b)
Cornices, eaves, gutters, stoops, steps, belt courses, sills, lintels and contrivances attached to the structures but
not having contact with the ground, for the purposes of controlling sunlight entering the building, may project
not more than 2½ feet into any setback space and shall not be considered a violation of the required setback.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 701.5, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-30. - Exception from lot coverage and setback requirements for fallout or air raid shelters.
Where the owners of any property wish to construct a fallout or air raid shelter for the protection of persons
living within a permitted structure, the shelter being above ground or below ground, they should present a sketch
of the proposed shelter to the planning commission staff for their approval, and, for the purposes of these
regulations, such shelters shall not be considered in violation of lot coverage, or rear yard setbacks. In all other
cases, proposals for fallout or air raid shelters shall be submitted to the planning commission for their approval,
with a request for variance of any regulation, setback or other requirement of these regulations, and each such
presentation shall be considered on its merits, in the light of the purpose and intent of these regulations, except
that required side yards may be encroached upon by underground shelters to a minimum of two feet from side
lot lines. All entryways or appurtenances thereto, except approved vent pipes which pierce the ground surface,
must be in compliance with the required setback spaces.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 701.6, 3-26-62)
Secs. 117-31—117-57. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Residential Districts
Sec. 117-58. - Home occupations.
In residential zones R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, and other zones as provided in this chapter, all home occupations
operated in a single-unit dwelling shall be considered a single unit which unit may be operated only if it
complies with all of the following conditions:
(1)
Is operated in its entirety within the single-unit dwelling and only by the person or persons maintaining a
dwelling therein.
(2)
Does not have a separate entrance from outside the building.
(3)
Does not display or create outside the building any external evidence of the operation of the home occupation,
except, for each street front of the lot on which the building is located, one unanimated, flat sign having a
displayed surface area of not more than two square feet giving notice of the service offered, but not advertising
any product.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
463/543
(4)
Does not utilize more than 20 percent of the gross floor area, but not to exceed 300 square feet, in the single-unit
dwelling; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to foster family care.
(5)
Does not have any employees or regular assistants not residents in the single-unit dwelling.
(6)
Is limited to the use of electric motors for power with a total limitation of three horsepower for all motors.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 701.3, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-59. - Exceptions to lot width, lot area and setback requirements.
(a)
Applicability. This section shall apply to residential zones R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6.
(b)
Exceptions to lot width and area requirements. On a lot of record shown on a plat or deed recorded prior to
March 26, 1962, or where the lot is adjoined on both sides with lots with structures thereon or on a lot adjoined
on one side by a street and on the other by a lot with a structure thereon, the minimum lot width at the building
line and minimum lot area may be waived by the planning commission staff, providing that the intended
structure is in full compliance with all other requirements of this chapter. In no case, however, shall a lot width
of less than 40 feet be permitted or a lot area of less than 4,800 square feet be permitted, except in an R-5 area a
lot width of not less than 20 feet and a lot area of not less than 2,500 square feet may be permitted when utilized
for terrace or row housing.
(c)
Exceptions to setback requirements. Where lots comprising 40 percent or more of the frontage of any block have
structures thereon having an average front yard with a variation in depth of not more than 16 feet, no building
hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard setback thus established,
provided further that this regulation shall not be interpreted as to require a front yard of more than 75 feet, and
provided further that in case of a subdivision approved by the city planning commission with a front building
line less than that required by zones R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 then the requirements of zones R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 shall be waived and said recorded building line shall be accepted.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 701.4, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-60. - Construction of structure on more than one lot.
(a)
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter or in the subdivision regulations, one structure may be
built on more than one lot without the necessity of a replat of lot boundary lines and in such circumstances as to
waive the setback requirements as they pertain to the interior lot lines. No such waiver or replat is valid without
prior planning commission approval.
(b)
The provisions of subsection (a) of this section only apply to the R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
464/543
(Ord. No. 5034, §§ 1—3, 12-10-79; Ord. No. 5572, §§ 1—4, 9-26-83)
Sec. 117-61. - R-0 single-family medium-density district.
(a)
Description of district. The R-0 single-family medium-density district is composed of single-family mediumdensity
areas of the city, plus certain open areas where similar residential developments appear likely to occur.
The regulations for this district are designated to encourage controlled medium-density single-family dwellings
at prices affordable to a large percentage of the area's population. The regulations are also provided to stabilize
and protect the essential characteristics of the district and to promote orderly planning and development of land
uses by prohibiting all activities of a commercial nature in this district, except certain prescribed home
occupations controlled by specific regulations, plus certain uses which are adjunct to residential areas, such as
schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities.
(b)
Limitation of external uses in such zones shall be as follows. Within not more than two years from the date on
which the following provisions become effective, every use shall be made to comply with the limitation of
external uses listed in the general regulations (section 118-161).
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied by only one
principal structure which shall be a single-family dwelling unit or other permitted use structure, and such
accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to the permitted use and operated and maintained by the
owner of the lot; provided, however, that no accessory building shall be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the R-0 district only those uses specified under R-6 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted, except that the following home occupations will be permitted,
providing they comply fully with the limitations on home occupations as specified in the general regulations
(section 118-191):
(1)
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for custom apparel and custom home furnishings.
(2)
Laundering and pressing.
(3)
Office (any office in which goods, wares or merchandise are not created, exchanged or sold).
(4)
Tutoring (not more than four students at a time).
(5)
Fine arts studio in which are created only individual works of art.
(e)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
465/543
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each residential structure shall comply with the following dimensional
requirements:
(1)
Minimum lot width. Each interior lot shall be not less than 40 feet wide at the front building line.
(2)
Corner lot. Each structure located on a corner lot must provide for a side street building line setback of 15 feet.
(In clarification, this may require some corner lots to have frontage wider than the 40-foot minimum to
accommodate the required side street building line setback and the ten-foot separation between residential
structures.)
(3)
Lot area. The lot area shall not be less 4,000 square feet and shall provide not less than 50 percent of the lot as
unobstructed open space.
(4)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 30 feet from the front property
line on residential and collector roadways. A setback of 35 feet is required on minor arterials and 40 feet on
principal arterials or other classifications.
(5)
Minimum side yards. Only one side yard is required on each lot. The minimum required side yard width shall not
be less than ten feet; except that any side yard abutting a street (the side building line) shall be at least 15 feet in
width.
(6)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(7)
Maximum height. No building shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height.
(8)
Maximum size of accessory buildings. The dimension of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 150 square feet.
(9)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within five feet of any lot line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any boundary of the side
yard or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence 60 inches in height
may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front building line. Any
fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have board of adjustment approval as to location,
height, material and construction.
(10)
Minimum size of dwelling unit. The minimum size (gross floor area) of single-family dwelling units shall not be
less than 600 square feet of interior heated and cooled living space.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
466/543
(11)
Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall provide at least two off-street paved parking spaces. (This
requirement is recognized as being more restrictive and greater than the requirements listed in section 118-311,
Off-street parking requirements.)
(12)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated fixtures
thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(13)
Maintenance easement. A five-foot maintenance easement is required on the abutting lot to the zero lot side.
(14)
Encroachments. No encroachment (eaves or otherwise) shall be allowed across the zero lot line side onto
abutting lots.
(f)
Amendments to Control of Development/Subdivision Regulations. The regulations presented in the R-0 zone
require several amendments to the Control of Development/Subdivision Regulations as follows:
(1)
The zero lot line residential lots description in the Control of Development and Subdivision Regulations section
7.13.2.2 is revised to state that such lots shall be not less than 40 feet rather than the current 50 feet.
(2)
Section 7.13.7 requiring a 75-foot width on corner lots is revised adding the following sentence: "R-0 zones
allow corner lots requiring a 15-foot side street setback."
(g)
Additional clarification. This chapter includes R-5 as row house developments with 20-foot wide lots. The
proposed R-0 zero lot line zone allows residential structures abutting one side property line only.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.1-6, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 6378, § 1, 11-13-78)
Sec. 117-62. - R-1 single-family district.
(a)
Description of district. The R-1 single-family district is composed exclusively of single-family low-density
residential areas plus certain open areas where similar residential developments appear likely to occur. The
regulations for the R-1 district are designated to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life,
and to promote orderly planning and development of land uses by prohibiting all activities of a commercial
nature in this district. Public and private parks and schools are permitted within the district provided that they
serve the residents of the district and further provided that they are a part of a planned development unit
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
467/543
approved by the planning commission. Home occupations listed below are permitted (subsection (d) of this
section).
(b)
Limitations of external uses. Within not more than two years from the date on which the following provisions
become effective, every use shall be made to comply with the limitations of external uses outlined in the general
regulations (section 118-161).
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied only by one
single-family dwelling structure and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal and operated
and maintained by the owner of the lot, provided, however, that it shall not be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the R-1 district only those uses specified under R-1 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted, except that the following home occupations will be permitted
providing that they comply fully with the limitations on home occupations as specified in the general regulations
(section 118-191):
(1)
Foster family home (not more than four children simultaneously).
(2)
Office (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not created, exchanged or sold.)
(3)
Tutoring (not more than four students simultaneously.)
(e)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each structure shall comply with the following dimensional area
requirements:
(1)
Lot width. Each lot shall be not less than 60 feet wide at the front building line.
(2)
Lot area. The lot area shall be not less than 7,200 square feet, and shall provide not less than 50 percent of the
lot area as unobstructed open space.
(3)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 25 feet from the front property
line or as required in other ordinances, whichever is greater.
(4)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
468/543
Minimum yards. There shall be two side yards to each lot; the minimum required side yard shall be not less than
ten percent of the width at the front building line, but in no case shall it be less than six feet, with eight feet the
maximum required, except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 15 feet, unless under the master
street plan, as existing or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the purpose of street
widening or for other reasons. However, in those instances where lot size would mandate the maximum side
yard setbacks, the landowner may elect to reduce the size of one side yard, provided the other side yard is
increased by the same amount and provided, further, that the reduced side yard meets the minimum size
requirement set forth hereinabove.
(5)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(6)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in
height.
(7)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be located on any required front or side yard or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any
boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence
60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front
building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height, material and construction.
(8)
Minimum size of single-unit dwelling. Each single-unit dwelling shall contain a gross floor area of not less than
800 square feet, excluding porches, steps and carports.
(9)
Off-street parking. Each single-family lot shall provide at least one off-street parking space. The provisions of
section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and effect in the R-1 district.
(10)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line adjoining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.1-1, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3297, § 1, 5-27-63; Ord. No. 6349, § 1, 8-14-89)
Sec. 117-63. - R-2 single-family district.
(a)
Description of district. The R-2 single-family district is composed of single-family low-density residential areas
of the city, plus certain open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations
for this district are designated to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the district, to promote and
encourage a suitable environment for family life, and to promote orderly planning and development of land uses
by prohibiting all activities of a commercial nature in this district. Public and private parks and schools are
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
469/543
permitted within the district provided that they serve the residents of the district and further provided that they
are a part of a planned development unit approved by the planning commission. Home occupations listed below
are permitted (subsection (d) of this section).
(b)
Limitation of external uses. Within not more than two years from the date on which the following provisions
become effective, every use shall be made to comply with the limitation of external uses listed in the general
regulations (section 118-161).
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied only by one
single-family dwelling structure and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal and operated
and maintained by the owner of the lot, provided, however, that it shall not be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the R-2 district only those uses specified under R-2 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted, except that the following home occupations will be permitted
providing that they comply fully with the limitations on home occupations as specified in the general regulations
(section 118-191):
(1)
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for custom apparel and custom home furnishings.
(2)
Foster family home (not more than four children simultaneously).
(3)
Office (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not created, exchanged or sold).
(4)
Tutoring (not more than four students simultaneously).
(5)
Fine arts studio in which are created only individual works of art.
(e)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each structure shall comply with the following dimensional area
requirements:
(1)
Lot area. The lot area shall be not less than 7,200 square feet, and shall provide not less than 50 percent of the
lot area as unobstructed open space.
(2)
Lot width. Each lot shall be not less than 60 feet wide at the front building line.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
470/543
(3)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 25 feet from the front property
line or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater.
(4)
Minimum side yards. There shall be two side yards to each lot; the minimum required side yard shall be not less
than ten percent of the width at the front building line, but in no case shall it be less than six feet, with eight feet
the maximum required, except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 15 feet, unless under the
master street plan, as existing or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the purpose of
street widening or for other purposes. However, in those instances where lot size would mandate the maximum
side yard setbacks, the landowner may elect to reduce the size of one side yard, provided the other side yard is
increased by the same amount and provided, further, that the reduced side yard meets the minimum size
requirement set forth hereinabove.
(5)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(6)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in
height.
(7)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located on any required front or side yard or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any
boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence
60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front
building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height, material and construction.
(8)
Minimum size of single-unit dwelling. Each single-unit dwelling shall contain a gross floor area of not less than
700 square feet, excluding porches, steps and carports.
(f)
Off-street parking. Each single-family lot shall provide at least one off-street parking space. The provisions of
section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and effect in this district.
(g)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.1-2, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 6349, § 1, 8-14-89)
Sec. 117-64. - R-3 two-family district.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
471/543
(a)
Description of district. The R-3 district is composed mainly of areas containing single- and two-family
dwellings plus certain open areas of the city where similar development appears likely to occur. It is intended for
quiet, low-density family living, with a good environment for bringing up children, and to prohibit all
commercial activities except certain prescribed home occupations controlled by specific regulations, plus certain
uses which are adjunct to residential areas, such as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities.
(b)
Limitation of external uses. Within not more than two years from the date on which the following provisions
become effective, every use shall be made to comply with the limitation of external uses listed in the general
regulations (section 118-161).
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied by only one
principal structure which may be a single- or a two-family dwelling structure or other permitted use structure,
and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal and are operated and maintained by the owner
of the lot, provided, however, that it shall not be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the R-3 district only those uses specified under R-3 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted, except that the following home occupations will be permitted
providing they comply fully with the limitations on home occupations as specified in the general regulations
(section 118-191):
(1)
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for custom apparel and custom home furnishings.
(2)
Laundering, pressing.
(3)
Foster family home (not more than four children simultaneously).
(4)
Office (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not created, exchanged or sold).
(5)
Fine arts studio in which are created only individual works of art.
(6)
Tutoring (not more than four students simultaneously).
(7)
Rooming or boarding of not more than two persons.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
472/543
(e)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each structure shall comply with the following dimensional area
requirements:
(1)
Lot width. Each lot shall be not less than 60 feet wide at the front building line.
(2)
Lot area. The lot area for a single-family structure shall be not less than 7,200 square feet, and the lot area for a
two-family structure shall be not less than 3,500 square feet per family and in both cases shall provide not less
than 50 percent of the lot area as unobstructed open space.
(3)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 25 feet from the front property
line or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater.
(4)
Minimum side yards. There shall be two side yards to each lot; the minimum required side yard shall be not less
than ten percent of the width at the front building line, but in no case shall it be less than six feet, with eight feet
the maximum required, except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 15 feet, unless under the
master street plan, as existing or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the purpose of
street widening or for other reasons. However, in those instances where lot size would mandate the maximum
side yard setbacks, the landowner may elect to reduce the size of one side yard, provided the other side yard is
increased by the same amount and provided, further, that the reduced side yard meets the minimum size
requirement set forth hereinabove.
(5)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(6)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in
height.
(7)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located on any required front or side yard or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any
boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence
60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front
building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height, material and construction.
(8)
Minimum size of single-unit dwelling. Each single-unit dwelling shall contain a gross floor area of not less than
600 square feet, excluding porches, steps and carports.
(f)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
473/543
Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall provide at least one off-street parking space. The provisions of
section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and effect in this district.
(g)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated appurtenances
thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.1-3, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 6349, § 1, 8-14-69)
Sec. 117-65. - R-4 multifamily district.
(a)
Description of district. The R-4 multifamily district is composed of multifamily or apartment residences, but
includes single- and two-family structures plus certain open areas of the city where such residential development
is likely to occur. The regulations for this district are designed to protect the residential character of the areas by
prohibiting commercial uses, to promote a neighborhood environment suitable for family life, and to maintain
openness to areas. Certain prescribed home occupations are permitted, plus certain uses which are adjunct to
residential areas, such as schools, parks, churches and certain public and quasipublic facilities.
(b)
Limitation of external uses. Within not more than two years from the date on which the following provisions
become effective, every use shall be made to comply with the limitation of external uses listed in the general
regulations (section 118-161).
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied by only one
principal structure, which may be a multifamily, two-family or single-family dwelling structure or other
permitted use structures and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal and are operated and
maintained by the owner of the lot, provided, however, that it shall not be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses.
(1)
In the R-4 district only those uses specified under R-4 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-134 of these
regulations, will be permitted, except that the following home occupations will be permitted providing they
comply with the limitations on home occupations as specified in the general regulations (section 118-191):
a.
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for custom apparel and custom home furnishings.
b.
Laundering, pressing.
c.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
474/543
Foster family home (not more than four children simultaneously).
d.
Office (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not created, exchanged or sold).
e.
Tutoring (not more than four students simultaneously).
f.
Fine arts studio in which are created only individual works of art.
(2)
Residential condominiums shall be constructed and operated pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act (A.C.A. §
18-13-101 et seq.). Architectural plans, including elevations, site plans and landscape plans shall be as approved
by the planning commission. No major changes in the location of buildings, elevations, drainage, streets or
setbacks as shown on the approved plans may be made without the approval of the planning commission.
(e)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each structure shall comply with the following dimensional area
requirements:
(1)
Lot width. Each lot shall be not less than 60 feet wide at the front building line.
(2)
Lot area. The lot area for a single-family structure shall be not less than 7,200 square feet, and for a two-family
structure shall be not less than 3,500 square feet per family, and for a multifamily structure shall be not less than
3,600 square feet each for the first three dwellings in the multifamily structure plus 1,200 square feet for each
additional dwelling unit below four stories. If the structure is four stories or more, for each dwelling unit in
addition to the first three, 600 square feet per unit shall be added. In all cases, not less than 50 percent of the lot
area shall be provided as unobstructed open space.
(3)
Minimum front yard. All primary structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 25 feet from the front
property line or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater; provided, however, that where the
height exceeds 45 feet the front yard setback distance shall be increased one foot for each increment of two feet
in increased structure height above 45 feet up to the maximum height permitted.
(4)
Minimum side yards. For a single- and two-family structures there shall be two side yards to each lot; the
minimum required side yard width shall not be less than ten percent of the lot width at the front building line but
in no case shall it be less than six feet, except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 15 feet, unless
under the master street plan, as existing or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the
purpose of street widening or for other reasons. For multifamily and other permitted use structures there shall be
a side yard on each side of the structure of not less than ten feet. For buildings more than 45 feet or three stories
in height the side yard, in addition to complying with the preceding requirements, shall add one foot for each
additional five feet in height above 45 feet.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
475/543
(5)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet, and for structures more
than 45 feet or three stories in height, in addition to complying with the preceding requirements, one foot shall
be added for each increment of two feet in increased structure height above 45 feet up to the maximum permitted
height.
(6)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in
height, provided, however, that where the provisions of the yard requirements and additions thereto are complied
with, the building may be increased in height, provided that no building shall exceed a height of 90 feet.
(7)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any
boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence
60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front
building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height, material and construction.
(8)
Minimum size of single-unit dwelling. Each unit shall contain a gross floor area of not less than:
a.
Single-family, 600 square feet;
b.
Two-family, 600 square feet; and
c.
Apartments, efficiency, 240 square feet, other apartments, 350 square feet.
(f)
Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall provide at least one off-street parking space. The provisions of
section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and effect in this district.
(g)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.1-4, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 4056, § 1, 4-24-72; Ord. No. 5013, § 1, 10-8-79)
Sec. 117-66. - R-5 group or terrace housing district.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
476/543
Description of district. The R-5 group or terrace housing district is intended for a planned development area of
not less than one-half of the previously platted block under consideration or 35,000 square feet, whichever is the
largest.
(b)
Purpose of designation procedure. Under the standard provisions of this chapter a separate ground area, referred
to in this chapter as the lot, may be designated, provided and continuously maintained for a structure or portion
of a structure. Pursuant to the procedure hereinafter set forth several lots may be combined into one special plan
covering a planned building group. The procedure is intended to permit diversification in the location of
residential structures and to improve circulation facilities and other site qualities while ensuring adequate
standards relating to public health, safety, welfare and convenience in the use and occupancy of buildings and
facilities in planned building groups and to permit the construction of low-cost private housing of good
standards and quality.
(c)
Limitations on designation procedure. The procedure hereinafter set forth shall not waive thereby any
regulations for any district except the regulation that a separate ground area, herein called the lot, may be
designated, provided and continuously maintained for a structure or portion of a structure when separately
owned from the other structures or portion of a structure. The designation of any area as R-5 may be
accomplished as provided in this chapter, in an action started by the planning commission, or upon application
by interested parties, prior to the submission and approval of a special plan for the development of terrace and
row housing. A zoning certificate may not be issued until such special plan is approved by the planning
commission.
(d)
Application for approval. All applications for approval of a special plan hereunder shall be filed with the
planning commission by the owner or owners of the entire land area to be included within the special plan, the
owner or owners of all structures then existing on said land area and all incumbrancers of said land area and
structures; shall contain sufficient evidence to establish that the applicants are the owners and all the
incumbrancers of the designated land and structures; shall contain such information and representations required
by this chapter as are deemed necessary by the commission; and shall include plats and plans showing at least
the following details drawn to scale:
(1)
The land area which would be included within the special plan, the present zoning classification of the
designated area, the land area of all abutting districts and the present zoning classification thereof, all public and
private rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the designated area and the abutting districts
which are proposed to be continued, created, relocated and/or abandoned, and the proposed finished grade of the
designated area, shown in contour intervals of not to exceed two feet;
(2)
A description of the proposed lot and the boundaries thereof;
(3)
The location of each existing and proposed structure in the designated area, the use or uses to be contained
therein, the number of stories, gross floor area and approximate location of entrances and loading points thereof;
(4)
The location of all outside facilities for waste disposal:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
477/543
(5)
All curb cuts, driving lanes, parking areas, loading areas, public transportation points and illumination facilities
for the same;
(6)
All pedestrian walks, malls, courts, parks, playgrounds and open areas for use by residents or members of the
public;
(7)
The location and height of all walls, fences and screen planting;
(8)
The types of surfacing, such as paving, turfing or gravel, to be used at the various locations;
(9)
The location of fire hydrants;
(10)
The gross floor area for residences;
(11)
The net residential density.
(e)
Site facilities. All special plans hereunder shall make due provisions for:
(1)
Adequate design of grades, paving, gutters, drainage and treatment of turf to handle stormwaters, and prevent
erosion and the formation of dust:
(2)
Design of streets as follows: All buildings in an R-5 zone shall abut or have access to a dedicated street. All
streets shall be accepted pursuant to the provisions of the city subdivision regulations, except the commission
may waive the minimum width of 50 feet right-of-way and the pavement from 27 feet back of curb to back of
curb. All culs-de-sac shall have an 80-foot-diameter paved area in order to accommodate emergency vehicles;
(3)
Adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street
parking and loading space, facilities for waste disposal and illumination;
(4)
Adequate amount and proper location of pedestrian walks, malls, courts and landscaped spaces to prevent
pedestrian use of vehicular ways and parking spaces and to separate pedestrian walks, malls, courts and public
transportation loading places from general vehicular circulation facilities;
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
478/543
(5)
Arrangement of buildings, vehicular circulation and open spaces so that pedestrians moving between buildings
are not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic;
(6)
Proper arrangement of lighting devices with respect to traffic control devices and adjacent residential districts;
(7)
An adequate amount and safe location of play areas for children and other recreational areas according to the
concentration of occupancy.
(f)
Minimum spacing between buildings; orientation of main window exposures and entrances. The following
required spacing between buildings shall be measured perpendicularly from any exterior wall exposing windows
or an entranceway; it does not apply in corner-to-corner placement of buildings where perpendicular wall
exposures do not overlap.
(1)
In buildings containing multiple dwelling units, walls containing main window exposures or main entrances
shall be so oriented as to ensure adequate light and air exposure, shall be so arranged as to avoid undue exposure
to nearby through trafficways or undue exposure to concentrated loading or parking facilities, and shall be so
oriented as to preserve visual and audible privacy between adjacent buildings;
(2)
A building wall exposing both windows and an entranceway shall be located no closer to another building than a
distance equal to the height of the taller building of the two, but in no case less than 35 feet;
(3)
Any open court area which otherwise complies with standards of minimum spacing and open area of window
exposure must, in any case, leave at least 25 percent of its perimeter free and unobstructed for access by
emergency vehicles;
(4)
A building group must be so arranged that any building is accessible by emergency vehicles.
(g)
Permitted uses. In the R-5 district only those uses specified under R-5 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted, except that the following home occupations will be permitted
providing they comply fully with the limitations on home occupations as specified in the general regulations
(section 118-191):
(1)
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for custom apparel and custom home furnishings.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
479/543
Foster family home (not more than four children simultaneously).
(3)
Office (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not created, exchanged or sold).
(4)
Tutoring (not more than four students simultaneously).
(5)
Fine arts studio in which are created only individual works of art.
(6)
Rooming or boarding of not more than two persons.
(h)
Dimensional requirements. The lot shall comply with the following dimensional area requirements:
(1)
Lot width. Each interior lot for row or terrace housing shall be not less than 20 feet, and each end lot in a row or
terrace housing unit shall be not less than 37 feet, six inches wide, except that where the end lot is adjacent and
lengthwise to a street, no building or structure will be permitted within the 25-foot building setback area.
(2)
Lot area. Each interior lot of a row or terrace housing unit shall be not less than 2,500 square feet and shall
provide not less than 50 percent of the lot area as unobstructed open space. Each end lot of a row or terrace
housing unit shall be not less than 4,500 square feet and shall provide not less than 50 percent of the lot area as
unobstructed open space. Single-family and two-family structures shall maintain lot areas as specified in
residential zones R-3 and R-4.
(3)
Minimum front yard. Where row or terrace house front onto a street, or court, or open space, the setback distance
shall be not less than 25 feet from the front property line, or as required in other ordinances, whichever is
greater. In the case of a lot having frontage on two streets which do not intersect on the lot boundaries, then the
front yard requirements shall be met on both streets.
(4)
Minimum side yards. For single-family and two-family structures there shall be two side yards to each lot. The
minimum required side yard width shall not be less than ten percent of the average lot width, but in no case shall
it be less than six feet, except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 15 feet, unless under the master
street plan, as existing or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the purpose of street
widening or for other reasons. For the end lot of a row or terrace housing unit there shall be one side yard of at
least 15 feet or greater where needed to maintain the minimum 35-foot spacing between buildings.
(5)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
480/543
(6)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in
height.
(7)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any
boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence
60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front
building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height, material and construction.
(8)
Minimum size of single-unit dwelling. Each single-unit dwelling shall contain a gross floor area of not less than
600 square feet, excluding steps, porches or carports.
(i)
Off-street parking. Each single-family and two-family lot shall provide at least one off-street parking space.
Each row or terrace lot shall have one off-street parking space; provided, however, that this space need not be on
the lot with the structure, but shall in no case be located more than 200 feet away from the structure. The
provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and effect in R-5 district.
(j)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.1-5, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 4062, § 1, 4-24-72)
Sec. 117-67. - R-6 single-family medium-density district.
(a)
Description of district. The R-6 single-family medium-density district is composed of single-family mediumdensity
areas of the city, plus certain open areas where similar residential developments appear likely to occur.
The regulations for this district are designated to encourage controlled medium-density single-family dwellings
and to afford a means whereby good homes can be sold at lower prices, to stabilize and protect the essential
characteristics of the district, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life and to promote
orderly planning and development of land uses by prohibiting all activities of a commercial nature in this
district, except certain prescribed home occupations controlled by specific regulations, plus certain uses which
are adjunct to residential areas, such as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities.
(b)
Limitation of external uses. Within not more than two years from the date on which the following provisions
become effective, every use shall be made to comply with the limitation of external uses listed in the general
regulations (section 118-161).
(c)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
481/543
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied by only one
principal structure which shall be a single-family dwelling unit or other permitted use structure, and such
accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to the permitted use and operated and maintained by the
owner of the lot; provided, however, that no accessory building shall be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the R-6 district only those uses specified under R-6 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted, except that the following home occupations will be permitted,
providing they comply fully with the limitations on home occupations as specified in the general regulations
(section 118-191):
(1)
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for custom apparel and custom home furnishings.
(2)
Laundering, pressing.
(3)
Office (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not created, exchanged or sold).
(4)
Tutoring (not more than four students simultaneously).
(5)
Fine arts studio in which are created only individual works of art.
(e)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each structure shall comply with the following dimensional area
requirements:
(1)
Lot width. Each interior lot shall be not less than 45 feet wide at the front building line, and each corner lot shall
be not less than 55 feet wide at the front building line.
(2)
Lot area. The lot area for a single-family structure shall not be less than 5,000 square feet and shall provide not
less than 50 percent of the lot as unobstructed open space.
(3)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 25 feet from the front property
line or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater.
(4)
Minimum side yards. There shall be two side yards to each lot. The minimum required side yard width shall not
be less than ten percent of the average width of the lot at the front building line and in no case be less than six
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
482/543
feet with eight feet the maximum; except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 15 feet unless under
the master street plan, as existing or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the purpose
of street widening or for other reasons. However, in those instances where lot size would mandate the maximum
side yard setbacks, the landowner may elect to reduce the size of one side yard, provided the other side yard is
increased by the same amount and provided, further, that the reduced side yard meets the minimum size
requirement set forth hereinabove.
(5)
Maximum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(6)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in
height.
(7)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any
boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence
60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front
building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height, material and construction.
(8)
Minimum size of single-family dwelling unit. Each single-family dwelling unit shall contain a gross floor area of
not less than 600 square feet, excluding porches, steps and carports.
(f)
Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall provide at least one off-street parking space. The provisions of
section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and effect in this district.
(g)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.1-6, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3297, § 1, 5-27-63; Ord. No. 6349, § 1, 8-14-89)
Sec. 117-68. - RT-1 mobile home park and mobile home subdivision district.
(a)
Description of district. The RT-1 mobile home park and mobile home subdivision district is composed of areas
containing mobile homes, rental spaces in a mobile home park or lots for sale in a mobile home subdivision.
(b)
Dimensions of mobile home parks. Minimum area of tract shall be eight acres for a mobile home park and ten
acres for a mobile home subdivision. Minimum width of tract, for portions used for general vehicular entrances
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
483/543
and exits only (other than alleys and service entrances), shall be 50 feet; for portions containing mobile home
stands and buildings open generally to occupants minimum width shall be 100 feet. The tract shall comprise a
single plot except where the total property includes separate parcels for necessary utility plants with permanent
rights-of-way and easements for connection and access or for other structures necessary to the park, but not open
generally to the occupants, provided that all lands involved shall be so dimensioned and related as to facilitate
efficient design and management.
(c)
Spaces per acre in mobile home park. There shall not be more than nine mobile home spaces per acre in the
mobile home park.
(d)
Spaces per acre in mobile home subdivision. There shall not be more than seven spaces per acre in a mobile
home subdivision.
(e)
General site requirements.
(1)
Physical character of the site shall be suitable for development in the manner proposed, without hazards to
persons or property, on or off the site, from probability of flooding, erosion, subsidence or slipping of soil, or
other dangers, annoyances or inconveniences.
(2)
Location must be in appropriate existing general land use zone.
(3)
The developer must offset any additional public expense involved in extending or expanding public utilities or
facilities to serve the site.
(4)
The limits of each mobile home lot shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stake markers or
other suitable means. Location of lot limits on the ground shall be approximately as shown on the accepted
plans. The degree of accuracy obtainable by working with a scale on the plan and then a tape on the ground is
acceptable.
(f)
Common recreation spaces. There shall be eight percent of the gross area for common recreation space. The
minimum area of any common recreation area shall be 10,000 square feet, and the minimum width of any such
area shall be 80 feet. Such recreation area shall be no nearer than 25 feet to any property line. Each required
common recreation area shall be appropriately graded, turfed or otherwise landscaped and provided with suitable
drainage facilities. The recreation area in a mobile home park shall be maintained by the owner. The recreation
area in a mobile home subdivision shall be dedicated to the city, or maintained by a homeowners' association.
(g)
Accessory commercial uses. In a mobile home park containing at least 50 dwelling units, there may be provided
for the convenience of the residents of the development accessory commercial area, provided that such
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
484/543
commercial areas meet the following conditions:
(1)
The area devoted to commercial purposes shall not exceed ten percent of the gross area.
(2)
No commercial use shall be closer to a property line than 25 percent of the average width or depth of a lot or
tract in an R district outside the development.
(3)
Any commercial use shall be governed by the requirements of the C-2 district, but shall present no visible
evidence of its commercial character from any R district outside the park.
(h)
Design of streets.
(1)
Alignment. The standards of the subdivision regulations for the city shall apply as to horizontal and vertical
alignment of all interior streets.
(2)
Street widths. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case
shall meet the following minimum requirements:
a.
Two-way, with no parking: 20 feet back to back of curb.
b.
Two-way, with parking on one side only: 27 feet back to back of curb.
c.
Two-way, with parking on both sides: 34 feet back to back of curb.
d.
The right-of-way shall be the same as pavement with a ten-foot utility easement on each side.
(3)
Street widths at access points. At points where general traffic enters or leaves the park street widths shall be
sufficient to permit free movement from or to the stream of traffic on the public street, and no parking shall be
permitted which in any way interferes with such movement. Where substantial pedestrian movement from and to
the park is anticipated, sidewalks shall be provided in such a manner as to eliminate use of roadway surface by
pedestrians at access points.
(i)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
485/543
Street pavement. Street pavements shall conform in material and construction to the standards for street paving
of the subdivision regulations for the city except as to street pavement width as specified above.
(j)
Parking and driveways.
(1)
Size of off-driveway spaces. The minimum size for each parking space off-driveway shall be nine feet wide and
20 feet long.
(2)
Size of off-street parking bays. The size of off-street parking bays shall be as shown in the following table:
Parking Angle (degrees) Curb Length Per Car (feet) Minimum Bay Depth
(feet)
Minimum Backing Depth
(feet)
90 9 18 26
60 12.5 17 20
45 12.7 16 19
(3)
Parking ratio. Parking facilities shall be provided at the rate of at least two car spaces for each mobile home lot.
(4)
Location. Required car parking spaces shall be located for convenient access to the mobile home stands. Insofar
as practicable one car space shall be located on each lot and the remainder located in adjacent parking bays.
(5)
Corner radii. All corner radii shall be 15 feet.
(k)
Pedestrian circulation.
(1)
Individual walks. Individual walks shall be provided to each mobile home stand from the paved street or from a
paved driveway or parking space connecting to a paved street.
(2)
Common walks. Common walks shall be provided in locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated, for
example at the court entrance and to the court office and other important facilities. Common walks should
preferably be through interior areas removed from the vicinity of streets.
(3)
Walkway width. Common walks shall be at least three feet wide.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
486/543
(l)
Patios. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a patio of at least 180 square feet to provide appropriate
outdoor living space. Patios may be omitted when the patio's equivalent is provided by mobile home models.
(m)
Yards and distances between stands and structures.
(1)
Determination of side yards. Side yard width shall be measured from the required mobile home stand to the
individual mobile home lot line. Minimum front yard shall be 15 feet. The minimum side yard shall be 7.5 feet
and the minimum back yard shall be ten feet. Expandable rooms, enclosed patios, garages or structural additions
shall be included in the mobile home stand area.
(2)
Distance across streets. The distance from the line or corner of any mobile home stand to any stand on the
opposite side of a street shall be 50 feet minimum.
(3)
Yards abutting common areas. The distance from the line or corner of the mobile home stand to a street
pavement, a common parking area, a common walk or other common area shall be 15 feet minimum.
(4)
Distance to court boundaries. The distance from the line or corner of any mobile home stand to a boundary line
of the mobile home court shall not be less than 15 feet. Special protection acceptable to the city shall be
provided by walls, solid or louvered fencing, or open fencing with appropriate planting, at a minimum distance
of 15 feet from the mobile home stand.
(n)
Length of residential occupancy. No space shall be rented for residential use of a mobile home in any such park
except for periods of 30 days or more.
(o)
Other regulations. In addition to complying with the requirements of this Code, any mobile home park shall
comply with the rules and regulations of the Arkansas state board of health pertaining to mobile home parks and
to the mobile home ordinance of the city.
(p)
Applicability of subdivision regulations. Mobile home subdivisions shall use the procedures in the city
subdivision regulations except right-of-way widths, setback requirements and minimum lot sizes. This chapter
shall govern these requirements. On preliminary plats the location of all mobile homes shall be shown.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.1-8, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3781, § 1, 11-24-69)
Secs. 117-69—117-87. - Reserved.
Subdivision III. - Commercial Districts
Sec. 117-88. - Generally.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
487/543
Certain areas of the city are designated as commercial districts. These districts are designed to permit the
transaction of the various types of business in separate areas, and in surroundings conducive to the particular
type of business, without interference to surrounding areas and developed to avoid traffic congestion, traffic
hazards and with ample parking. It is intended that each district should provide for good traffic and pedestrian
circulation, eliminating all possible conflicts between the two, and the developing of open spaces, landscape,
green and planted areas of sufficient size and number to enhance each business and create in the city centers of
outstanding beauty, convenience and attractiveness.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2(A), 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3696, § 1, 9-9-68)
Sec. 117-89. - Effect of district designation; procedure.
The designation of an area as a C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 or C-5 district may be accomplished as provided in this
chapter, in action started by the planning commission, or upon applications by interested parties. In the latter
case, there shall be presented a preliminary development plan which shall be the basis for the development plan,
and shall show all street rights-of-way, proposed zone, boundaries, and location and general type use for all
buildings. In all cases, before any designation is given, there shall be a public hearing as provided for in section
118-40. The designation of an area as a commercial zone shall cause the conditions and requirements set forth in
sections 118-223 and 118-224 hereof to come into full force and effect. Such designation shall not create any
right to erect or alter any structures or to apply for a permit therefor, nor shall such right exist until the filing,
approval and registration of a commercial development plan as hereinafter set forth. Whenever a failure to
comply with the provisions of this subdivision occurs, no permit shall be issued for the erection or alteration of
any structures in the area and all issued permits therefor shall be terminated and cancelled until the area included
within the area has been examined by the commission and zoned or rezoned for its most appropriate use. Any
applicant for the designation of an area as a C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 or C-5 district, whether under disability or
otherwise and including the successors and assigns thereof, shall be deemed conclusively to have assented to all
of these conditions.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2(B), 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-90. - Development plans.
(a)
The provisions of this section shall apply to all areas designated as commercial districts C-2, C-3, C-4 or C-5
after the effective date of this chapter and shall apply to all new commercial districts hereafter designated
whether by action originated by the planning commission or by action originated by application of interested
parties; and further the provisions of this section shall apply under the circumstances listed hereunder to areas
designated herein as commercial districts which on the date of the passage of this chapter were developed and
improved:
(1)
Whenever such district is increased;
(2)
Whenever a structure containing or intended for a permitted use is to be erected or the floor area of such
structure then existing is to be increased;
provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall apply under these circumstances only to the
additional land area added and only to the structures erected or altered.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
488/543
Within not more than 12 months from the effective date of any subsequent ordinance designating an area
development as a commercial district, a complete development plan covering the area zoned shall be filed with
the planning commission by the owner or owners and the developers of the area accompanied by sufficient
evidence to establish that the applicants are the owners and the developers of the designated land and structures.
The development plan may be based, in whole or part, on the provisions of section 118-313, Planned building
groups, and if so based shall comply with all requirements of that section. Upon, but not before, the approval and
registration of the development plan as hereinafter set forth, the applicants for a development plan shall be
entitled to apply for permits and certificates as are made necessary by the plan for compliance to this section.
Upon request and valid reasons for delay, an extension of time may be granted by the commission in increments
of six months up to a maximum of four extensions.
(c)
The development plan shall be certified by the applicants and shall show in exact and final detail the following
details to scale:
(1)
The land area included within the area, the land of all abutting districts and the zoning classification thereof,
public rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the area and for 500 feet within the abutting
districts which are proposed to be continued, created, relocated and/or abandoned;
(2)
The estimated starting and completion dates for the construction of all structures and improvements within the
district;
(3)
The proposed finished grade of the district, shown to contour intervals of not to exceed one foot;
(4)
A description of the proposed lot or lots and the boundaries thereof;
(5)
The location of each existing and each proposed structure in the area, the use or uses to be contained therein, the
number of stories, gross floor area for each structure and location of all entrances and loading points;
(6)
The location of all outside facilities for waste and garbage disposal;
(7)
All curb cuts, driving lanes, parking areas, loading areas, public transportation points and illumination facilities
for the district;
(8)
All pedestrian walks, malls and open areas for use by tenants or members of the public;
(9)
The location, height and type of all walls, fences and screen planting;
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
489/543
(10)
The location, size, height, type and orientation of all signs other than signs flat on building facades;
(11)
The types of surfacing, such as paving, turfing or gravel, to be used at the various locations, and the landscaping
plan;
(12)
The location of fire hydrants.
(d)
All development plans filed hereunder shall be reviewed for completeness by the administrative office. If the
plans are found to be complete and all requirements met, they shall be approved in writing. In the case of
disapproval, it shall go before the planning commission and if the commission disapproves they shall be notified
in writing of the reasons for the disapproval, and in all cases, giving due notice to the applicants.
(e)
After completing its review of a development plan, the commission shall return one approved copy of the plan
and all pertinent data, together with a notice of recommendation, to the applicants. All approved development
plans shall be registered as hereinafter set forth.
(f)
Upon approval of the development plan, the commission shall register a copy thereof among its records.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2(C)—(H), 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-91. - Exceptions to lot width and area requirements.
On a lot of record shown on a plat or deed recorded prior to the adoption of this chapter, or where the lot is
adjoined on both sides with lots with structures thereon or on a lot is adjoined on one side by a street and on the
other by a lot with a structure thereon, the minimum lot width at the building line and minimum lot area may be
waived by the planning commission staff, providing that the intended structure is in full compliance with all
other requirements of this chapter. In no case, however, shall a lot width of less than 20 feet be permitted or a lot
area of less than 2,500 square feet be permitted.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2(I), 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-92. - Hours of operation of permitted uses.
(a)
Notwithstanding any other provisions contained with this chapter, all uses listed as permitted within the zoning
classifications C-1, C-2 and C-5 are permitted uses only between the hour of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Authority
to operate between the hours of 10:01 p.m. and 5:59 a.m. may be obtained by application for special use as set
forth within article II of this chapter.
(b)
This section shall be prospective in operation, it being the express intent of the city council to exempt from its
provisions regarding application for special use, existing ongoing entities operating between the hours of 10:00
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
490/543
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. as of August 12, 1991.
(Ord. No. 6542, §§ 1—3, 8-12-91)
Sec. 117-93. - Service stations.
(a)
Permitted structures. Each service station lot shall have at least one front line and shall be occupied only by
structures and accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to the operation of service stations.
(b)
Dimensional requirements.
(1)
Lot area. The lot area shall not be less than 14,000 square feet, of which 60 percent shall remain as unobstructed
open space; provided, however, that this open space may be used for parking and landscaped areas.
(2)
Minimum front yard. The main structure shall be set back 40 feet from each front property line. The pump
islands shall be set back not less than 15 feet from each front property line; provided, however, if a canopy is
used the forwardmost part may not extend any closer than 12 feet from each front property line.
(3)
Side yards. No side yard is required for the primary structure. Pump islands, including canopies, shall not be less
than 15 feet from any side lot line.
(4)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet; provided that, where the
rear lot line abuts an alley, then the minimum rear yard requirement shall be a depth of not less than 15 feet.
(5)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 28 feet in height; provided,
however, that cooling towers and other structural units necessary for the functioning of the use shall be permitted
to exceed this height, provided that no building shall exceed a height of 35 feet.
(6)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory building except pump islands and/or canopies shall be located in
any required front yard, or within 15 feet of any lot line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along
any boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A
fence 60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the
front building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height, material and construction.
(7)
Screens. All service stations shall provide a screen between abutting residential zones and C-1 business areas, so
as to protect these areas by day and by night from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles,
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
491/543
and from lights, noises or exposure to views not compatible with these areas. Such screens shall be pleasing in
design and of a substantial material, easily maintained.
(c)
Off-street parking. An area equal to the gross floor area but in no case less than five parking spaces shall be
provided.
(d)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles, a pole or support installed
to display a trademark sign provided it does not obstruct the view of traffic at the intersection, and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(e)
Used car sales and trailer rentals. No used car or other related type sales shall be permitted. Trailer rentals will
be permitted in zones C-2, C-3, C-4 and C-5 only; provided, however, the storage of said trailers is properly
screened from all abutting properties.
(f)
Enclosure requirement. All major repair work shall be in an enclosed area.
(g)
Curb cuts and safety islands. Curb cuts and safety islands shall be in accordance with the regulations of the city
engineer.
(h)
Signs. All signs shall meet the requirements of the sign ordinance as amended.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2-0, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3666, § 1, 3-11-68)
Sec. 117-94. - Commercial condominiums.
(a)
The construction of commercial structures which may be owned under the provisions of the Arkansas Horizontal
Property Act (A.C.A. § 18-13-101 et seq.) is hereby permitted, provided the planning commission shall
designate such setback requirements for front, rear and side property lines, such parking requirements, such
landscaping and lighting requirements, and grant such waivers thereto as it may deem fit and proper for the
betterment of the city, and provided, further, that no major changes in the approved plans may be made without
resubmission to the planning commission.
(b)
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of a so-called condominium unit or horizontal
property unit authorized under and by virtue of the Horizontal Property Act (A.C.A. § 18-13-101 et seq.), a copy
of the master deed and plans shall be attached to the master deed as required by A.C.A. §§ 18-13-104, 18-13-105
shall be filed with and approved by the appropriate city officials as required for all other construction projects.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
492/543
(c)
Notwithstanding any other provision in any other ordinance to the contrary, it is hereby determined and found
that in no event shall developments under this chapter or under the Horizontal Property Act (A.C.A. § 18-13-101
et seq.) be in violation of the zoning ordinances of the city.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2-1a, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 4543, § 1, 8-11-75; Ord. No. 4558, §§ 1, 2, 9-22-75)
Sec. 117-95. - C-1 quiet business district.
(a)
Description of district. The C-1 quiet business district is composed of certain lands and structures used primarily
to provide office space for uses related to professional type services either for the residents of nearby residential
areas or characterized by a low volume of direct daily customer contact. Usually this district is located on
thoroughfares, characteristically is small in size and is usually situated between business and residential areas.
The regulations are designed to permit development of the functions specified under C-1 in the list of permitted
uses, limited by standards designed to protect surrounding residential districts. To these ends the regulations
establish standards comparable to those for residential districts, resulting in similar open space and building bulk
and retaining the low concentration of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(b)
Limitation of external effects of uses. Within not more than two years from the date on which this chapter is
passed, every use shall be made to comply with the limitation of external uses outlined in the general regulations
(section 118-161).
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front line and shall be occupied only by one structure
containing a permitted use and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to the permitted
use, provided, however, that it shall not be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the C-1 district only those uses specified under C-1 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted.
(e)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each permitted use shall comply with the following dimensional area
requirements:
(1)
Lot width. Each lot shall be not less than 60 feet wide at the front building line.
(2)
Lot area. The lot area shall be not less than 7,200 square feet, and shall provide not less than 50 percent of the
lot area as unobstructed open space.
(3)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 25 feet from the front property
line or as required in other ordinances, whichever is greater.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
493/543
(4)
Minimum side yards. There shall be two side yards to each lot. The minimum required side yard shall be not less
than ten percent of the width at the front building line, but in no case shall it be less than six feet, with eight feet
the maximum required, except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 15 feet, unless under the
master street plan, as existing or amended, or other ordinance a greater setback is required for the purpose of
street widening or for other reasons.
(5)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(6)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in
height.
(7)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any
boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence
60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front
building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height and construction.
(8)
Screens. All C-1 uses shall provide an approved screen between abutting residential areas, so as to protect these
areas by day and night from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles, and from noises or
exposure to views not fully compatible with residential areas. Such screens should permit the passage of air and
be of pleasing design.
(f)
Off-street parking. The provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and
effect in C-1 district.
(g)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersections, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(h)
Planned building groups. The provisions of section 118-313, Planned building groups, may be applied in the C-1
district.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2-1, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-96. - C-2 local shopping center district.
(a)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
494/543
Description of district. The C-2 local shopping center district is composed of certain lands that should be a
minimum of one acre in size and structures used primarily to provide the retailing of commodities classed by
merchants as convenience goods. The volume of pedestrian traffic in proportion to automobile traffic in the
district is much higher than in other retail business districts. This district characteristically is small, almost
always is surrounded by residential districts and is located at a convenient walking distance from the edges of
the surrounding residential districts it is designed to serve. The regulations are designed to permit development
of the functions specified in the list of permitted uses, limited by standards designed to protect the surrounding
residential districts. To these ends, the regulations establish standards comparable to those for residential
districts, resulting in similar building bulk and retaining the relatively low concentration of vehicular traffic as
compared to other retail business districts. Of great importance is the necessity that the areas selected for this
district actually be developed as permitted. To ensure the provision of essential retail services to a neighborhood,
the privilege of providing these services is matched by the responsibility and duty to so provide. Consequently,
the right to develop this district may be lost if actual development does not occur. In some instances, this district
may not be located pending the development of sections of the city and may therefore be considered a floating
zone; however, once such a zone is established in any area of the city, and the need for neighborhood shopping
facilities having been met, the district shall be fixed and no further applications for such zones will be
considered in that area.
(b)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front line and shall be occupied by one structure containing
permitted uses, and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to the permitted use, provided,
however, that it shall not be a residence.
(c)
Permitted uses. In the C-2 district only those uses specified under C-2 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted, provided such uses are operated only at retail and shall not be
operated as commercial wholesale.
(d)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each structure shall comply with the following dimensional and area
requirements:
(1)
Lot width. Each lot shall be not less than 80 feet wide at the front building line.
(2)
Lot area. The lot shall be not less than one acre in area, and shall provide not less than 60 percent of the area as
unobstructed open space, except for use as an off-street parking space.
(3)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 40 feet from each front property
line, or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater. At least one additional foot of setback shall be
provided for each foot that a building on the lot exceeds 35 feet.
(4)
Minimum side yard. No side yards are required except where the zone abuts a residential area, in which case a
side yard of 15 feet is required on the side or sides abutting the residential area. In all other cases where side
yards are provided they shall be not less than eight feet in width.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
495/543
(5)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet; provided that, where the
rear lot line abuts an alley and the property on the other side of the alley is not within a residential zone, then the
minimum rear yard requirement shall be a depth of not less than 15 feet. Where the rear lot line abuts onto a
street the rear building line shall be the building setback line established for that street.
(6)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting
poles and associated appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(7)
Screens. All C-2 uses shall provide a screen between abutting residential or C-1 business areas, so as to protect
these areas by day and by night from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles, and from
lights, noises or exposure to views not compatible with these areas. Such screens shall be pleasing in design, and
of substantial material, easily maintained.
(e)
Off-street parking. The provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and
effect in this district.
(f)
Off-street loading requirements. The provisions of section 118-312, Off-street loading requirements, shall be in
full force and effect in this district.
(g)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the area formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(h)
Planned building groups. The provisions of section 118-313, Planned building groups, shall be in full force and
effect in the C-2 district.
(i)
District designation and development plan provisions. The provisions of the general regulations for commercial
districts, sections 118-221 through 118-224 inclusive, shall be in full force and effect in the C-2 district.
(j)
Antique and furniture auction houses. No antique and furniture auction house doing business in a C-2 zone shall
conduct public auctions between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., or conduct any auction or hold items for
inventory or display for sale outside the physical structure comprising the auction house.
(Ord. No. 3171, §§ 502.006a, 702.2-2, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3914, § 1, 4-26-71; Ord. No. 4716, § 2, 1-24-77)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
496/543
Sec. 117-97. - C-3 community shopping district.
(a)
Description of district. The C-3 community shopping district is composed of certain land and structures used
primarily to provide the retailing of commodities classed by merchants as general apparel and furnishings. The
volume of pedestrian traffic in proportion to automobile traffic entering the district is relatively low. This district
is usually located on a major arterial highway, characteristically is large, and should be at least three acres in
area, almost always is entirely surrounded by residential or C-1 districts and is located at a convenient driving
distance from the edges of the surrounding residential districts it is designed to serve. The regulations are
designed to provide for development of the permitted uses limited by standards designed to protect the abutting
or surrounding residential districts. To these ends, the regulations establish standards comparable to those for
residential districts, resulting in similar building bulk and retaining as low a concentration of vehicular traffic as
is compatible with the functioning of the district. Of great importance is the necessity that the areas selected for
this district actually be developed as permitted. To ensure the provision of essential major retail services to a
community, the privilege of providing these services is matched by the responsibility and duty to so provide.
Consequently, the right to develop this district may be lost if actual development does not occur.
(b)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied only by structures
containing permitted uses and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to and are operated
and maintained by the owner as tenant of the permitted use, provided, however, that it shall not be a residence.
(c)
Permitted uses.
(1)
In the C-3 district only those uses specified under C-3 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-134 of these
regulations, will be permitted.
(2)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the temporary display of mobile homes,
boats, cars, farm implements and similar items is a permitted use in the C-3 zoning district if approval is
obtained from the director of the planning commission and a special permit is obtained from the revenue officer
of the city. The special permit allows such use for a period of seven days at the location specified in the permit
and is renewable for an additional period of seven days upon approval of the planning director. The fee for the
permit is $25.00 for the first four days and $5.00 for each day thereafter.
(d)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for the C-3 commercial district shall comply with the following dimensional
and area requirements:
(1)
Lot area. The lot area shall be not less than 130,680 square feet of which 60 percent shall remain as unobstructed
open space; provided, however, that this open space may be used for parking and landscaped areas.
(2)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 40 feet from each front property
line, or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater; provided, however, that, where the height of
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
497/543
any building exceeds 45 feet as permitted under these district regulations, the front yard setback shall be
increased at least one foot for each foot of increased structure height above 45 feet.
(3)
Side yards. No side yard is required except where the zone abuts a residential area, in which case a side yard of
15 feet is required on the side or sides abutting the residential area; provided, however, that where the zone abuts
a street the side yard setback established for that street shall be maintained, or the setback shall be as required by
other ordinances, whichever is greater. In all other cases where side yards are provided they shall be not less than
eight feet in width; provided, however, that, where the height of any building exceeds 45 feet as permitted under
these district regulations, the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for each increment of five feet of
increased structure height above 45 feet up to the maximum permitted height.
(4)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet; provided that where the
rear lot line abuts an alley and the property on the other side of the alley is not within a residential zone, then the
minimum rear yard requirement shall be a depth of not less than 15 feet. Where the rear lot line abuts onto a
street the rear building line shall be the building setback line established for that street.
(5)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be located in any required front or side yard, or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any
boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence
60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front
building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height, material and construction.
(6)
Screens. All C-3 uses shall provide a screen between abutting residential or C-1 business areas, so as to protect
these areas by day and by night from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles from lights,
noises or exposure to views not compatible with these areas. Such screens shall be pleasing in design, and of a
substantial material, easily maintained.
(e)
Off-street parking. The provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and
effect in C-3 district.
(f)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(g)
Planned building groups. The provisions of section 118-313, Planned building groups, shall be in full force and
effect in the C-3 district.
(h)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
498/543
District designation and development plan provisions. The provisions of the general regulations for commercial
districts, sections 118-221 through 118-224 inclusive, shall be in full force and effect in the C-3 district.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2-3, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3914, § 1, 4-26-71; Ord. No. 4300, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-73)
Sec. 117-98. - C-4 trade fair district.
(a)
Description of district. The C-4 district is a recognition of the unfortunate commercial strip development which
has occurred along some of the highways in the city. The purpose of this district is to contain this commercial
strip development, to permit infilling of vacant areas within the zone and by establishing standards of
development to encourage owners and tenants to improve their properties, to remove some of the hazards that
this type of development create and to promote developments that are pleasing to see, and to fit into the overall
city and business pattern. The creation of this district is a recognition of what is and it should not be used to
extend into other areas commercial strip development. This district is composed of certain land and structures
used primarily to provide retailing and personal and recreational services and temporary housing, for
nonresidents of the district and transients using the main arterial highways, to provide business services in
support of the primary activities in the central business district and to provide locations for certain limited light
industrial activities which require a higher degree of protection than is afforded in industrial districts. As a
secondary function retailing and personal services may be provided to residents of nearby areas. The volume of
pedestrian traffic in proportion to automobile traffic is relatively low. This district is usually located paralleling
arterial highways or in areas adjacent to the central business district. Characteristically, it is large, and sometimes
abuts residential districts. The regulations are designed to allow completion of development for permitted
functions, limited by standards designed to protect the surrounding residential districts and to create welldesigned
and pleasing areas along highways. To these ends, the regulations establish standards retaining as low
an intensity of use and concentration of vehicles as is compatible with the functioning of the district.
(b)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front line and shall be occupied only by one structure
containing a permitted use and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to the permitted
use, provided, however, that it shall not be a permanent residence.
(c)
Permitted uses. In the C-4 district only those uses specified under C-4 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted.
(d)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each permitted use shall comply with the following dimensional area
requirements:
(1)
Lot width. Each lot shall be not less than 100 feet wide at the front building line.
(2)
Lot area. The lot area shall be not less than 10,000 square feet, and shall provide not less than 50 percent of the
area as unobstructed open space.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
499/543
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 40 feet from the front property
line or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater. At least one additional foot of setback shall be
provided for each foot that a building on the lot exceeds 35 feet.
(4)
Side yards. No side yards are required except where the zone abuts a residential area, in which case a side yard
of 15 feet is required on the side or sides abutting the residential area; provided, however, that where the zone
abuts a street the side yard setback established for that street shall be maintained or the setback shall be as
required by other ordinances, whichever is greater. In all other cases where side yards are provided they shall be
not less than eight feet in width.
(5)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet; provided that, where the
rear lot line abuts an alley and the property on the other side of the alley is not within a residential zone, then the
minimum rear yard requirement shall be a depth of not less than 15 feet. Where the rear lot line abuts onto a
street the rear building line shall be the building setback line established for that street.
(6)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located on any required front or side yards, or
within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line. Fences up to 96 inches in height may be erected along any
boundary of the side yards or rear yard from the rear of the lot forward to the rear of the main structure. A fence
60 inches in height may be erected along the side yards from the rear of the main structure forward to the front
building line. Any fence or screen constructed in the required front yard must have planning commission
approval as to location, height, material and construction.
(7)
Screens. All C-4 uses shall provide a screen between abutting residential or C-1 business areas, so as to protect
these areas by day and by night from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles, and from
lights, noises or exposure to views not compatible with these areas. Such screens shall be pleasing in design, and
of a substantial material, easily maintained.
(e)
Off-street parking. The provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and
effect in this district. Owners and tenants will be encouraged to develop well-located and landscaped joint
parking areas.
(f)
Off-street loading requirements. The provisions of section 118-312, Off-street loading requirements, shall be in
full force and effect in this district.
(g)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(h)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
500/543
Planned building groups. The provisions of section 118-313, Planned building groups, shall be in full force and
effect in the C-4 district.
(i)
District designation and development plan provisions. The provisions of the general regulations for commercial
districts, sections 118-221 through 118-224 inclusive, shall be in full force and effect in the C-4 district.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2-4, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3914, § 1, 4-26-71)
Sec. 117-99. - C-5 central business district.
(a)
Description of district. The C-5 central business district is composed of certain land and structures used
primarily to provide retailing and personal and business service of all kinds satisfying the needs of transients
generally and of the residents, business and industry of the metropolitan area and the outlying trade area, plus
wholesaling and limited manufacturing in support of the primary functions. The volume of pedestrian traffic in
proportion to the volume of automobile and public transit traffic entering the district is very low. This district is
located at the area of convergence of the main arterial highways and transit lines, is large, is usually surrounded
by nonresidential districts or by high-density residential districts and is centrally located with respect to the
metropolitan area. The regulations are designed to permit a highly concentrated, intensive development of the
permitted facilities, limited by standards designed to provide light and air for street exposures of buildings in the
district and to protect the district itself from over-intensive development of land coverage and over-congestion as
related to the ultimate capacity of common public facilities which serve the entire district. Because transit
facilities are centered in this district and because the provision of off-street parking is a recognized, separate
business enterprise, the regulations do not require the furnishing of off-street parking space; but in the interest of
the individual business venture and the central business district as a whole, individuals or groups are encouraged
to provide adequate off-street parking. Where extensions, redevelopment or new areas of this C-5 district are
proposed and they exceed 100,000 square feet in area, then the owners and developers shall submit a complete
development plan for the extension, redevelopment or new area, as provided for in the general commercial
provisions. Although existing downtown areas have developed without benefit of setbacks, off-street parking
areas or landscaping, all owners and tenants in downtown areas are encouraged to incorporate these
improvements in any individual or group development of lots in the downtown C-5 district.
(b)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front line and shall be occupied only by structures
containing permitted uses, and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to the permitted
use.
(c)
Permitted uses. In the C-5 district only those uses specified under C-5 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted.
(d)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for each permitted use shall comply with the following dimensional and area
requirements:
(1)
Lot width. Each lot shall be not less than 25 feet wide at the front building line.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
501/543
Lot area. The lot area shall be not less than 2,500 square feet.
(3)
Minimum front yard. There shall be no front yard requirements for the C-5 district other than the following:
a.
A front yard is required where other ordinances require a setback.
b.
A front yard is required in compliance with the provisions of an adjoining district where a part of the frontage is
in a district requiring front yards.
c.
If a building on a lot exceeds 90 feet in height, all buildings on the lot will be set back from the property line at
least one foot for each foot that a building on the lot exceeds 90 feet in height.
(4)
Minimum side yards. No side yards shall be required under this chapter, but they shall be provided if required
under other ordinances or in compliance with the provisions of an adjoining district where a part of the side yard
is in that district. If a side yard or yards are provided, they shall be not less than eight feet in width.
(5)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than ten feet, provided, however, that
this yard may be built over by upper floors of the same structure at a height of not less than 15 feet from the
alley or adjacent street level, and further provided that, where the rear yard abuts a street which has a front yard
requirement, this setback shall be maintained.
(6)
Maximum gross floor area of structures. The sum total of the gross floor area of all structures on a lot, including
garage space, shall not be greater than ten times the area of the lot on which the structures are located.
(7)
Off-street parking. The provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be of no force and
effect in this C-5 district, unless otherwise mentioned herein.
(8)
Off-street loading requirements. The provisions of section 118-312, Off-street loading requirements, shall be in
full force and effect in this district.
(9)
Planned building groups. The provisions of section 118-313, Planned building groups, may be applied in the C-5
district.
(10)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
502/543
District designation and development plan provisions. The provisions of the general regulations for commercial
districts, sections 118-221 through 118-224 inclusive, shall be in full force and effect in the C-5 district.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.2-5, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3914, § 1, 4-26-71)
Secs. 117-100—117-117. - Reserved.
Subdivision IV. - Industrial Districts
Sec. 117-118. - Generally.
Certain areas of the city are designated as industrial zone districts. These areas are established in locations where
they will not interfere with other types of districts and will provide suitable sites for development of good
industrial areas. The standards developed herein are intended to protect industrial uses and to ensure the
continuing stability of land values by:
(1)
Providing ample, uncongested space and circulation for all industrial users.
(2)
Protecting each owner or tenant so that he may obtain maximum convenience, safety, economy, view, identity
and amenity in relation to adjacent sites and in relation to the industrial zone district as a whole.
(3)
Providing for adequate space for access parking, off-street loading, internal circulation, landscaping, utilities and
adequate space protection for light and air, for insulation of noise and vibration, and for police and fire
protection.
(4)
Providing for safe and uncongested traffic and pedestrian movements both on and off the lots.
(5)
Providing through careful landscaping a pleasant environment in which to work and providing shade and
protection from sun and light glare and providing windbreaks.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.4, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-119. - Limitations on external effects of uses.
Within not more than two years from the date on which this chapter becomes effective, every use in an industrial
district shall be made to comply with the following limitations:
(1)
Enclosure of uses. Every use, unless expressly exempted by this chapter, shall be operated in its entirety within a
completely enclosed structure; the exemption of a use from the requirement of enclosure will be indicated by a
symbol appearing after any use exempted. For all uses exempted from total enclosure the lot will be so
developed and screened so that it will present an attractive appearance from all approaches.
(2)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
503/543
Emission of sound, heat, etc. All lots and structures will be developed and operated in a manner that will to the
greatest extent practicable protect surrounding lots from the emission of sound, vibration, heat, glare, radiation
and fumes emitted from any operation, and shall in no case emit any of these nuisances in a dangerous degree.
(3)
Storage of flammable or explosive materials. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be
stored in bulk above ground. Tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with heating devices or appliances
located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision. Where the permitted
industry by its nature requires storage of flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases, it shall locate only in
the zone district specified herein and shall meet all of the distance requirements hereinafter specified.
a.
Liquified petroleum gas, where permitted, shall be stored no closer to any boundary line of a lot on which it is
located than the following minimum distances:
Water Capacity Per Container
(gallons)
If Stored Underground
(feet)
If Stored Aboveground
(feet)
Less than 125 10 None
125—500 10 10
501—2,000 25 25
Over 2,000 50 50
b.
Flammable liquids (fire prevention code class I, II and III), where permitted, shall be stored no closer to any
boundary line of a lot on which they are located than the following minimum distances:
Aboveground Capacity
(gallons)
Minimum Distance
(feet)
1—1,000 25
1,001—3,000 50
3,001—35,000 100
Over 35,000 120
Underground Capacity
(gallons)
Minimum Distance
(feet)
550 6
2,000 10
5,000 20
15,000 25
20,000 30
35,000 40
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
504/543
c.
Explosives, where permitted, shall be stored no closer to any boundary line of the lot on which they are located
than the following distances:
Pounds Minimum Distance
(feet)
2—5 70
5—10 90
10—20 110
20—25 125
Over 25 As required by other ordinances
Railroad rights-of-way abutting a lot may be part of the required setback hereinabove set forth.
(4)
Outdoor storage and waste disposal. The following regulations shall apply to all industrial zone districts:
a.
All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products, wrecking, storage or dismantling of vehicles
or parts, junkyards and uses of a similar nature shall be enclosed by a screen fence or wall adequate to conceal
such facilities from adjacent property and from public streets and highways.
b.
No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the
lot by normal natural causes or forces, and such materials shall not be allowed to pollute a watercourse, stream,
lake or underground water supply.
c.
All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be
edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.4-1.1, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-120. - Conditions for site developments.
No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be designed, erected, altered, used or occupied in an
industrial district except for either one or several of the permitted uses and lawful accessory uses thereto. Any
permitted use shall observe all of the following conditions:
(1)
All yards and open areas shall be properly graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete,
asphalt, oil, lawns or any other dustfree surfacing, and maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash
and debris.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
505/543
(2)
Any permitted use shall be provided with barriers of such dimensions that occupants of adjacent structures are
not unreasonably disturbed, either by day or by night, by the movement of vehicles, machinery, equipment or
supplies.
(3)
Any permitted use shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion. Where
entrances and exits are intended for use by trucks, lanes shall be at least 12 feet wide and the radius of the curve
at the pavement edge of the entrance or exit shall be at least 35 feet.
(4)
Any permitted use shall provide sufficient internal circulation and turning space on the lot so that no vehicle will
have to maneuver on any public right-of-way in order to gain access to or exit from any lot, or to load or unload
from any structure on the lot or for any other reason.
(5)
Any permitted use must provide and maintain a landscaped strip at least ten feet wide along all street property
lines, exclusive of drives and walks, and such landscape should not interfere with sight distances or block
needed view of buildings or their identification.
(6)
Any permitted use shall be provided with barriers of such type and so located that no part of parked vehicles will
extend beyond the yard space or into the setback space from a lot line abutting a residential lot or separated
therefrom by a street.
(7)
Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that they neither unreasonably disturb occupants of adjacent properties
nor interfere with traffic.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.4-1.2, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-121. - Accessory uses.
Incidental only to a permitted use, any use which complies with all of the following conditions may be operated
as an accessory use in an industrial district:
(1)
The use is clearly incidental and customary to and commonly associated with the operation of the permitted use.
(2)
The use is operated and maintained under the same ownership or by lessees or concessionaires thereof, and on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(3)
The use does not include structures or structural features inconsistent with the permitted use.
(4)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
506/543
The use does not include residential occupancy except by caretakers or watchmen.
(5)
If operated partially or entirely in detached structures, such detached structures shall be limited to a gross floor
area of not more than 20 percent of the gross area of the principal structure.
(6)
If operated partially or entirely within the structure containing the permitted use, the gross floor area within such
structure utilized by accessory uses (except garages, loading docks and company dining rooms) shall not be
greater than ten percent of the gross floor area of the structure containing the permitted use by right.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.4-1.3, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-122. - Permitted encroachments on setback spaces.
Belt courses, sills, lintels, cornices, eaves, gutters, stoops and building accessories designed and intended to
control light and glare entering the building, and not being a permanent part of such building by being supported
from the ground, may extend three feet into any setback space without being considered in violation of the
setback requirements of the industrial zone districts.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.4-1.4, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-123. - I-1 community industrial park district.
(a)
Description of district. The I-1 community industrial park district is composed of certain lands located between
general industrial or commercial uses and quiet residential areas and of certain other lands so located that
residential development is in close proximity. The regulations of this district are intended to provide structural
standards, standards of intensity of use and standards of external effects compatible with the surrounding
residential districts. To these ends, development standards are established to encourage those industries and
wholesaling activities which can be operated in a clean and quiet manner, plus certain public facilities which are
needed to serve the occupants of the district and residents of adjoining residential districts, and to establish
pleasant community industrial parks.
(b)
General conditions. The general conditions applying to all zone districts and the general conditions applying to
industrial zone districts shall be in full force and effect in the I-1 district.
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied only by structures
containing permitted uses and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to and are operated
and maintained by the owner or tenant of the permitted use, provided, however, that it shall not be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the I-1 district, only those uses specified under I-1 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted.
(e)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
507/543
Dimensional requirements. The lot for an I-1 industrial district shall comply with the following dimensional
requirements:
(1)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 30 feet from each front property
line, or as required in other ordinances, whichever is greater; provided, however, that, where the height of any
structure exceeds 35 feet as permitted under these district regulations, the front yard setback shall be increased
one foot for each increment of five feet of increased structure height above 45 up to the maximum permitted
height.
(2)
Minimum side yards. There shall be two side yards to each lot. The minimum required side yard width shall not
be less than ten percent of the lot width at the front building line, but in no case shall it be less than 15 feet,
except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 25 feet, unless under the master street plan, as existing
or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the purpose of street widening or for other
reasons, provided, however, that when structures on abutting lots share a common rail facility extending along
the side of the building the side yard on that side of the building may be reduced with the commission's approval
to facilitate common usage of the railroad spur. Where the height of any structure exceeds 35 feet as permitted
under these district regulations, the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for each increment of five feet
of increased structure height above 45 up to the maximum permitted height.
(3)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(4)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in
height; provided, however, that chimneys, vents, air conditioning towers, accessory water towers and elevator
shafts, all clearly accessory to the main structure, shall be permitted to exceed this height limitation up to but not
exceeding 25 percent of the total permitted height, and that no illuminated sign, name, display or advertising
device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed or attached to any portion of any structure exceeding the height
limitations.
(5)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within 25 feet of any street or within ten feet of any lot line, that is not a street line, unless otherwise provided
for herein. Fences up to 84 inches in height may be erected along any boundary line of the side yards or rear
yard from the front building line to the rear lot line and along the rear lot line, except where the rear lot line
abuts a street, and such fences shall not be deemed structures for the purpose of this section.
(6)
Lot coverage. On each lot there shall be 40 percent of the total lot area retained as clear and unobstructed open
space, provided, however, that such open space may be used for parking areas and access roads, further provided
that such parking areas and access roads do not encroach on any required landscaped areas.
(f)
Off-street parking. The provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and
effect in the I-1 district.
(g)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
508/543
Off-street loading requirements. The provisions of section 118-312, Off-street loading requirements, shall be in
full force and effect in the I-1 district.
(h)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(i)
Planned building groups. The provisions of section 118-313, Planned building groups, shall have no force and
effect in the I-1 district.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.4-2, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-124. - I-2 light industrial park district.
(a)
Description of district. The I-2 light industrial park district is composed of certain lands so situated as to be
suitable for industrial development, but where the modes of operations of the industry will directly affect nearby
residential and business uses. The purpose of the district is to permit the normal operations of industries, subject
to those regulations needed to control congestion and to protect nearby residential and business districts.
(b)
General conditions. The general conditions applying to all zone districts and the general conditions applying to
industrial zone districts shall be in full force and effect in the I-2 district.
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied only by structures
containing permitted uses and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to and are operated
and maintained by the owner or tenant of the permitted use, provided, however, that it shall not be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the I-2 district only those uses specified under I-2 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted.
(e)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for an I-2 industrial district shall comply with the following dimensional
requirements:
(1)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 30 feet from each front property
line, or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater; provided, however, that where the height of any
main structure exceeds 35 feet as permitted under these district regulations the front yard setback shall be
increased one foot for each increment of five feet of increased structure height above 45 feet up to the maximum
permitted height.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
509/543
(2)
Minimum side yards. There shall be two side yards to each lot. The minimum required side yard width shall not
be less than ten percent of the lot width at the front building line, but in no case shall it be less than 15 feet,
except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 25 feet, unless under the master street plan, as existing
or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the purpose of street widening or for other
reasons; provided, however, that when structures on abutting lots share a common rail facility extending along
the side of the building the side yard on that side of the building may be reduced, with commission approval, to
facilitate common usage of the railroad spur. Where the height of any structure exceeds 35 feet as permitted
under these district regulations, the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for each increment of five feet
of increased structure height above 45 feet up to the maximum permitted height.
(3)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet.
(4)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed six stories or 60 feet in
height; provided, however, that chimneys, vents, air conditioning towers, accessory water tower and elevator
shafts, all clearly accessory to the main structure, shall be permitted to exceed this height limitation up to but not
exceeding 25 percent of the total permitted height, and that no illuminated sign, name, display or advertising
device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed or attached to any portion of any structure exceeding the height
limitations.
(5)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within 25 feet of any street or within ten feet of any lot line, that is not a street line, unless otherwise provided
for herein. Fences up to 84 inches in height may be erected along any boundary line of the side yards or rear
yard from the front building line to the rear lot line and along the rear lot line, except where the rear lot line
abuts a street, and such fences shall not be deemed structures for the purpose of this section.
(6)
Lot coverage. On each lot there shall be 60 percent of the total lot area retained as clear and unobstructed open
space, provided, however, that such open space may be used for parking areas and access roads, further provided
that such parking areas and access roads do not encroach on any required landscaped areas.
(f)
Off-street parking. The provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and
effect in the I-2 district.
(g)
Off-street loading requirements. The provisions of section 118-312, Off-street loading requirements, shall be in
full force and effect in the I-2 district.
(h)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
510/543
(i)
Planned building groups. The provisions of section 118-313, Planned building groups, shall have no force and
effect in the I-2 district.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.4-3, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-125. - I-3 industrial park district.
(a)
Description of district. The I-3 industrial park district is composed of industrial areas of the city and is
downwind from residential and business areas. Regulations are the minimum required for mutual protection of
the industrial users, and, to that end, the district should not be adjacent to any residential or business district, if
such abutment can possibly be avoided. The district is intended to provide good and attractive sites for industrial
uses, to encourage a high standard of industrial development, and/or to encourage the location of industries
requiring the use of water and/or river transportation.
(b)
General conditions. The general conditions applying to all zone districts and the general conditions applying to
industrial zone districts shall be in full force and effect in the I-3 district.
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied only by structures
containing permitted uses and such accessory buildings as are clearly incidental and normal to and are operated
and maintained by the owner or tenant of the permitted use, provided, however, that it shall not be a residence.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the I-3 district only those uses specified under I-3 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted, except that certain uses in the I-3 industrial zone may be permitted
only after two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the planning commission:
Abattoir
Acid manufacturing
Ammonia manufacturing
Ammunition manufacturing
Animal boarding
Animal breeding (commercial)
Animal hospitals
Bones: reduction or distillation
Coal mining
Dead stock collectors
Dog pound
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
511/543
Explosives, manufacturing
Explosives, storage and distribution
Fat rendering
Fireworks or explosives, manufacturing
Fur preparation (tanning)
Raw hides warehouse
Garbage, reduction, scavenging
Glue manufacturing
Grease and tallow manufacturing
Gunpowder manufacturing
Hide and tallow manufacturing
Horses, dog and cat hospital
Hydrochloric acid manufacturing
Incineration of animals and garbage
Kennels
Livestock, slaughter
Picric acid, manufacturing
Raw hides and skins, treatment
Reduction of garbage, offal
Rendering works
Rubbish removal, private equipment
Slaughterhouses
Tallow rendering
Tanneries
(e)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for an I-3 industrial district shall comply with the following dimensional
requirements:
(1)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 40 feet from each property line,
or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater; provided, however, that, where the height of any
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
512/543
main structure exceeds 50 feet as permitted under these district regulations, the front yard setback shall be
increased one foot for each increment of five feet of increased structure height above 50 feet up to the maximum
permitted height.
(2)
Minimum side yards. There shall be two side yards to each lot. The minimum required side yard width shall not
be less than ten percent of the lot width at the front building line, but in no case shall it be less than 20 feet,
except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 30 feet, unless under the master street plan, as existing
or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the purpose of street widening or for other
reasons; provided, however, that when structures on abutting lots share a common rail facility extending along
the side of the building the side yard on that side of the building may be reduced, with the commission's
approval, to facilitate common usage of the railroad spur. Where the height of any main structure exceeds 50 feet
as permitted under these district regulations, the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for each increment
of five feet of increased structure height above 50 feet up to the maximum permitted height.
(3)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 30 feet.
(4)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed eight stories or 90 feet in
height, provided, however, that chimneys, vents, air conditioning towers, accessory water towers and elevator
shafts, all clearly accessory to the main structure, shall be permitted to exceed this height limitation up to but not
exceeding 25 percent of the total permitted height, and that no illuminated sign, name, display or advertising
device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed or attached to any portion of any structure exceeding the height
limitations.
(5)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within 40 feet of any street or within 20 feet of any lot line, that is not a street line, unless otherwise provided for
herein. Fences up to 84 inches in height may be erected along any boundary line of the side yards or rear yard
from the front building line to the rear lot line and along the rear lot line, except where the rear lot line abuts a
street, and such fences shall not be deemed structures for the purpose of this section.
(6)
Lot coverage. On each lot there shall be 60 percent of the total lot area retained as clear and unobstructed open
space, provided, however, that such open space may be used for parking areas and access roads, further provided
that such parking areas and access roads do not encroach on any required landscaped areas.
(f)
Off-street parking. The provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and
effect in the I-3 district.
(g)
Off-street loading requirements. The provisions of section 118-312, Off-street loading requirements, shall be in
full force and effect in the I-3 district.
(h)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
513/543
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(i)
Planned building groups. The provisions of section 118-313, Planned building groups, shall have no force and
effect in the I-3 district.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.4-4, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 11-19-62)
Secs. 117-126—117-147. - Reserved.
Subdivision V. - Other Districts
Sec. 117-148. - PUD-R-7 planned unit development district.
(a)
Statement of purpose. It is the intent of this section to encourage developments with superior living
environments brought about through unified development and to provide for the application of design ingenuity
in such developments while protecting existing and future surrounding developments and achieving the goals of
the comprehensive plan of development for the city. The PUD planned unit development district herein
established is intended to provide for greater flexibility in the design of buildings, yards, courts, circulation and
open space than would otherwise be possible through the strict application of other district regulations, and to
produce:
(1)
A maximum choice in the types of environment and living units available to the public;
(2)
Open space and recreation areas;
(3)
A pattern of development which preserves trees, outstanding natural topography and geologic features, and
prevents soil erosion;
(4)
A creative approach to the use of land and related physical development;
(5)
An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lowering costs;
(6)
An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding developments; and
(7)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
514/543
A more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of other sections of this
chapter.
The PUD planned unit development district regulations are designed to provide for small- and large-scale
developments incorporating a single type or a variety of residential, commercial and related uses which are
planned and developed as a unit. Such development may consist of individual lots or it may have common
building sites. Private or public common land and open space must be an essential and major element of the plan
which is related to and affects the longterm value of the homes and other development. A planned unit shall be a
separate entity with a distinct character in harmony with surrounding development.
(b)
Authority. The authority for the establishment of these regulations was granted by A.C.A. tit. 14, ch. 56, subch. 4
(A.C.A. § 14-56-401 et seq.).
(c)
Applicability. The PUD planned unit development district is created as a special zone and shall be so designated
by a zone classification "PUD" with boundaries on the zoning district map. All lands within the corporate limits
and such other lands outside the corporate limits over which the city exercises zoning jurisdiction as permitted
by Arkansas Statutes shall be eligible for designation as a PUD. The standards, design criteria and procedures
adopted herein are designed to enable the district to operate in harmony with the plan for land use and
population density embodied in this chapter.
(d)
Standards of development.
(1)
Ownership control. The land in a planned unit development district shall be owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by a person, firm, group of individuals, partnership, corporation or trust, provided assurances are
given through the procedures contained herein that the project can be successfully completed.
(2)
Minimum district area. The minimum area for a PUD planned unit development district shall be three acres. In
calculating the minimum area for a PUD district, the measurements shall include the area of all dedicated streets
entirely within the boundary of the proposed PUD and one-half of the area of all boundary or perimeter streets.
(3)
Uses permitted. Property and buildings in a PUD district shall be as follows:
a.
Single-family attached and detached residences, two-family dwelling units and multiple-family dwelling units
including triplexes, fourplexes, townhouses, row houses, garden apartments, condominiums and high-rises.
b.
Public and semipublic parks; and private common areas, playgrounds, landscaped areas and greenbelts
maintained by a homeowners' association.
c.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
515/543
Public uses such as schools and churches.
d.
Clubs and lodges; golf course and club.
e.
Docks and marinas.
f.
Public utility facilities and rights-of-way.
g.
C-1 and C-2 commercial uses.
(4)
Special permit uses.
a.
In addition to the above permitted uses by right, certain other uses may be permitted in accordance with the
restrictions included herein. These uses more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other
uses permitted in the PUD district and as such they require special considerations and restrictions. The following
uses are designated as special permit uses:
1.
C-3 and C-4 commercial uses.
2.
I-1 and I-2 industrial uses.
b.
In applying for a special permit use to be included as a part of a PUD district, the applicant shall precisely
indicate the specific use, its location, area to be included, building square footage and such other information as
required by the planning commission to properly and comprehensively evaluate the nature and impact of such
special permit use.
c.
Where such special permit uses are approved at the time of rezoning they shall not be subsequently changed to
any other use until and unless they are changed to another use that is permitted by right, i.e. a C-1 or C-2
commercial use, or the new proposed use if not permitted by right in a PUD district is resubmitted for rezoning
approval. No zoning permit for a change of use shall be issued by the planning commission for any such special
permit use area or structure unless the above conditions are fully complied with.
(5)
Parking and off-street loading.
a.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
516/543
Off public right-of-way parking shall be provided for each use within the PUD district in accordance with
section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, of this chapter.
b.
Off-street loading space shall be provided for each use within the PUD district in accordance with section 118-
312, Off-street loading requirements, of this chapter.
(6)
Perimeter requirements. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this district, all uses of land or structures
located on a lot within the PUD that are adjacent to the boundary of the PUD district or adjacent to any boundary
or perimeter street right-of-way shall comply with the following:
a.
All residential uses and structures on the perimeter of this district shall meet the dimensional requirements of the
district they abut.
b.
All commercial or other nonresidential uses and structures on the perimeter of this district shall meet the
dimensional requirements of the C-1 commercial quiet business district.
(7)
Area and lot regulations. Uses of land and structures of the PUD district shall comply with the following:
a.
Every structure containing dwelling units shall have direct access to a public street, except for row or terrace
housing, which may have access via a court, walkway or other area of common ownership that is owned and
maintained by a homes association.
b.
No minimum lot size or setbacks shall be required for structures within this district. However, not less than 40
percent of the lot area must be retained as unobstructed open space.
c.
All unattached residential structures must be at least 12 feet in horizontal distance to any other structure.
d.
If any structures are closer than ten feet to another structure, then an approved firewall shall be installed.
(8)
Residential density standards. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within a PUD district is
dependent upon both the type and number of each type of residential units intended to be included in the PUD
district. Micro densities within certain areas of the PUD may be beyond the overall limits through a transfer of
density. However, overall project densities shall not be exceeded in accordance with the following schedule:
a.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
517/543
Six dwelling units per net residential acre for single-family attached and detached houses and two-family
dwellings.
b.
Twelve dwellings per net residential acre for triplexes, fourplexes and row or terrace housing.
c.
Twenty-two dwellings per net residential acre for low-rise (three stories or less) apartments.
d.
Thirty dwellings per net residential acre for high-rise (four stories or more) apartments.
For purposes of calculating density, net residential acres are defined as gross acres of the PUD site minus all
public rights-of-way, and less the area of all parcels of lots devoted to commercial, industrial or institutional uses
not of a residential nature. Common open space that is owned and maintained by a homeowners' association
shall be included in calculating the net residential acres available for all dwelling units that automatically belong
to such an association. Where more than one homeowners' association is to be created, then each common open
space can only be attributed to the lots or dwellings which have automatic membership for that specific common
open area.
(9)
Common open space requirements.
a.
Common open space constitutes an essential ingredient in a planned unit development and is one of the most
basic and important design elements. Open space should be distributed more or less equitably throughout the
PUD district in relationship to the dwelling units and areas that are intended to be served by the common open
space. Common open space is composed of one or more parcels of land that are reserved for the use and
enjoyment of all or a significant portion of the PUD residents and owned and maintained in common by them,
usually through a homeowners' association. However, it is permissible for all or a portion of the common open
space requirements included in this section to be met through the provision of public park lands within the PUD
district. In such cases, however, all lands must comply with all of the regulations included herein as to size,
location usability, etc., in order to qualify as meeting the requirements of this section. Also, in such cases it shall
be the responsibility of the developer to obtain written approval in advance from the appropriate public agency
or body responsible for public parks as to their willingness to accept dedication of such areas as public parks.
b.
The design criteria and regulations included herein are concerned with both the quantity and the quality of the
open spaces that are to be provided. All of the various requirements must be complied with as follows:
1.
Minimum required amount. A minimum of 20 percent of all the net residential acres within the PUD district
shall be designated for and devoted to common open space.
2.
Usability of open space. At least 70 percent of the total common open space required must be usable. Usable, for
purposes of these regulations, is defined as that portion of the total open space required that complies with each
and every one of the following criteria:
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
518/543
i.
Dimension. Each and every parcel or portion of a parcel that is designated as usable shall not contain less than
10,000 square feet and not less than 60 feet in its smallest dimension. Furthermore, the overall shape should be
sufficiently geometric to be functionally usable.
ii.
Physical surface characteristics. Bodies of water or stream beds can account for not more than 40 percent of the
total required open space; provided, however, that not more than 20 percent of the required usable open space is
occupied by bodies of water or stream areas. At least 70 percent of the required usable open space shall have an
overall finished grade not to exceed ten percent.
iii.
Location. Usable open space should be distributed more or less equitably throughout the PUD district in
relationship to the number and types of dwelling units intended to be served by the common open space. All lots
or parcels designated for residential purposes that are part of a homeowners' association enjoying common open
spaces within the PUD shall be located not more than 1,000 feet from at least one parcel of usable open space;
provided, however, that for residential lots designated for single-family detached dwellings that contain at least
6,000 square feet per lot there shall be no distance requirement to the open space.
iv.
Physical improvements allowed. Only recreational facilities or structures and their accessory uses shall be
located in any usable open space areas. Walks, driveways and similar pathways are permitted and parking
facilities may be included where such parking areas are associated with and accessory to recreational facilities or
structures.
v.
Natural amenities. Developers are encouraged to include as part of the open space such areas that have unique or
unusual natural assets including heavy tree growth, ravines and natural rock outcroppings. However, not more
than 30 percent of the required usable open space can be left in a natural condition where such natural condition
of the area would prevent active recreational activities.
3.
Preservation of open space. Adequate guarantees must be provided that the common open space areas as
contained in the plan for the PUD district are preserved and maintained for those purposes only. A homeowners'
association shall be required, if other arrangements satisfactory to the planning commission have not been made,
for improving, operating and maintaining all such common open space areas. At the time the final plan and plat
is submitted, the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the homeowners' association shall be reviewed and
approved by the planning commission. Additionally, the restrictive covenants which run with the land must be
submitted and include similar provisions to preserve all open space areas.
(e)
Procedure for obtaining PUD zoning. A three-step review procedure is required for obtaining PUD zoning and
final approval of the final plan and plat. The first step involves a preapplication plan and conference which is
designed to provide information to the local government of the developer's intention with respect to the nature
and scope of the proposed PUD district and to allow the developer to be informed of the city's regulations and
policies concerning development alternatives for the area. The second step involves submission of a formal
application for rezoning of the area to a PUD district and simultaneous submission of a preliminary plat in
accordance with the city subdivision rules and regulations. The last step involves submission of the final
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
519/543
development plan and plat for approval and recording prior to commencing building construction. These steps
are outlined below with respect to the procedure followed and submission requirements at each step:
(1)
Preapplication plan and conference.
a.
Procedure.
1.
A preapplication plan shall be submitted to the city planning commission for review of the area and proposed
uses relative to the compatibility of a planned unit development project with existing development in the
surrounding area and the comprehensive development plan of the city.
2.
Each applicant shall confer with the director of planning, the subdivision committee of the planning commission
and interested department heads in connection with the preparation of the planned unit development application.
It shall be the responsibility of the planning director to contact and invite these department heads to a joint
meeting. The general outlines of the proposal, evidenced schematically by the preapplication plan and such other
information as may be desired, is to be considered before submission of the planned unit development
application.
3.
Upon review of the site plan and general area, and following completion of the preapplication conference, the
department of planning shall furnish the applicant with written comments regarding the conference, including
appropriate recommendations to inform and assist the applicant prior to preparing the components of the planned
unit development application.
b.
Submission requirements. At the time of requesting a preapplication conference, the applicant shall submit a site
plan and such other narrative or graphic information the applicant deems pertinent to the city's initial review and
evaluation of the potential of the planned unit development district proposed. The preapplication plan shall
include the following:
1.
Boundaries of the property involved;
2.
Existing zoning of the area and zoning of adjoining properties;
3.
Existing roadways, easements and waterways;
4.
Indication of availability of all utilities;
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
520/543
5.
General plan of development at a level of detail sufficient to indicate to the city the nature and scope of the
project as to its magnitude in terms of approximate number and types of dwelling units, location and extent of
nonresidential elements, proposed locations of major open space areas, and major circulation facilities.
(2)
Zoning application and preliminary plat.
a.
Application. After receiving written comments from the department of planning following the preapplication
conference, the applicant may proceed in preparing a formal application for a planned unit development to the
city planning commission. The application shall consist of a simultaneous submission of a preliminary plat and a
rezoning application. The preliminary plat shall conform to all requirements contained in the city subdivision
regulations with the exception of certain design requirements regarding lots, setbacks, etc., that are specifically
exempted or modified by the provisions of this section. The application shall be processed following the
procedure for a change of zone district boundary as outlined in this chapter.
b.
Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held for a change of zoning classification. At the same meeting in
which the public hearing is held, the planning commission shall consider the preliminary plat also. Upon
completion of the public hearing, the granting of a planned unit development district may be recommended for
approval to the city council.
c.
Submission requirements. The applicant shall simultaneously submit both a preliminary plat and a rezoning
application. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in a manner as prescribed in the city subdivision regulations.
To form the basis for the rezoning application, a preliminary site plan shall be submitted and it shall include at
least the following information:
1.
The proposed title of the project and the name of any engineer, architect, land planner, landscape architect or
company responsible for various elements of the plan shall be included.
2.
The north point, scale and date shall be included.
3.
The boundaries of the property involved, all existing easements, section lines and property lines, existing streets,
existing buildings, watercourses, waterways or lakes, and other existing physical features in and adjoining the
project shall be included.
4.
The location and sizes of sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures in
and adjacent to the project shall be included.
5.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
521/543
The topography of the project area with contour intervals as determined by the planning director shall be
included.
6.
A general land use development plan of the area shall be included indicating the location of different land uses,
dwellings by types and numbers, areas designated for commercial uses and other nonresidential uses, and areas
proposed for open space and recreational use. For all residential areas, the site plan shall clearly indicate the type
and number of dwellings to be located per parcel, lot or block in accordance with the preliminary plat. For all
commercial or other nonresidential uses, the areas shall clearly be indicated in accordance with lots, parcels or
blocks and each such parcel shall indicate the type of building proposed, number of stories and gross square
footage to be included on each parcel. The boundaries of all open space areas shall be clearly indicated along
with the form of proposed ownership, that is, by homeowners' association or public park or other legal entity,
and, in such case where more than one homeowners' association is being created, documentation shall be clearly
submitted as to which areas will have automatic membership into said associations. This requirement, however,
shall not be interpreted as requiring a detailed site development plan which includes the exact boundaries and
locations of all structures proposed for construction.
7.
All setback lines for all properties shall be shown.
8.
If the project is to be developed in more than one phase, the boundaries of each proposed phase shall be clearly
indicated on the site plan map.
9.
Tabulations shall be submitted of the total number of gross acres in the project, and the acres and percentages
thereof, proposed to be devoted to the several dwelling types, commercial uses, other nonresidential uses,
streets, parks, schools and other reservations.
10.
A tabulation of the total number of dwelling units by various types in the project and the total number of net
residential acres within the project shall be included, or, if the project is to be developed in phases, by each phase
within the project. The tabulation shall so indicate conformance of the proposed project or each phase within the
project to the residential density standards for the PUD district.
11.
A tabulation of the total common open space required and the amount of common open space actually shown on
the preliminary site plan shall be included. Additionally, such tabulation shall be furnished to indicate the
amount of usable open space. The site plan map shall also clearly indicate those portions of the common open
space that are usable in accordance with the criteria included herein.
(3)
Final plan and plat.
a.
Upon approval of the rezoning request by the city council, the applicant may proceed with preparation of the
final plan and plat. The final plat shall meet all applicable requirements of the city subdivision regulations and
shall be processed in accordance with those regulations. The final plan shall contain the same information as
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
522/543
required in the preliminary plan. Additionally, a narrative description shall be provided of all tabulations and
other documentation required on the preliminary plan. Furthermore, the applicant shall submit a written and
graphic description of any modifications made to the final plan from the approved preliminary plan.
b.
If it is determined that no changes have been made from the preliminary plan or if only minor plan changes have
been made in accordance with the definition provided hereinbelow in subsection (f) of this section, then the
review by the city planning commission may proceed and the plat may be submitted to the planning commission
for approval. If approved, the plat shall be filed in the county recorder's office.
(f)
Amendments. Amendments may be required either to the preliminary site plan or the final development plan.
The procedure governing the disposition of amendments shall be as follows:
(1)
Amendments to the preliminary plan.
a.
At the time a final plan is submitted for review, it shall be determined whether or not any amendments have been
made to the approved preliminary plan. If amendments have been made then a determination shall be required as
to whether or not said amendments constitute a major or minor plan change. Modifications from the previously
approved preliminary plan shall be deemed to be minor plan changes if any and all modifications by the
applicant of the plan do not:
1.
Vary the total number of dwelling units by more than five percent;
2.
Involve a reduction of the area set aside for common open space or the substantial relocation of such area or
areas;
3.
Increase by more than five percent the floor area proposed for any nonresidential use; and
4.
Substantially change the location of any nonresidential areas as shown on the preliminary plan.
Additionally, modifications in the location design of minor streets, culs-de-sac, alleys or facilities for water and
for disposal of stormwater and sanitary sewage shall not be considered as major modifications.
b.
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing, the planning commission may not permit changes beyond the
maximum or minimum requirements set forth in this section.
c.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
523/543
All other changes in the planned unit, including changes in the site plan and the development schedule, must be
made under the procedures that are applicable to the initial approval of a planned unit.
(2)
Amendments to final development plan. The final development plan as submitted and approved may be amended
in accordance with the following procedure. Minor changes may be authorized by the planning director, if
required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final development program was
approved. No change authorized by the planning director under this section, however, may either increase the
total area devoted to any and all nonresidential uses, or decrease the amount of area devoted to common open
space, or increase the total number of dwelling units located on any lot, block or parcel as approved in the final
development plan. Notwithstanding any of these conditions, the planning director may not permit changes
beyond the minimum or maximum requirements set forth in this section. All other changes in the planned unit,
including changes in the site plan or the development schedule, must be made under the procedures that are
applicable to the initial approval of a planned unit development.
(g)
Administration and enforcement.
(1)
Review standards. The department of planning shall investigate and ascertain that the plans for a planned unit
development meet the following conditions:
a.
That the tract of land for the entire project comprises not less than three acres.
b.
That the project is in conformity with the requirements and standards of development of the planned unit
development district and is consistent with the intent and purpose of this section.
c.
That the proposed project constitutes an environment of sustained desirability and stability and that it is in
harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
d.
That the property adjacent to the proposed development will not be adversely affected.
(2)
Recorded plat and plot plan required. The proposed development shall follow all applicable procedures,
standards, regulations and laws governing the subdivision of land. No zoning certificate for any structure shall
be issued until a final plat of the proposed development or part thereof is approved and recorded and an
approved plat plan has been submitted in accordance with section 118-38(d) of this chapter.
(3)
Phasing and development schedule.
a.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
524/543
The applicant is permitted to construct the planned unit development in more than one phase or stage of
construction. In such cases, the applicant shall clearly indicate on the site plan map the boundaries of each
proposed phase. If the sequence of construction of various portions of the development is to occur in phases or
stages, then the open space and/or recreational facilities must be developed or committed thereto in proportion to
the number of dwelling units intended to be developed during any given stage of construction as approved by the
planning commission. Compliance with this provision, however, will be calculated in a cumulative manner, i.e.,
the open space required in any successive phase of development shall equal or exceed the requirement of the
total number of units constructed through all phases.
b.
Additionally, the applicant shall submit a schedule of construction for the project or for each phase within the
project indicating the sequence of development according to residential type and other nonresidential
construction within the project. Upon adoption of the schedule of construction, the building inspector shall be
responsible for enforcing this schedule. If he determines that the rate of construction of residential units or
nonresidential structures differs from the construction schedule, he shall so notify the developer in writing;
thereafter the building inspector may issue such orders to the developer as he sees fit, and upon continued
violation of this subsection may suspend the developer from further construction of dwelling units or
nonresidential structures until compliance is achieved.
(4)
Guarantee of completion. Before approval of the final development plan, the planning commission shall require
a contract with safeguards satisfactory to the commission guaranteeing completion of the development plan for
any single phase in a period to be specified by the commission, but which period shall not exceed five years
unless extended by the commission.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.1-7, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 4543, § 1, 8-11-75; Ord. No. 4558, §§ 1, 2, 9-22-75; Ord. No.
4616, § 1, 2-27-76)
Sec. 117-149. - O-1 open lands district.
(a)
Description of district. The O-1 open lands district is composed of certain large open areas, land publicly owned
and land suitable for the location of public buildings and certain public facilities. The regulations of this district
are designed to retain the open character and settings desirable for public facilities and certain other compatible
uses.
(b)
Limitation of external uses. Within not more than two years from the date on which the following provisions
become effective, every use shall be made to comply with the limitation of external uses listed in the general
regulations (section 118-161).
(c)
Permitted structures. Each lot shall have at least one front property line and shall be occupied by only one
principal structure which may be a public building or facility, except that where the use is for a public park, a
public recreational center, a public playground, an airport, or a port or harbor, or other similar facilities, as
determined by the commission, several structures may be placed within the land area reserved for such public
uses, provided that they are located in accordance with a development plan submitted to and approved by the
commission in the manner prescribed under this chapter, and further provided that in these areas residences may
be permitted provided that they are limited to those required by caretakers, police and similar personnel required
to be present on the lands to provide protection and to safeguard the property.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
525/543
(d)
Permitted uses. In the O-1 district only those uses specified under O-1 in the list of permitted uses, section 118-
134 of these regulations, will be permitted.
(e)
Uses by temporary permit. Upon application to and issuance by the planning commission of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as uses by temporary permit:
(1)
Bazaar, carnival and/or circus; provided, however, that each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than
three days and shall not be renewed for more than three successive periods; and provided, further, that a period
of at least 90 days shall intervene between the termination of one permit and the issuance of another permit for
the same location.
(2)
A newspaper distribution station operated in accordance with all of the following standards: shall be maintained
in a sightly condition with all papers, waste wrappers and newspapers stored, handled and distributed within a
completely enclosed structure until removed from the premises, shall provide adequate on-the-premises storage
for bicycles and shall prohibit unnecessary loitering on or about the premises; provided, however, that each
permit shall be valid for a period of not more than one calendar year but may be renewed; and provided, further,
that a failure to comply with any of the standards herein set forth shall be cause for revocation of any permit.
(3)
Noncommercial concrete batching plant, both incidental and necessary to construction in the district; provided,
however, that each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six calendar months and shall not be
renewed for more than three successive periods at the same location.
(4)
Parking lot designated for a special event; provided, however, that each permit shall be valid only for the
duration of the designated special event; and provided, further, that if the designated special event is a seasonal
activity the permit may be valid for the entire season but shall be restricted in use to designated dates and times
during which the event is occurring.
(5)
Sale at retail of Christmas trees and wreaths; provided, however, that no permit shall be effective prior to
November 15 in each calendar year and no permit shall be valid for a period of more than 45 days.
(6)
Temporary building or yard for construction materials and equipment, both incidental and necessary to
construction in the district; provided, however, that each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six
calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than four successive periods at the same location.
(7)
Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of real property in the district; provided,
however, that each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six calendar months and shall not be
renewed for more than four successive periods at the same location.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
526/543
(f)
Dimensional requirements. The lot for the O-1 district shall comply with the following dimensional and area
requirements:
(1)
Lot area. The lot area shall be not less than 175,000 square feet of which 60 percent shall be retained as
unobstructed open space; provided, however, that this open space may be used for parking and landscaping
areas, and recreational purposes.
(2)
Minimum front yard. All structures shall be set back a distance of not less than 40 feet from each front property
line, or as required in other ordinances, whichever is the greater; provided, however, that, where the height of
any building exceeds 45 feet as permitted under these district regulations, the front yard setback shall be
increased one foot for each increment of five feet of increased structure height above 45 feet up to the maximum
permitted height.
(3)
Minimum side yards. There shall be two side yards to each lot; the minimum required side yard width shall be
not less than ten percent of the lot width at the front building line but in no case shall it be less than 15 feet,
except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least 20 feet, unless under the master street plan, as existing
or amended, or other ordinances a greater setback is required for the purpose of street widening or for other
reasons.
(4)
Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet; provided that where the
rear lot line abuts an alley and the property on the other side of the alley is not within a residential zone, then the
minimum rear yard requirement shall be a depth of not less than 15 feet. Where the rear lot line abuts onto a
street the rear building line shall be the building setback line established for that street.
(5)
Maximum height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 60 feet in height, provided,
however, that cooling towers, elevator shafts, control towers and other structural units necessary for the
functioning of the use shall be permitted to exceed this height, provided that no building shall exceed a height of
90 feet and further provided that the provisions of the yard requirements are met.
(6)
Location of accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located on any required front or side yard, or
within 20 feet of any street, or within five feet of any lot line, that is not a street line, except where an alley abuts
the rear line of the lot detached accessory buildings not opening directly into the alley and fixtures for the
disposal of trash and garbage may be set on the rear lot line, provided, however that in no case will a trash
burner be located closer than ten feet to the line of any adjacent or abutting property. Accessory structures
having access to the alley shall be set back five feet from the rear lot line. Fences up to 60 inches in height may
be erected along any boundary line of the side yards or rear yard from the front building line to the rear lot line
and along the rear lot line, except where the rear lot line abuts a street, and such fences shall not be deemed
structures for the purpose of this section.
(7)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
527/543
Screens. All O-1 uses shall provide a screen between abutting residential or C-1 business areas, so as to protect
these areas by day and by night from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles and from
light, noises or exposure to views not compatible with these areas. Such screens shall be pleasing in design, and
of a substantial material, easily maintained.
(g)
Off-street parking. The provisions of section 118-311, Off-street parking requirements, shall be in full force and
effect in the O-1 district.
(h)
Off-street loading requirements. The provisions of section 118-312, Off-street loading requirements, shall be in
full force and effect in this district.
(i)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(j)
Planned building groups. The provisions of section 118-313, Planned building groups, shall be in full force and
effect in the O-1 district.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.5, 3-26-62)
Sec. 117-150. - Floodprone district.
(a)
Description of district. The floodprone district is composed of lands which have high water tables, have
improper drainage, or are subject to periodic overflow. The district is established to protect the public health and
to reduce the financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and individuals, which may
result from the improper use of such lands. The boundaries of these lands are established by the planning
commission based on data received from the city engineer, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Soil
Conservation Service. In this district, it is felt that the problems of water table, improper drainage and periodic
overflow can be solved through natural or manmade improvements, and that once these changes have been made
and it can be demonstrated beyond doubt that the condition no longer exists, and that all drainage, sewer and
other utility lines will operate efficiently under all conditions, and that all structures erected thereon will comply
with all provisions of the building or other codes, then the district may be reclassified. Such determination and
reclassification shall be made by the planning commission in consultation with the city engineer and such other
agencies as may be interested in the reclassification of the said lands and the improvements proposed thereon,
and shall be subject to the amending procedures set forth in this chapter. In order to assist in the development of
the overall plan for the city and to encourage the proper use of land, the commission may establish the type of
district for which the lands shall be deemed suitable upon correction of the basic problem, and such floodprone
designation shall be followed by the designation of the appropriate district. This designation shall not give the
right to develop such lands for the use, but shall only be a guide to the owner and the commission on the most
appropriate use for the reclaimed land.
(b)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
528/543
Limitation of external effects of uses. Within not more than two years from the date on which this chapter is
passed, every use shall be made to comply with the limitation of external uses outlined in the general regulations
(section 118-161).
(c)
Permitted structures. No structures shall be permitted in the floodprone district except those used in the
operation of the permitted uses, and further providing that these structures do not cover more than five percent of
the total lot area. In no case will a residential structure be permitted.
(d)
Permitted uses. In the floodprone district only those uses specified under "Floodprone" in the list of permitted
uses, section 118-134 of these regulations, will be permitted.
(e)
Uses by temporary permit. Upon application to and issuance by the planning commission of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as uses by temporary permit:
(1)
Bazaar, carnival and/or circus; provided, however, that each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than
three days and shall not be renewed for more than three successive periods; and provided, further, that a period
of at least 90 days shall intervene between the termination of one permit and the issuance of another permit for
the same location.
(2)
A newspaper distribution station operated in accordance with all of the following standards: shall be maintained
in a sightly condition with all papers, waste wrappers and newspapers stored, handled and distributed within a
completely enclosed structure until removed from the premises, shall provide adequate on-the-premises storage
for bicycles and shall prohibit unnecessary loitering on or about the premises; provided, however, that each
permit shall be valid for a period of not more than one calendar year but may be renewed; and provided, further,
that a failure to comply with any of the standards herein set forth shall be cause for revocation of any permit.
(3)
Noncommercial concrete batching plant, both incidental and necessary to construction in the district; provided,
however, that each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six calendar months and shall not be
renewed for more than three successive periods at the same location.
(4)
Parking lot designated for a special event; provided, however, that each permit shall be valid only for the
duration of the designated special event; and provided, further, that if the designated special event is a seasonal
activity the permit may be valid for the entire season, but shall be restricted in the use to designated dates and
times during which the event is occurring.
(5)
Sale at retail of Christmas trees and wreaths; provided, however, that no permit shall be effective prior to
November 15 in each calendar year and no permit shall be valid for a period of more than 45 days.
(6)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
529/543
Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to
construction in the district; provided, however, that each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six
calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than four successive periods at the same location.
(7)
Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of real property in the district; provided,
however, that each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six calendar months and shall not be
renewed for more than four successive periods at the same location.
(f)
Structure setback. All structures must be set back at least 30 feet from all street right-of-way lines, or as required
under other ordinances, whichever is the greater.
(g)
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, within the areas formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a
line joining points on such right-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet from their intersection, there shall be no
obstruction to vision between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street
at the centerline thereof, except that street name signs, fire hydrants, street lighting poles and associated
appurtenances thereto shall be permitted within this area.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 702.6, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 5560, § 1, 8-22-83)
Secs. 117-151—117-177. - Reserved.
ARTICLE I. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Sec. 117-178. - Off-street parking requirements.
(a)
Scope of requirements. The requirements herein set forth shall apply and govern in all districts except the C-5
(downtown) district, in which district these regulations shall be of no force and effect, unless otherwise
mentioned herein.
(b)
Duty to provide and maintain off-street parking space; existing uses. The duty to provide and maintain the offstreet
parking space herein required shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and owner of the
use and the operator and owner of the land on which, or the structure or structures in which, is located the use or
uses for which off-street parking space is required to be provided and maintained. No land shall be used or
occupied, no structure shall be designed, erected, altered, used or occupied and no use shall be operated unless
the off-street parking space herein required is provided in at least the amount specified and maintained in the
manner herein set forth; provided, however, that where off-street parking space is not provided or maintained for
land, structures or uses actually used, occupied and operated on March 26, 1962, it shall not be required under
this chapter. From March 26, 1962, if such land, structures or uses are enlarged, expanded or changed there shall
be provided, for the increment only of such land, structures and uses enlarged expanded or changed and
maintained as herein required, at least the amount of off-street parking space that would be required hereunder if
the increment were a separate land, structure or use. However, where a lot with an existing structure is cleared
and a new structure is erected thereon, there shall be provided and maintained off-street parking space as
required herein.
(c)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
530/543
Location of off-street parking space. Off-street parking space shall be located on the same lot as the use for
which provided and may be composed of one or several separated parcels, unless otherwise provided for herein.
(d)
Separate or combined space. Separate off-street parking space shall be provided for each use or the parking
space required of two or more uses located on the same lot may be combined and used jointly; provided,
however:
(1)
Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two or more uses having different standards for
determining the amount of off-street parking space required, the parking space shall be adequate in area to
provide the sum total of off-street parking space requirements of all such uses.
(2)
Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two or more uses having the same standard for
determining the amount of off-street parking space required, all of such uses, for the purpose of this section,
shall be considered a single unit and the gross floor area of all such uses in all structures on the same lot or the
number of employees of all such uses in all structures on the same lot, as fixed by the applicable standard, shall
be taken as a single total for the purpose of determining the amount of off-street parking space required.
(e)
Amount of off-street parking space required. At least the following amounts of off-street parking space shall be
provided, plus an area or means adequate for ingress and egress which shall not be included in the computation
of the parking area, except single-family residences may utilize the areas of ingress and egress up to and
equaling 50 percent of the required parking area in computation of the total parking area. The following
classifications of uses shall be deemed to include and apply to all uses, and if for any reason the classification of
any use for the purpose of determining the amount of off-street parking space to be provided by such use is not
readily determinable hereunder the classification of the use shall be fixed by the planning commission.
(1)
Parking type I. Single-family residence: One space when less than 1,200 square feet, two spaces when greater
than 1,200 square feet.
(2)
Parking type II.
a.
Residential uses.
1.
Two-family dwelling: 1.5 spaces per unit.
2.
Roominghouses, dormitories, fraternities and similar establishments: one space per sleeping accommodation.
3.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
531/543
Hotels and motels: One space per guestroom, plus an additional ten percent of the total of all parking spaces
required for developments larger than 20 rooms for employees and non-guest users patronizing meeting rooms,
restaurants and other facilities.
4.
Multifamily: 1.5 spaces per unit.
5.
Mobile home: Two per mobile home space.
6.
Mobile home park community building: One per ten mobile home spaces.
7.
Mobile home park visitor parking: One per five mobile home spaces located no further than 400 feet from the
mobile home spaces to be served.
b.
Schools and institutions.
1.
Elementary: One per employee. Stacking space for dropoff and pickup shall be required on the site.
2.
Secondary (grades 7—12): Six spaces per classroom. Stacking space for buses and autos shall be required on the
site.
3.
Libraries: Ten, plus one for each 200 square feet over 1,000.
(3)
Parking type III.
a.
Residential uses. Elderly housing: 0.5 spaces per unit.
b.
Office and institutional.
1.
Churches: For the seating capacity in the principal room or hall, one for each five seats; in C-5 commercial
districts, one for each ten seats.
2.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
532/543
Lodge halls, exhibition halls, clubs (and similar places of public assembly): One space per 100 square feet of
gross floor area if without fixed seats, and one for each five seats if with fixed seats.
3.
Public tennis courts and private tennis clubs: Two per court, plus one for each 200 square feet of clubhouse floor
area in excess of 1,000 square feet.
(4)
Parking type IV.
a.
Office and institutional.
1.
Hospitals, general: One per 1.5 beds.
2.
Hospitals, extended care: One per two beds.
3.
Hospitals, convalescent (or nursing home): One per five beds.
b.
Schools and institutions. Nursery, kindergarten and day care centers: One space per employee plus on-site
loading and unloading spaces to be required at a rate of one for each ten children accommodated.
c.
Commercial uses. Restaurants (and similar establishments serving food and beverages): One space for each 100
square feet of gross floor area.
d.
Entertainment and recreation.
1.
Theaters, auditoriums and sports arenas or stadia, including school auditoriums and stadia: For all fixed seating
capacity, one for each four seats; theaters in shopping center, one per 8.5 seats.
2.
Dancehalls and exhibition halls, without fixed seats for floor area devoted to public assembly or activity: One
for each 100 square feet of floor area devoted to the principal activity.
3.
Billiard and pool rooms: Two per table.
4.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
533/543
Bowling alleys: Three for each alley except when in a shopping center which includes a supermarket, when it
shall be two per alley.
5.
Golf courses: Four per hole, plus required spaces for restaurants and cocktail lounges.
6.
Health spas and gymnasia: Ten plus one for each 200 square feet of floor area in excess of 1,000.
7.
Public swimming pools and private swim clubs: 20 per pool (not including wading pools or whirlpool baths),
plus one for each 200 square feet of cabana floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet, except, where membership
is restricted to the immediate neighborhood, a minimum of five parking spaces shall be provided.
8.
Skating rinks: One for each 200 square feet of floor area devoted to the principal activity.
(5)
Parking type V. Office and institutional:
a.
Finance, savings and loan institutions, insurance, real estate, business, professional and other offices (except
those otherwise designated herein): Zero to 20,000 square feet of floor area, one for each 300 square feet of floor
area, plus one for each 500 square feet of floor area in excess of 20,000 square feet.
b.
Banks (commercial): One for each 200 square feet.
c.
Medical and dental offices and clinics: One for each 200 square feet of floor area.
d.
Veterinarians, animal and veterinary hospitals: One for each 250 square feet of floor area exclusive of boarding
areas.
e.
College or university: One per three student classroom seats.
f.
Trade, vocational and business school, not otherwise listed: One per employee, plus one per three student
classroom seats.
g.
Dance schools other than ballrooms: Five, plus one for each 150 square feet of dance floor area over 500 square
feet.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
534/543
h.
Beauty culture schools: Three, plus one for each operator station.
i.
Drive-in commercial facilities (banks, restaurants and similar uses): Shall provide not less than three holding or
stacking spaces for each service window.
(6)
Parking type VI.
a.
Trade.
1.
Retail stores and personal services not listed elsewhere: Zero to 3,000 square feet of floor area, five; 3,000 to
5,000 square feet of floor area, five, plus one for each 500 square feet of floor area in excess of 3,000 square
feet; in excess of 5,000 square feet of floor area, ten, plus one for each 250 square feet of floor area in excess of
5,000 square feet.
2.
Retail furniture and appliance stores, retail machinery and equipment sales, motor vehicle sales: Area devoted to
retail, office, service or display of goods, five, plus one for each 800 square feet of floor area in excess of 3,000
square feet.
3.
Building materials sales where lumber is sold: Ten, plus one for each 120 square feet of sales area devoted to
hardware and paint items in excess of 1,000 square feet, and one per 750 square feet of warehouse area open to
the public.
4.
Service stations: A minimum of five, of which at least one must be large enough to accommodate a towing
vehicle.
5.
Drive-in restaurants: A minimum of 25.
6.
Agricultural and commercial nurseries: Ten, plus one for each 150 square feet of inside sales area over 1,000
square feet, and one per 2,000 square feet of outside area open to the public.
b.
Personal services.
1.
Self-service laundry and dry cleaning: One for each three machines.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
535/543
2.
Dry cleaning, pickup: Three, plus one for each 500 square feet over 1,000.
3.
Repair services, wearing apparel, motor vehicles, appliance and furniture: Five, plus one for each 800 square
feet of floor area in excess of 3,000 square feet.
4.
Barbershops, beauty shops and similar uses: One space for each 200 square feet of gross building area.
5.
Food stores, supermarkets and convenience type grocery stores: Four spaces plus one space for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area, exclusive of storage area.
(7)
Parking type VII.
a.
Manufacturing uses.
1.
Manufacturing, steel fabricating, warehousing and similar uses: One for each 200 square feet of office area and
one space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 50,000 square feet, then, in addition to the above
requirement, one space per 10,000 square feet above 50,000 square feet or portion thereof.
2.
Corporation yard: Three, plus one for each 20,000 square feet of yard area over 40,000.
b.
Laboratories, when a primary use: Four, plus one for each 300 square feet in excess of 1,000 square feet.
c.
Carwashes: 2.5 for each wash bay.
(8)
Parking type VIII. Wholesale trade: One for each 250 square feet of office area, and one space per 2,000 square
feet of gross floor area up to 50,000 square feet, then, in addition to the above requirement, one space per 10,000
square feet above 50,000 square feet or portion thereof.
(9)
Additional parking requirements.
a.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
536/543
Central business district. The number of off-street parking spaces for uses in the central business district, except
for shopping centers, may be reduced by ten percent from the requirements specified in this section which would
otherwise be applicable.
b.
Shopping centers. One space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of gross leasable area exclusive of
bowling alleys, movie theaters and skating rinks.
(f)
Location separated from use; sharing of same off-street parking space.
(1)
Purpose of approval procedure. Under the standard provisions of this chapter off-street parking space is required
to be located on the same lot as the use for which the space is provided. Also, each use is required to provide an
individual amount of space. Pursuant to the procedure hereinafter set forth, either part or all of required off-street
parking space may be located off the lot of the use for which the space is provided. Also, two or more uses may
share the same off-street parking space and each of such uses may be considered as having provided such shared
space individually.
(2)
Limitations on approval procedure.
a.
Location separated from use. In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-6 districts, off-street parking space for residential
uses shall be located no farther from the lot of the use for which provided than on a land area adjacent to such
lot. In all other districts off-street parking space shall be located no farther from the lot of the use for which
provided than 600 feet unless otherwise specified herein, such distance to be measured by a straight line from
the nearest point of the separated off-street parking space.
b.
Sharing of same off-street parking space. No use shall be considered as individually having provided off-street
parking space which is shared with one or more uses unless the schedules of operation of all such uses are such
that none of the uses sharing the space require the off-street parking space at the same time as any other use
sharing the space.
(3)
Submission and contents of applications for approval. All applications for approval of a special plan hereunder
shall be filed with the planning commission by the owner or owners of the entire land area to be included within
the special plan, the owner or owners of all structures then existing on said land area and all encumbrancers of
said land area and structures; shall contain sufficient evidence to establish to the satisfaction of the commission
that the applicants are the owners and encumbrancers of the designated land and structures; shall contain such
information and representations required by this chapter or deemed necessary by the commission and shall
include plans showing the following details:
a.
The location of the uses or structures for which off-street parking space is required.
b.
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
537/543
The location at which the off-street parking space is to be located.
c.
A complete plan of the parking area showing parking spaces, driving lanes, access and egress locations and
landscaped areas.
(4)
Review of applications for approval. All applications hereunder shall be reviewed by the planning commission
and either approved or disapproved within a period of 45 days from the date of submission. Any approval
hereunder may establish necessary conditions and limitations.
(5)
Approved plan to be registered and recorded. Upon approval of a special plan hereunder, a copy of such plan
shall be registered among the records of the planning commission. An as-built copy of such plan shall be also
registered with the planning commission and a copy of such plan, or such other records thereof as deemed
proper by the commission, shall be recorded by the owners in the office of the county recorder.
(6)
Effect of registered and recorded special plans. All special plans registered and recorded hereunder shall be
binding upon the applicants for such special plans, their successors and assigns, shall limit and control the
issuance and validity of all zoning permits and shall restrict and limit the use and operation of all land and
structures included within such special plans to all conditions and limitations specified in such plans and the
approvals thereof.
(7)
Amendment of registered and recorded special plans. All special plans registered and recorded hereunder may be
amended pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which such
plans were approved, registered and recorded.
(8)
Withdrawal of registered and recorded special plans. Upon application to the planning commission by the owner
or owners of the entire land area included within any special plan registered and recorded hereunder, the owner
or owners of any structures then existing thereon and all encumbrancers of said land and structures, any such
plan may be withdrawn, either partially or completely, from registration and released from recording if all uses,
land and structures remaining under such plan can be made to comply with all conditions and limitations of the
plan and all uses, land and structures withdrawn from such plan can be made to comply with all regulations
established by this chapter and unrelated to any special plan. Upon approval of an application hereunder, the
planning commission shall register among its records and the owner shall record in the office of the county
recorder an appropriate certificate of such withdrawal.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 801, 3-26-62; Ord. No. 3778, § 1, 11-10-69; Ord. No. 5524, § 1, 5-23-83)
State law reference— Authority to require off-street parking, A.C.A. § 14-56-416(a)(2)(B).
Sec. 117-179. - Off-street loading requirements.
(a)
Scope of regulations. The regulations herein set forth shall apply and govern in all districts; provided, however,
that in the R-O, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and C-1 districts these regulations shall apply and govern only
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
538/543
those structures in which are operated a use or uses, which use or uses, pursuant to the provisions of section 118-
311, Off-street parking requirements, are required to provide and maintain more than 800 square feet of offstreet
parking space.
(b)
Duty to provide off-street loading space; existing uses. The duty to provide the off-street loading space herein
required shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and owner of the structure or structures for
which off-street loading space is required to be provided. No structure shall be designed, erected, altered, used or
occupied unless the off-street loading space herein required is provided in at least the amount herein set forth;
provided, however, that where off-street loading space is not provided for in structures actually used, occupied
and operated on the effective date of this chapter it shall not be required under this chapter after the effective
date of this chapter; if such structures are enlarged or expanded, or the uses within such structures are enlarged,
expanded or changed, there shall be provided, for the increment only of such structures enlarged, expanded or
changed and maintained as herein required, at least the amount of off-street loading space that would be required
hereunder if the increment were a separate structure. However, where a lot with an existing structure is cleared
and a new structure erected therein, there shall be provided and maintained the off-street loading space required
herein.
(c)
Location of off-street loading space. Off-street loading space shall be located on the same lot as the structure for
which provided.
(d)
Amount of off-street loading space required. At least the following amounts of off-street loading space shall be
provided, plus an area or means adequate for ingress and egress:
(1)
For structures containing less than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area, one berth shall be provided for each
12,500 square feet of gross floor area or increment thereof. Each such berth shall have a net area of not less than
160 square feet.
(2)
For structures containing 25,000 or more square feet of gross floor area, the number of berths is specified in the
following table. Each such berth shall be at least ten feet wide, 35 feet long and 15 feet high:
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Required Number of Berths
10,000 up to and including 40,000 1
40,001 up to and including 100,000 2
100,001 up to and including 160,000 3
160,001 up to and including 240,000 4
240,001 up to and including 320,000 5
320,001 up to and including 400,000 6
For each additional 90,000 over 400,000 1 additional
(Ord. No. 3171, § 901, 3-26-62)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
539/543
State law reference— Authority to require off-street loading, A.C.A. § 14-56-416(a)(2)(B).
Sec. 117-180. - Planned building groups.
(a)
Purpose. Under the standard provisions of this chapter a separate ground area, referred to in this chapter as a lot,
may be designated, provided and continuously maintained for a structure or portion of a structure. Pursuant to
the procedure hereinafter set forth, several lots may be combined into one special plan covering a planned
building group. The procedure is intended to permit diversification in the location of residential structures and to
improve circulation facilities and other site qualities while ensuring adequate standards relating to public health,
safety, welfare and convenience in the use and occupancy of buildings and facilities in planned building groups
and to permit the construction of low-cost private housing of good standards and quality.
(b)
Limitation on approval procedure. The procedure hereinafter set forth shall not be construed to waive nor shall
there be waived thereby any regulation for any district except the regulation that a separate ground area, herein
called the lot, may be designated, provided and continuously maintained for a structure or portion of a structure
when separately owned from the other structures or portion of a structure.
(c)
Applicability. The procedure hereinafter set forth shall apply only in districts R-4, R-5, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5
and O-1.
(d)
Submission and contents of application for approval. All applications for approval of a special plan hereunder
shall be filed with the planning commission by the owner or owners of the entire land area to be included within
the special plan, the owner or owners of all structures then existing on said land area and all encumbrancers of
said land area and structures; shall contain sufficient evidence to establish that the applicants are the owners and
all the encumbrancers of the designated land and structures; shall contain such information and representations
required by this chapter or deemed necessary by the commission and shall include plats and plans showing at
least the following details drawn to scale:
(1)
The land area which would be included within the special plan, the present zoning classification of the
designated area, the land area of all abutting districts and the present zoning classification thereof, all public and
private rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the designated area and the abutting districts
which are proposed to be continued, created, relocated and/or abandoned;
(2)
The proposed finished grade of the designated area, shown in contour intervals of not to exceed two feet;
(3)
A description of the proposed lot or lots and the boundaries thereof;
(4)
The location of each existing and proposed structure in the designated area, the use or uses to be contained
therein, the number of stories, gross floor area and approximate location of all outside facilities for waste
disposal;
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
540/543
(5)
All curb cuts, driving lanes, parking areas, loading areas, public transportation points and illumination facilities
for the same;
(6)
All pedestrian walks, malls, courts, parks, playgrounds and open areas for use by tenants or members of the
public;
(7)
The location and height of walls, fences and screen planting;
(8)
The location, size, height and orientation of all signs other than signs flat on building facilities;
(9)
The types of surfacing, such as paving, turfing or gravel, to be used at the various locations;
(10)
The location of fire hydrants.
(e)
Review of applications for approval. All applications filed hereunder shall be reviewed for completeness by the
planning commission staff. If the plans are found to be complete, they shall be transmitted for review to the
planning commission and any other agency affected by such plans. Such review shall be based on the standards
herein set forth. No development plan hereunder shall be approved unless in full compliance with these
standards. Within not more than 60 days from the date on which an application is filed with the commission, it
shall approve or disapprove such application in writing, stating, in the case of disapproval, the reasons for the
disapproval, and, in all cases, giving due notice to the applicants. Within not more than 45 days after a
disapproval as aforesaid, the applicants filing an application which has been disapproved may file with the
commission an amendment to the plan or an amended plan. An amendment or amended plan shall be approved
or disapproved within not more than 30 days after filing thereof. If on second revision of the amendment to the
plan or an amended plan the commission should again disapprove the plan then it shall not be again presented to
the commission for a period of one year from the date of the original application. Any approval hereunder may
establish necessary conditions and limitations as determined by the commission.
(f)
Compliance with standard provisions of chapter. No application hereunder shall be approved unless the
application and the accompanying plats and plans comply with all regulations established for the district or
districts in which are located the land areas and structures designated in such application are located, except the
regulation that a separate ground area, herein called a lot, shall be designated, provided and continuously
maintained for each structure containing a permitted use.
(g)
Site facilities. All special plans hereunder shall make due provision for:
(1)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
541/543
Adequate design of grades, paving, gutters, drainage and treatment of turf to handle stormwaters, and prevent
erosion and formation of dust;
(2)
Adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street
parking and loading space, and facilities for waste disposal and illumination;
(3)
Adequate amount and proper location of pedestrian walks, malls, courts and landscaped spaces to prevent
pedestrian use of vehicular ways and parking spaces and to separate pedestrian walks, malls, courts and public
transportation loading places from general vehicular circulation facilities;
(4)
Arrangement of buildings and vehicular circulation open spaces so that pedestrians moving between buildings
are not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic;
(5)
Proper arrangement of signs and lighting devices with respect to traffic control devices and adjacent residential
districts;
(6)
In residential building groups providing for permanent family occupancy, an adequate amount and safe location
of play areas for children and other recreational areas according to the concentration of occupancy;
(7)
In businesses building groups near or abutting residential districts, fences, walls or yearround screen planting
when necessary to shield adjacent residential districts from parking lot illumination headlights, fumes, heat,
blowing papers and dust and to reduce the visual encroachment of commercial structures, signs and activity on
residential privacy and residential neighborhood character.
(h)
Minimum spacing between buildings; orientation of main window exposures and entrances. The following
required spacing between buildings shall be measured perpendicularly from any exterior wall exposing windows
or an entranceway; it does not apply in corner-to-corner placement of buildings where perpendicular wall
exposures do not overlap:
(1)
In buildings containing multiple dwelling units, walls containing main window exposures or main entrances
shall be so oriented as to ensure adequate light and air exposure, shall be so arranged as to avoid undue exposure
to nearby through trafficways or undue exposure to concentrated loading or parking facilities, and shall be so
oriented as to preserve visual and audible privacy between adjacent buildings.
(2)
A building wall exposing both windows and an entranceway shall be located no closer to another building than a
distance equal to the height of the taller building of the two, but in no case less than 50 feet.
(3)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
542/543
A building wall exposing only windows or only an entranceway shall be located no closer to another building
than a distance equal to the height of the taller building of two, but in no case less than 35 feet.
(4)
Any open court area which otherwise complies with standards of minimum spacing and open area of window
exposure must, in any case, leave at least 25 percent of its perimeter free and unobstructed for access by
emergency vehicles.
(5)
A building group must be so arranged that any building is accessible by emergency vehicles.
(i)
Approved plans to be registered and recorded. After completing its review of a plan, the commission shall return
one copy of the plan and all pertinent data, together with a notice of recommendation, to the applicants. All
approved plans shall be registered and recorded as hereinafter set forth. Upon approval of the plan, the
commission shall register a copy thereof among its records and the applicants shall record a copy thereof, or
such other record thereof as deemed proper by the commission, in the office of the county recorder.
(j)
Effect of registration and recording of special plans. All plans registered and recorded hereunder shall be
binding upon the applicants therefor, their successors and assigns, shall limit and control the issuance and
validity of all building permits and zoning certificates and shall restrict and limit the construction, location, use
and operation of all land and structure included within such plans; provided, however, that, upon application to
and approval by the commission based only upon a showing of engineering necessity therefor, minor changes in
the location of structures may be permitted if such minor changes will not cause any of the following
circumstances to occur:
(1)
A change in the character of the development;
(2)
An increase in the ratio of the gross floor areas in structures to the area of any lot;
(3)
An increase in the intensity of use;
(4)
A reduction in the originally approved separations between buildings;
(5)
An increase in the problems of safety, circulation and utilities;
(6)
An increase of the external effects on adjacent property;
(7)
8/16/2019 North Little Rock, AR Code of Ordinances
543/543
A reduction in the originally approved setbacks from property lines;
(8)
An increase in ground coverage by structures;
(9)
A reduction in the ratio of off-street parking and loading space to gross floor area in structures;
(10)
A change in the subject, size, lighting, flashing, animation or orientation of originally approved signs.
(k)
Amendment or withdrawal of registered and recorded specifications. Pursuant to the same procedure and subject
to the same limitations and requirements by which such plans were approved, registered and recorded, all special
plans registered and recorded hereunder may be amended or withdrawn, either partially or completely, from
registration and released from recording if all land and structures remaining under such plans can be made to
comply with all regulations established by this chapter and unrelated to any special plan hereunder. Upon
approval of an application hereunder, the commission shall register among its records and shall have the
applicants record in the office of the county recorder an appropriate certificate of such amendment or
withdrawal.
(Ord. No. 3171, § 1001, 3-26-62)