
Apache Junction, AZ Code of Ordinances


CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION, ARIZONA
CITY CODE
VOLUME I



2018 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 1454, passed 12-5-2017



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CHAPTER 1: GENERAL



      Article




         1-1.   GENERAL




ARTICLE 1-1:  GENERAL



Section



   1-1-1   How code designated and cited



   1-1-2   Construction of ordinances



   1-1-3   Definitions



   1-1-4   Additional rules of construction



   1-1-5   References to this code



   1-1-6   Conflicting provisions; different chapters



   1-1-7   Conflicting provisions; same chapter



   1-1-8   Section headings



   1-1-9   Effect of repeal



   1-1-10   Severability of parts of code



   1-1-11   Penalty



   1-1-12   Effective date of repeal



   1-1-13   Ordinances exempt from repeal



   1-1-14   Effective date of code



   1-1-15   Number of signatures required



   1-1-16   Petition filing deadline



   1-1-17   Duties of the Clerk



   1-1-18   Responsibilities of the applicant



   1-1-19   Election schedule



   1-1-20   Duties of the Clerk



   1-1-21   Responsibilities of the applicant



   1-1-22   Petition applicants and circulators; eligibility



   1-1-23   Definition of resident/qualified elector



§ 1-1-1  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   (A)   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "The code of the City of Apache Junction,
Arizona," and may be so cited.



   (B)   This code may also be cited as the "Apache Junction city code."



(Prior Code, Art. 1-1)



§ 1-1-2  CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES.



   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be
observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the city
unless that construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest
intent of the Council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the
city.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-2)



§ 1-1-3  DEFINITIONS.



   All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to
the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and
phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such
peculiar and appropriate meaning.



   ACTS BY AGENTS.  When an ordinance requires an act to be done which
may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, those
requirements shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.



   CITY.  The City of Apache Junction, Arizona.



   CLERK.  The City Clerk of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona.



   CODE.  The code of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona, unless the
context indicates otherwise.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona,
including the Mayor and six Councilmembers.



   DAY.  The period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.



   DAYTIME.  The period of time between sunrise and sunset. NIGHTTIME is
the period of time between sunset and sunrise.



   DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE.  Whenever
any department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is referred
to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or
employee of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.



   GENDER; SINGULAR AND PLURAL.  Words of the masculine gender include
the feminine; words in the singular number include the plural and words in
the plural number include the singular.



   IN THE CITY or WITHIN THE CITY.  Includes all territory over which the
city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of
its police powers or other regulatory powers.



   MAY.  Permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  Includes affirmation or declaration.



   OR.  In the alternative.



   PERSON.  Extends and shall be applied to firms, corporations or
voluntary associations, enterprises, as well as to individuals, unless
plainly inapplicable.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes every species of property, except real
property as defined in this article.



   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING.  Next before and next after, respectively.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   SHALL.  Mandatory.



   SHALL HAVE BEEN.  Include past and future cases.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK.  Includes a mark when the signer
cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark
by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer's or subscriber's
name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can
serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when 2
witnesses so sign their own names thereto.



   THE STATE.  The State of Arizona.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  Applied to a building or land, including any
person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the whole or part
of that building or land, either alone or with others.



   TENSES.  The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and
the future includes the present.



   TIME; COMPUTATION.  The time within which an act is to be done as
provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal
holiday it shall be excluded; and when that time is expressed in hours, the
whole of Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight,
shall be excluded.



   TIME; REASONABLE.  In all cases where any section of this code shall
require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be
given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only
as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance
with the notice.



   WEEK.  Consists of 7 consecutive days.



   WRITING.



      (1)   Includes any form of recorded message capable of
comprehension by ordinary visual means.



      (2)   Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be written in the English
language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-3)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions and construction of statutes generally, see A.R.S. §§
1-211 through 1-215



§ 1-1-4  ADDITIONAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In addition to the rules of construction specified in Vol. I, §§
1-1-2 and 1-1-3, the rules set forth in this article shall be observed in the
construction of this code.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



§ 1-1-5  REFERENCES TO THIS CODE.



   All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters,
articles and sections of this code unless otherwise specified.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)



§ 1-1-6  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; DIFFERENT CHAPTERS.



   If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)



§ 1-1-7  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; SAME CHAPTER.



   If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same
chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall
prevail unless that construction is inconsistent with the meaning of the
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-4)



§ 1-1-8  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a
convenience to indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute
part of the law.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-5)



§ 1-1-9  EFFECT OF REPEAL.



   (A)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision, shall be itself repealed, that repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be
expressly so provided.



   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-6)



§ 1-1-10  SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the
sections, divisions, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code shall be
severable, and if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for any
reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall
not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-7)



§ 1-1-11  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
code, except as otherwise provided in this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 6 months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment, and probation of up to 36 months and any
community service or community restriction, as the court deems necessary.
Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as
hereinabove described.



   (B)   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any
act required by Vol. I, Chapter 12, Articles 12-1, 12-2 and 12-3 constitutes
a civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the
provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 6, Articles 20 and 21 and amendments
thereto. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of Vol. I,
Article 12-4 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in
accordance with division (A) above.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-8)



§ 1-1-12  EFFECTIVE DATE OF REPEAL.



   All ordinances of the City of Apache Junction except those specially
exempted in this article, now in force and effect are hereby repealed
effective at 12:01 a.m. on the first day of July, 1979, but all rights,
duties and obligations created by the ordinances shall continue and exist in
all respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.



(Prior Code, § 1-9-1)



§ 1-1-13  ORDINANCES EXEMPT FROM REPEAL.



   The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to
repeal or in any way to affect or modify:



   (A)   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises,
annexations, dedications or zoning;



   (B)   Any ordinance making an appropriation;



   (C)   Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond
issue may have been authorized;



   (D)   The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time
this code becomes effective;



   (E)   The continued existence and operation of any department,
agency, commission or office heretofore legally established or held;



   (F)   Any bond of any public officer;



   (G)   Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or
imposed; or



   (H)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving
or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the State
of Arizona, or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States
or any agency or instrumentality thereof.



(Prior Code, § 1-9-2)



§ 1-1-14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE.



   Each and every section of this code as herein contained and hereby
enacted shall take effect and be in force on and after 12:01 a.m. on July, 1,
1979, except that where a later effective date is provided it shall prevail.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-10)



§ 1-1-15  NUMBER OF SIGNATURES REQUIRED.



   Fifteen percent of the total number of registered voters qualified to
vote in the last preceding municipal election at which a member or members of
the Council were elected shall be the basis on which the number of electors
of the city required to file an initiative petition shall be computed.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-1)



§ 1-1-16  PETITION FILING DEADLINE.



   All petitions submitted under this article shall be filed with the
Clerk not less than 120 days preceding the date of the election at which the
measures so proposed are to be voted upon.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-2)



§ 1-1-17  DUTIES OF THE CLERK.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for an initiative petition
number as provided by A.R.S. § 19-111 and amendments thereto, the Clerk
shall assign an official number to the petitions and issue that number to the
applicant.



   (B)   The Clerk shall furnish to each applicant an initiative
petition form as provided by the Secretary of State's office and a copy of
the text of A.R.S. Title 19 and this article.



   (C)   It is not the responsibility of the Clerk to furnish the
applicant with a completed initiative petition form containing the proposed
law or measure to be initiated or to provide the text of the proposed law or
measure to be initiated.



   (D)   Unless otherwise stated by this code, the duties of the Clerk
with regard to initiative petitions shall be the same as prescribed in A.R.S.
Title 19 as amended and the Arizona State Constitution.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-3)



§ 1-1-18  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE APPLICANT.



   It is the responsibility of the applicant for an initiative petition to
comply with the procedures for an initiative as prescribed in A.R.S. Title
19, the Arizona State Constitution and this code.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-4)



§ 1-1-19  ELECTION SCHEDULE.



   Initiative and referendum elections shall be scheduled in accordance
with A.R.S. Titles 16 and 19 and amendments thereto and the Arizona State
Constitution.



(Prior Code, § 1-12-1)



§ 1-1-20  DUTIES OF THE CLERK.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a referendum petition
number as provided by A.R.S. § 19-111 and amendments thereto, the Clerk
shall assign an official number to the petition and issue that number to the
applicant.



   (B)   The Clerk shall furnish to each applicant a copy of the text
of A.R.S. Title 19 and a copy of this article.



   (C)   It shall not be the responsibility of the Clerk to furnish the
applicant with a completed referendum petition form containing the proposed
law or measure to be referred. Upon the request of the applicant, the clerk
shall furnish a sample referendum petition form as provided by the Secretary
of State's Office.



   (D)   Unless otherwise stated by this code, the duties of the Clerk
with regard to referendum petitions shall be the same as prescribed in A.R.S.
Title 19 and amendments thereto, and the Arizona State Constitution.



(Prior Code, § 1-12-2)



§ 1-1-21  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE APPLICANT.



   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a referendum
petition to comply with the procedures for a referendum as prescribed in
A.R.S. Title 19, the Arizona State Constitution and this code.



(Prior Code, § 1-12-3)



§ 1-1-22  PETITION APPLICANTS AND CIRCULATORS; ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   Nomination and recall petitions.  All applicants for
nomination and recall petitions for Mayor and Council shall be residents and
a qualified elector of the city.



   (B)   Initiative and referendum petitions.  All applicants and
circulators of initiative and referendum petitions shall be eligible to be a
qualified elector of the State of Arizona.



(Prior Code, § 1-13-1)



§ 1-1-23  DEFINITION OF RESIDENT/QUALIFIED ELECTOR.



   (A)   For purposes of this article, the term RESIDENT is defined as
an individual having both actual physical presence and intent to remain in
the corporate limits of the City of Apache Junction, which may be
demonstrated by the following:



      (1)   A valid Arizona Driver's License or official Arizona
Identification Card, showing a current address within the corporate limits of
the City of Apache Junction; or



      (2)   Any other valid form of identification showing an
address within the corporate limits of the City of Apache Junction, such as,
but not limited to any of the following:



         (a)   A change of address card issued by the United
States Postal Service;



         (b)   Registration of a vehicle, RV or boat;



         (c)   A United States or Arizona tax return;



         (d)   A lease or rental agreement;



         (e)   A paid utility bill (water, sewer, gas, telephone,
cable, sanitation, wastewater); or



         (f)   Financial information from a credit union, bank or
other financial institution located within the City of Apache Junction.



   (B)   In order for a political committee to be considered a RESIDENT
an officer of the committee must be a RESIDENT as defined herein.



   (C)   For purposes of this article, the term QUALIFIED ELECTOR is
defined as a person who has complied with voter registration law pursuant to
A.R.S. § 16-101.



(Prior Code, § 1-13-2)



CHAPTER 2: MAYOR, COUNCIL, AND APPOINTED BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      Article




         2-1.   COUNCIL





         2-2.   MAYOR





         2-3.   COUNCIL ELECTION





         2-4.   COUNCIL PROCEDURE





         2-5.   ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND COUNCIL ACTIONS





         2-6.   [RESERVED]





         2-7.   LIBRARY BOARD





         2-8.   PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION





         2-9.   [RESERVED]





         2-10.   INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND
COUNCIL MEMBERS





         2-11.   HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION





         2-12.   [RESERVED]





         2-13.   FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE





         2-14.   REQUESTS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE





         2-15.   INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY





         2-16.   EMERGENCY POWERS AND AUTHORITY





         2-17.   [RESERVED]





         2-18.   [RESERVED]





         2-19.   [RESERVED]





         2-20.   [RESERVED]





         2-21.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS/MUNICIPAL
PROPERTY CORPORATION/PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL RETIREMENT BOARD





         2-22.   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION




ARTICLE 2-1:  COUNCIL



Section



   2-1-1   Elected officers



   2-1-2   Corporate powers



   2-1-3   Duties of office



   2-1-4   Vacancies in Council



   2-1-5   Compensation



   2-1-6   Oath of office



   2-1-7   Bond



§ 2-1-1  ELECTED OFFICERS.



   (A)   The elected officers of the city shall be a Mayor and 6
Council members. The Mayor and Council members shall constitute the Council
and shall continue in office until assumption of duties of office by their
duly elected successors.



   (B)   The term of Office of the Mayor shall be 2 years, but nothing
in this section precludes such person from serving as Mayor for more than one
2-year term after successive elections.



   (C)   Council members shall serve 4-year overlapping terms as in the
case of the office of the Mayor, Council members are not limited to serving
only one 4-year term.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-1)



§ 2-1-2  CORPORATE POWERS.



   (A)   The corporate powers of the city shall be vested in the
Council and shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law.



   (B)   All powers of the Council shall be exercised by ordinance,
resolution, order or motion.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-2)



§ 2-1-3  DUTIES OF OFFICE.



   Council members shall assume the duties of office once sworn in at the
first regular business meeting in January following the general election or
at a special meeting in January following the general election on a date
selected by council. There shall be no interruption of a term of office even
if council members are elected outright in the preceding August primary
election.



(Ord. 1438, passed 10-18-2016)



§ 2-1-4  VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.



   The Council shall fill by appointment for the unexpired term any
vacancy that may occur for whatever reason, but such appointee shall only
fill the remainder of the term.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-4)



§ 2-1-5  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The salary for the position of Mayor shall be paid at the rate
of $1,000 per month.



   (B)   The salary for the position of Vice Mayor shall be paid at the
rate of $900 per month.



   (C)   The salary for the position of Council member shall be paid at
the rate of $800 per month.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-5)



§ 2-1-6  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, the Mayor and
each Council member shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of
office.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-6)



§ 2-1-7  BOND.



   Prior to taking office, every Council member shall execute and file an
official bond, enforceable against the principal and his or her sureties,
conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her official
duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the city
or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default
of the officer in his or her official capacity. A person so injured or
aggrieved may bring suit on the bond under provisions identical to those
contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds shall be in such sum as shall be
provided by resolution and the premium for the bonds shall be paid by the
city. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from obtaining a
blanket bond pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-302.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-7)



ARTICLE 2-2:  MAYOR



Section



   2-2-1   Selection of Mayor



   2-2-2   Vice Mayor



   2-2-3   Acting Mayor



   2-2-4   Powers and duties of the Mayor



   2-2-5   Absence of Mayor



   2-2-6   Failure to sign documents



   2-2-7   Addressing the Council



   2-2-8   Disruption of meeting



§ 2-2-1  SELECTION OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall be directly elected by the qualified electors of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-1)



§ 2-2-2  VICE MAYOR.



   (A)   At the same meeting at which the Mayor is sworn in at the
beginning of the mayoral term, the Council shall select one of its members as
Vice Mayor, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.



   (B)   The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during
his or her absence or disability.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-2)



§ 2-2-3  ACTING MAYOR.



   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the
Council may designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor who
shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Mayor during
such absence or disability.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-3)



§ 2-2-4  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.



   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:



   (A)   Be the chief executive officer of the city;



   (B)   Be the Chairperson of the Council and preside over its
meetings during which the making and seconding motions and having a voice and
vote in all its proceedings;



   (C)   Execute and authenticate by signature such instruments as the
Council, or any statutes, ordinances, resolutions or this Vol. I shall
require;



   (D)   By proclamation, declaring a local emergency to exist due to
fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing or any other
natural or human-made calamity or disaster or in the event of the threat or
occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of civil disobedience which
endanger life or property within the city. After declaration of the
emergency, the Mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary
regulations to preserve the peace and order of the city, including but not
limited to:



      (1)   Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the city;



      (2)   Ordering the closing of any business;



      (3)   Closing to public access any public building, street or
other public place; and/or



      (4)   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement
agencies and organizations within or without the political subdivision for
assistance.



   (E)   Performing other duties required by state statute and this
Vol. I as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-4)



§ 2-2-5  ABSENCE OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall not absent himself or herself from the city for a
greater period than 30 days without the consent of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-5)



§ 2-2-6  FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.



   If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution,
contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring his or
her signature for 5 days consecutively, then a majority of the members of the
Council may, at any regular or special meeting, authorize the Vice Mayor, or
in his or her absence, an acting Mayor to sign the ordinance, resolution,
contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument which when so
signed shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-6)



§ 2-2-7  ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL.



   The public in accord with other provisions of Vol. I shall have the
right to petition Council at the call to the public for 3 minutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-7)



§ 2-2-8  DISRUPTION OF MEETING.



   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interrupt any regular or special
meeting of the Council; any person violating this section, in addition to
being punishable under the disorderly conduct provisions of Arizona state
law, shall be summarily ejected from the meeting and if refuses to leave,
shall be arrested for disorderly conduct.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-8)



ARTICLE 2-3:  COUNCIL ELECTION



Section



   2-3-1   Primary election



   2-3-2   Non-political ballot



   2-3-3   General election nomination



   2-3-4   Election to office



   2-3-5   Candidate financial disclosure



   2-3-6   Initiative, referendum and recall special elections



§ 2-3-1  PRIMARY ELECTION.



   Any candidate who receives the majority of the votes cast at the
primary election as defined under A.R.S. § 9-821.01, as amended, shall be
declared elected to the office for which he or she is a candidate, effective
upon completion of the swearing-in ceremony held on such date as scheduled
pursuant to Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 2: Mayor, Council, and
Appointed Boards and Commissions, Article 2-1: Council, § 2-1-3 Duties of
Office.



(Ord. 1438, passed 10-18-2016)



§ 2-3-2  NON-POLITICAL BALLOT.



   Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the
support of the candidate.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-2)



§ 2-3-3  GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.



   (A)   If at any primary election there is any office for which no
candidate is elected, the primary election shall be considered to be an
election for nomination of candidates for such office, and a general
municipal election shall be held to fill the office. Candidates to be placed
on the ballot at the general election shall be those not elected at the
primary election and shall be equal in number to twice the number to be
elected to any given office unless there be less than that number named on
the primary election ballot.



   (B)   Persons who receive the highest number of votes for the
respective offices at the primary election shall be the only candidates at
such general election, provided that if there be any person who, under the
provisions of this article, would have been entitled to become a candidate
for any office except for the fact that some other candidate received an
equal number of votes therefor, then all those persons receiving an equal
number of votes shall likewise become candidates for that office.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-3)



§ 2-3-4  ELECTION TO OFFICE.



   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive
the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-4)



§ 2-3-5  CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.



   Each candidate for the office of Council member shall file a financial
disclosure statement on a form prescribed by the City Clerk when the
candidate files a nomination paper. The statement shall contain that
information as required by resolution of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-5)



§ 2-3-6  INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL SPECIAL ELECTIONS.



   There is reserved to the qualified electors of the city the power of
initiative, referendum, and recall as prescribed by the state constitution.
When an initiative or referendum is required to be placed upon the ballot,
the council shall do so at the next regularly scheduled general election, or
at a special election on a date permitted under A.R.S. § 16-204, as amended.
When a recall is required to be placed upon the ballot, the city clerk shall
do so at the next regularly scheduled general election, or at a special
election on a date permitted under A.R.S. § 16-204, as amended.



(Ord. 1445, passed 4-4-2017)



ARTICLE 2-4:  COUNCIL PROCEDURE



Section



   2-4-1   Regular meetings



   2-4-2   Special meetings



   2-4-3   Meetings to be public



   2-4-4   Quorum



   2-4-5   Agenda



   2-4-6   Order of business



   2-4-7   Committees and commissions



   2-4-8   Voting



§ 2-4-1  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The regular meetings of the Council shall be scheduled for the first
and third Tuesdays of each month at 7:00 p.m., in the Apache Junction City
Hall Complex, 300 East Superstition Boulevard, Apache Junction, Arizona.
However, when circumstances are such that there is no official business
requiring Council consideration or that there will be no quorum of the
Council present, the meeting may be cancelled by the Mayor after notifying
all members of the Council, the City Manager and the City Clerk. Notice of
cancellation of the meeting shall be posted at least 48 hours prior to the
time originally scheduled for the meeting in at least 3 public places in the
city. At no time, however, shall the Council meet less than once per month.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-1)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-4-2  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   The Mayor, City Manager or City Clerk, may convene the Council at any
time by notifying the members of the Council of the date, hour and purpose of
such special meeting. The public shall be given at least 24-hours' notice of
any such special meeting by the posting of such notice in at least 3 public
places and preparation of an agenda in accordance with applicable state law;
except that in the case of an actual emergency, a meeting may be held upon
such notice as is appropriate for the circumstances in accordance with
applicable state law.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-2)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-4-3  MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.



   (A)   All official meetings of the Council at which any legal action
is taken shall be open to the public. Notice of meetings shall be given in a
manner consistent with applicable state law. Upon approval by a majority vote
of the Council, the Council may meet in a closed executive session for a
discussion of the following:



      (1)   Discussion or consideration of employment, assignment,
appointment, promotion, demotion, dismissal, salaries, disciplining or
resignation of a public officer, appointee or employee of the city, except
that with the exception of salary discussions, an officer, appointee or
employee may demand that the discussion or consideration occur at a public
meeting. The city shall provide the officer, appointee or employee with
written notice of the executive session as is appropriate but not less than
24 hours for the officer, appointee or employee to determine whether the
discussion or consideration should occur at a public meeting;



      (2)   Discussion or consideration of records exempt by law
from public inspection, including the receipt and discussion of information
or testimony that is specifically required to be maintained as confidential
by state or federal law;



      (3)   Discussion or consultation for legal advice with the
City Attorney or other attorneys of the city;



      (4)   Discussion or consultation with the City Attorney or
other attorneys of the city in order to consider its position and instruct
such attorneys regarding the city's position regarding contracts that are the
subject of negotiations, in pending or contemplated litigation or in
settlement discussions conducted in order to avoid or resolve litigation;



      (5)   Discussions or consultations with designated
representatives of the Council in order to consider its position and instruct
its representatives regarding negotiations with employee organizations
regarding the salaries, salary schedules or compensation paid in the form of
fringe benefits of employees of the city; and/or



      (6)   Discussions or consultations with designated
representatives of the Council in order to consider its position and instruct
its representatives regarding negotiations for the purchase, sale or lease of
real property.



   (B)   Minutes of executive sessions shall be kept confidential
except from members of the Council, officers, appointees or employees who
were subject of discussion or consideration in executive session, or in case
of an official investigation, from investigating officials, as authorized
under applicable state law.



   (C)   No executive session may be held for the purpose of taking any
final action or making any final decision.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-3)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-4-4  QUORUM.



   (A)   A majority of the Council members shall constitute a quorum
for transacting business, but a lesser number may recess from time to time
and compel the attendance of absent members, in such a manner and under such
penalty as the Council may by ordinance have previously prescribed.



   (B)   Council members may appear for a meeting telephonically or by
video conferencing and may cast votes during such proceeding.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-4)



§ 2-4-5  AGENDA.



   (A)   Prior to each Council meeting or on or before a time fixed by
the Council for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is
earlier, the City Manager shall collect all written reports, communications,
ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents which are to be
submitted to the Council, and shall prepare an agenda according to the order
of business set forth below in Vol. I, § 2-4-6.



   (B)   A copy of the agenda and pertinent material, as approved by
the City Manager, shall be furnished to the Mayor and Council, City Manager,
and each pertinent department and the City Attorney by the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-5)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-4-6  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The business of the Council shall be considered, numbered on the agenda
and disposed of in the order listed below. However, the Council may change
the order at the discretion of the Mayor.



   (A)   Call to order. The Mayor shall take the chair precisely at the
hour set for the meeting and shall immediately call the Council to order. In
the absence of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall call the Council to order. In
the absence of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the City Clerk shall call the
Council to order and an acting Mayor shall be selected to chair the meeting.
Upon arrival of the Mayor or the Vice Mayor, the Vice Mayor or the acting
Mayor shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the
business immediately before the Council. The Mayor shall preserve order and
decorum, decide all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the
meetings in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Webster's
New World Robert's Rules of Order, Copyright 1999 by Robert McConnell
Productions or as may be revised. Any conflict under these rules with state
law shall render such rules unenforceable and state law and/or other local
regulations may apply. The City Attorney may serve as parliamentarian or a
parliamentarian may be appointed by the Council for regular and special
meetings.



   (B)   Invocation and pledge of allegiance. The Mayor shall call upon
the Vice Mayor, member of Council or a member of the public for an invocation
and the pledge of allegiance.



   (C)   Roll call. Before proceeding further on the agenda, the City
Clerk or Deputy City Clerk shall call the roll of the members, and the names
of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a quorum is not present,
the members may adjourn pursuant to Vol. I, § 2-4-4.



   (D)   Consent agenda. The Council may, at this time, take single
action on any or all items listed as consent agenda items. These items may
include, but are not limited to, acceptance of agenda, acceptance of minutes,
appointments, acceptance of resignations and adoption of certain resolutions
and other items which do not require a public hearing. The consent agenda is
a time saving device of which the Mayor and City Council is to receive
documentation on these items from the City Manager for their review prior to
the meeting. Any member of the Council may remove any item from the consent
agenda for discussion and cause a separate vote on the matter later in the
agenda.



   (E)   Awards, presentations, proclamations, acknowledgment of
distinguished guests and visitors, and staff presentation of receipt of grant
or donated funds. Awards, presentations from other organizations,
proclamations issued by the Mayor, and acknowledgment of distinguished guests
and visitors, and staff presentation of receipt of grant or donated funds are
permitted at this time.



   (F)   Announcement of current events.  The Mayor or any member of
Council may at this time present a brief summary of current events. However,
no discussion shall take place on such items except for clarifying comments
related to substance, time and location.



   (G)   City Manager’s report. The City Manager, members of city
staff, or those individuals designated by the City Manager may present
information pertinent to items under consideration or information related to
the operation of the city. There shall, however, be no discussion at this
time except for clarification inquiries.



   (H)   Public hearings. Public hearings required by applicable law
shall be conducted by the Council and any person shall be given the
opportunity to speak. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a
whole and not to any member thereof. The remarks shall be limited to 5
minutes unless additional time is granted by the Mayor. This time limitation
shall not apply to applicants and their agents appearing before the Council.



   (I)   Old business. The Council shall consider any business that has
been previously considered and which is still unfinished to include those
items previously postponed or tabled. No member of the public shall be
permitted to speak on these items unless invited to do so by the Mayor after
first submitting a written “Request to Speak” form with the City Clerk.



   (J)   New business. The Council shall consider any business not yet
considered. No member of the public shall be permitted to speak on these
items unless invited to do so by the Mayor after first submitting a written
“Request to Speak” form with the City Clerk.



   (K)   Council direction to staff. This item allows the Mayor and
City Council to direct staff on specifically listed matters.



   (L)   Call to the public.



      (1)   At this time the public has the privilege of addressing
the Council relating to city business that is not listed on the agenda with
requests, communications, comments or suggestions. All speakers must submit a
written “Request to Speak” form to the City Clerk no later than after the
City Manager’s Report portion of  the agenda has concluded. All such
remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a whole and not to any member
thereof. The Mayor is authorized to ask a speaker to stop speaking and leave
the podium or to adjourn the meeting if anyone becomes disorderly, uncivil,
makes personal attacks or continues to speak about items that are not within
the jurisdiction of the city after being warned such issues are beyond the
jurisdiction of the city to act. The Council may not answer questions of the
speaker or discuss their concerns with staff or other members of the Council,
but may, at the conclusion of Call to the Public:



         (a)   Respond to criticism by a speaker;



         (b)   Ask staff to review a matter; and



         (c)   Ask staff to place a matter on a future agenda.



      (2)   Each speaker must approach the podium, speak into the
microphone, and provide his or her name and address. There is a 3 minute time
limit per speaker.



   (M)   Adjournment. The Mayor shall at the conclusion of all items on
the agenda, adjourn the meeting without the necessity of a vote.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-6)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006; Am. Ord. 1342,
passed 7-7-2009)



§ 2-4-7  COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.



   The Council may create such committees, boards and commissions:
standing, advisory or special, as it deems necessary. The committees, boards
and commissions shall consist of as many members and shall perform such
duties as the Council may require and shall exist at the pleasure of the
Council. No employee or appointed officer of the city may serve as a voting
member of any such committee, board or commission.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-7)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-4-8  VOTING.



   (A)   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.



   (B)   The ayes and nays upon all questions shall be taken and
entered in the minutes by roll call.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-8)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



ARTICLE 2-5:  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND COUNCIL ACTIONS



Section



   2-5-1   Prior approval



   2-5-2   Reading of ordinance



   2-5-3   Requirements for an ordinance



   2-5-4   Effective date of ordinances



   2-5-5   Signatures required



   2-5-6   Publishing required



   2-5-7   Posting required



§ 2-5-1  PRIOR APPROVAL.



   (A)   All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall,
before formal presentation to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by
the City Attorney.



   (B)   When there are substantive matters of administration involved,
all ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall be referred to the
person who will be charged with the administration of such ordinance,
resolution or contract.



   (C)   The person shall have an opportunity to present comments,
suggestions and objections, if any, prior to the passage of the ordinance,
resolution or acceptance of the contract.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-1)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-5-2  READING OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Unless requested to be read in full by a majority vote of
Council members present, the City Clerk shall read the proposed ordinance by
title only.



   (B)   Upon completion of the vote on reading by title only, the
Mayor and Council shall vote on the text after the main motion is seconded.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-2)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-5-3  REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ORDINANCE.



   Each ordinance may have only one subject, the nature of which is
clearly expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be
introduced as an amendment to Volume I or II of the city code or to an
existing ordinance and, in such case, the title of the chapter, article and
section proposed to be amended shall be included in the ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-3)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-5-4  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   No ordinance, resolution or franchise shall become operative
until 30 calendar days after its passage by the Council and signature by the
Mayor, except measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace,
health or safety of the city.



   (B)   Such an emergency measure shall not become immediately
operative unless it states in a separate section the reason why it is
necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is
approved by the affirmative vote of 3/4 of all the members elected to the
Council taken by ayes and nays.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-4)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-5-5  SIGNATURES REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it become
effective, be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-5)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-5-6  PUBLISHING REQUIRED.



   Only such ordinance, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings
of the Council shall be published as may be required by applicable federal or
state law, city code or expressly ordered by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-6)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



§ 2-5-7  POSTING REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other
punishment shall, after passage, be posted by the City Clerk in 3 or more
public places within the city and an affidavit of the person who posted the
ordinance shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk as proof of posting.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-7)  (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 5-2-2006)



ARTICLE 2-6:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 2-7:  LIBRARY BOARD



Section



   2-7-1   Creation



   2-7-2   Membership and terms of office



   2-7-3   Salaries and personal expenses



   2-7-4   Officers



   2-7-5   Meetings



   2-7-6   Vacancies



   2-7-7   Removal of members



   2-7-8   Duties



§ 2-7-1  CREATION.



   There is hereby established the Apache Junction Public Library, to be
governed by 7 trustees, in compliance with A.R.S. §§ 9-411 to 9-419, those
sections of statutes being adopted by reference just as if copied fully
herein, the city reserving the right to levy taxes for the support of the
library as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 2-7-1)



§ 2-7-2  MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The Library Board shall consist of 7 trustees who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council. Ex-officio trustee,
without voting privileges, may be designated by the Mayor with the approval
of the Council.



   (B)   The terms of the trustees shall be for 3 years and shall
commence on November 1 of each year and end on October 31 three years
thereafter or until their successors are duly appointed by the Mayor and City
Council. The terms shall be so staggered that the terms of no more than 3
trustees shall conclude in any given year. Ex-officio members shall serve for
a term not to exceed 1 year.



   (C)   All trustees and ex-officio members shall be residents of the
City of Apache Junction.



(Prior Code, § 2-7-2)  (Am. Ord. 1328, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 2-7-3  SALARIES AND PERSONAL EXPENSES.



   The trustees of the Library Board shall receive no salaries or other
remuneration for their services in such capacity and shall not be entitled to
personal expenses incurred by them in the discharge of their official duties,
except to the extent and purposes and amount such expense is first authorized
and approved by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-7-3)



§ 2-7-4  OFFICERS.



   (A)   The officers of the Board shall include a President,
Vice-President and Secretary who shall be elected by the members at the first
meeting of the Board following October 31 of each year. Those officers shall
serve until October 31 of the next succeeding year.



   (B)   In the absence of the President, the Vice-President shall
preside at meetings. In the absence of the Vice-President, the Secretary
shall serve in that capacity.



(Prior Code, § 2-7-4) (Am. Ord. 1370, passed 1-4-2011)



§ 2-7-5  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Board shall establish a regular meeting day and time once
a month for meetings relating to regular business purposes. Special meetings
may also be called but on an as needed basis.



   (B)   A quorum shall consist of 4 voting members for the transaction
of all business.



(Prior Code, § 2-7-5)



§ 2-7-6  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies shall be filled by the Council in accordance with Vol. I, §
2-7-2 for the unexpired term of the member affected.



(Prior Code, § 2-7-6)



§ 2-7-7  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   Members of the Board serve at the pleasure of the Council and may be
removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the Council. A member shall not
be absent from Library Board regular meetings for more than 3 consecutive
times without a reasonable excuse. After the absence of 3 consecutive
meetings, the remaining trustees of the Library Board shall vote to retain or
recommend to the Council that the absentee trustee be relieved of his or her
duties on the Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-7-7)



§ 2-7-8  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Board, through the City Manager, shall recommend
regulations and policy for the governing, control and improvement of the
Apache Junction Library.



   (B)   The Board may interview, evaluate and recommend to the Council
the best qualified applicant for the position of library director from those
candidates provided by the personnel officer.



   (C)   To submit annually to the Council by the first Monday in July
an overall evaluation of the library system.



(Prior Code, § 2-7-8)



ARTICLE 2-8:  PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION



Section



   2-8-1   Creation



   2-8-2   Membership and terms of office



   2-8-3   Salaries and personal expenses



   2-8-4   Officers



   2-8-5   Meetings



   2-8-6   Vacancies



   2-8-7   Removal of members



   2-8-8   Duties



§ 2-8-1  CREATION.



   A Parks and Recreation Commission of the City of Apache Junction is
hereby created.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-1)



§ 2-8-2  MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of 7 members
who shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council. Ex-officio
members, without voting privileges, may be designated by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council.



   (B)   Commission members shall all serve for a term of 3 years or
until their successors are duly appointed by the Mayor and Council.  Terms
of members shall be so staggered that the terms of no more than 3 members
shall expire in any 1 year and, in accordance with this section, all such
terms shall expire on October 31 of the applicable year. If a reduction in
membership is ever approved by the Mayor and Council, the terms of office due
to expire or unfilled at the time of amendment shall remain so and no future
appointments shall be made to replace those members.



   (C)   All members shall be residents of the City of Apache Junction.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-2)  (Am. Ord. 1328, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 2-8-3  SALARIES AND PERSONAL EXPENSES.



   The members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall receive no
salaries or other remuneration for their services in such capacity, and shall
not be entitled to personal expanses incurred by them in the discharge of
their official duties, except to the extent and purposes and amount such
expense is first authorized and approved in advance by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-3)



§ 2-8-4  OFFICERS.



   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and
Secretary from their members to serve for a period of 1 year. The Vice
Chairperson shall preside at meetings in the absence of the Chairperson.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-4)



§ 2-8-5  MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall establish a regular meeting day and time at least
once a month. Special meetings may be called as required. A quorum shall
consist of 4 voting members for the transaction of all business.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-5)



§ 2-8-6  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies shall be filled by the Council in accordance to Vol. I, §
2-8-2 for the unexpired term of the member affected.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-6)



§ 2-8-7  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   Members of the Commission serve at the pleasure of the Council and may
be removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the Council. A member shall
not be absent from Parks and Recreation Commission regular meetings for more
than 3 consecutive times without a reasonable excuse. After the absence of 3
consecutive meetings the remaining members of the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall vote to retain or recommend to the Council that the absentee
member be relieved of his or her duties on the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-7)



§ 2-8-8  DUTIES.



   The Commission through the Director of Community Services shall
recommend regulations and policy for the government, control and improvement
of the public parks of the City of Apache Junction. The Commission shall also
recommend fees for the use of public park facilities and recommend full time
or seasonal employees as necessary for the efficient management of the city
parks and recreation program.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-8)



ARTICLE 2-9:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 2-10:  INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND COUNCIL MEMBERS



Section



   2-10-1   Definitions



   2-10-2   Indemnification



   2-10-3   Action other than by or in the right of city



   2-10-4   Criminal proceeding



   2-10-5   No presumption created



   2-10-6   Action by or in the right of city



   2-10-7   Negligence and misconduct



   2-10-8   Success on the merits



   2-10-9   Determination by Council



   2-10-10   Payment of expenses in advance



   2-10-11   Indemnification not exclusive remedy



§ 2-10-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON.  Includes officers, appointees, employees and Council members
of Apache Junction.



   PROCEEDINGS.  Includes any threatened, pending or completed action,
suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administered or investigated.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-1)



§ 2-10-2  INDEMNIFICATION.



   Any person made a party or threatened to be made a party to any
proceeding by reason of the fact that the person is an officer, employee,
appointee, or Council member of Apache Junction shall be indemnified by the
city as hereinafter set forth.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-2)



§ 2-10-3  ACTION OTHER THAN BY OR IN THE RIGHT OF CITY.



   If the proceeding is one other than an action by or in the right of the
city, the person shall be indemnified against his or her expenses, including
attorneys fees, and including judgments, fines, amounts paid in settlement
actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection with the
proceeding.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-3)



§ 2-10-4  CRIMINAL PROCEEDING.



   If the proceeding is a criminal proceeding, the person shall be
indemnified if he or she had no reasonable cause to believe his or her
conduct was unlawful.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-4)



§ 2-10-5  NO PRESUMPTION CREATED.



   With respect to indemnification under Vol. I, §§ 2-10-3 or 2-10-4, a
termination of a proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction or
upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not, by itself,
create a presumption that the person acted, or failed to act, other than in
good faith and in a manner which he or she reasonably believed to be in or
not opposed to the best interest of the city; and with respect to any
criminal proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his or her conduct
was unlawful.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-5)



§ 2-10-6  ACTION BY OR IN THE RIGHT OF CITY.



   If the proceeding is one by or in the right of the city to procure a
judgment in the city's favor, the person shall be indemnified against his or
her expenses, including attorneys fees, but excluding judgments and fines,
and, except as hereinafter set forth, amounts paid in settlement actually and
reasonably incurred by him or her in connection with the defense or
settlement of the proceeding if he or she acted, or failed to act, in good
faith and in a manner he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed
to the best interest of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-6)



§ 2-10-7  NEGLIGENCE AND MISCONDUCT.



   (A)   No indemnification under Vol. I, § 2-10-6 shall be made in
respect of any claim, issue or matter as to which such person shall have been
adjudged to be liable for negligence or misconduct in the performance of his
or her duty to the city except that such person may apply to the court in
which the proceeding was brought and request a determination that the person
is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for the expenses when the
court shall deem proper.



   (B)   The court in which any such proceeding was brought may
determine upon application that, in view of all circumstances of the case,
indemnity for amounts paid in settlement is proper and may order indemnity
for the amounts so paid in settlement and for the expenses, including
attorneys fees, actually and reasonably paid in connection with the
application, to the extent the court deems proper.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-7)



§ 2-10-8  SUCCESS ON THE MERITS.



   To the extent that a person covered by this article has been successful
on the merits or otherwise in defense of any proceeding covered by this
article or in the defense of any claim, issue or matter therein, he or she
shall be indemnified against expenses, including attorneys fees, actually and
reasonably incurred by him or her in connection therewith.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-8)



§ 2-10-9  DETERMINATION BY COUNCIL.



   Any indemnification made pursuant to this article, unless ordered by a
court, shall be made by the city only as authorized in the specific case upon
a determination that indemnification of the officer, appointee, employee or
Council member is proper in the circumstances because he or she has met the
applicable standard of conduct set forth in this article. The determination
shall be made by any of the following:



   (A)   By the Council by majority vote of a quorum consisting of
Council members who were not part to the proceeding;



   (B)   If a quorum is not obtainable, then in a written opinion of
independent legal counsel acquired by majority of the disinterested Council
members for that purpose; and



   (C)   If there are no disinterested Council members, by the court or
other body before which the proceeding was brought or in the court of
competent jurisdiction upon the approval of an application by any person
seeking indemnification, in which case indemnification may include the
expenses, attorneys fees, actually and reasonably paid in connection with the
application.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-9)



§ 2-10-10  PAYMENT OF EXPENSES IN ADVANCE.



   Expenses, including attorneys fees, incurred in defending a civil or
criminal proceeding may be paid by the city in advance of the final
disposition of the proceeding as authorized in the manner provided in Vol. I,
§ 2-10-9 upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the officer,
employee or Council member to repay the amount unless it shall ultimately be
determined that he or she is entitled to be indemnified by the city as
authorized by this article.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-10)



§ 2-10-11  INDEMNIFICATION NOT EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.



   The indemnification provided by this article shall not be deemed
exclusive of any other rights to which those indemnity may be entitled.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-11)



ARTICLE 2-11:  HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION



Section



   2-11-1   Creation



   2-11-2   Membership and terms of office



   2-11-3   Compensation and expenses



   2-11-4   Officers



   2-11-5   Duties



   2-11-6   Meetings



   2-11-7   Vacancies



   2-11-8   Removal of members



§ 2-11-1  CREATION.



   (A)   The Health and Human Services Commission of the City of Apache
Junction, Arizona, is hereby created.



   (B)   Staff responsibilities shall be assigned through the City
Manager's office.



(Prior Code, § 2-11-1)



§ 2-11-2  MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The Health and Human Services Commission shall consist of 5
members who shall be appointed and approved by the Council.



   (B)   (1)   The appointments to this Commission shall be for
terms of 3 years each, with the terms of members so staggered that the terms
of no more than 3 members shall expire in any given year.



      (2)   Upon expiration of the term of office, all new
appointments shall be made by the Mayor and Council for full 3-year terms and
all such terms shall expire on October 31, except that in the event of death
or resignation of a member, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the
Mayor and Council for the unexpired term.



   (C)   At least 3 of the 5 members shall be residents of the city,
with no more than 2 being non-residents from within the zone of influence.



   (D)   No individual shall be appointed to the Commission if the
individual has received funding from the city either as an individual, or if
such person has served on the board of any agency or been the employee of any
agency that has received funding from the city at any time during the
preceding 12 months.



   (E)   No former member of the Health and Human Services Commission
shall make application to the city for funding as an individual or as the
employee or representative of any agency within 12 months after they have
ceased to be a member of the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 2-11-2)  (Am. Ord. 1328, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 2-11-3  COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.



   The members of the Health and Human Services Commission shall receive
no salaries or other remuneration for their services as members of the
Commission and shall not be entitled to personal expenses incurred by them in
the discharge of their official duties, except to the extent, purposes and
amount such expense is first authorized and approved in advance by the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-11-3)



§ 2-11-4  OFFICERS.



   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from
among its members to serve for a period of 1 year. The Vice Chairperson shall
preside at Commission meetings in the absence of the Chairperson.



(Prior Code, § 2-11-4)



§ 2-11-5  DUTIES.



   The Health and Human Services Commission is hereby charged with the
following duties:



   (A)   To conduct public hearings to determine the needs of city
residents with regard to public health needs, provision of human services and
care of the elderly, handicapped and developmentally disabled;



   (B)   To enhance the development of the public health through public
forums, seminars and work with other agencies;



   (C)   To review requests submitted by health and human service
providers (non-profit agencies) for city funding and to make recommendations
to the Council regarding that funding;



   (D)   To assist in the development of health care facilities; and



   (E)   To make recommendations to the Council regarding elderly
health care and emergency transportation programs.



(Prior Code, § 2-11-5)



§ 2-11-6  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Commission shall establish a regular meeting date which
shall be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson.



   (C)   A quorum shall consist of 3 members for the transaction of all
business.



(Prior Code, § 2-11-6)



§ 2-11-7  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of Vol. I,
§ 2-11-2 for the unexpired term of the member affected.



(Prior Code, § 2-11-7)



§ 2-11-8  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   Members of the Commission serve at the pleasure of the Council
and may be removed from office by the majority of the Council.



   (B)   A member of the Commission shall not be absent from more than
3 consecutive meetings.



   (C)   If such an absence occurs, the remaining members of the
Commission shall vote to retain or recommend to the Council that the absentee
member be relieved of his or her duties on the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 2-11-8)



ARTICLE 2-12:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 2-13:  FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE



Section



   2-13-1   Definitions



   2-13-2   Duty to file financial disclosure statement



   2-13-3   Duty to file financial disclosure statement by a candidate
for the Council



§ 2-13-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPENSATION.  Money, tangible things of value or financial benefit.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY.  A spouse of a local public officer, and any minor
child of whom he or she has legal custody.



   LOCAL PUBLIC OFFICER.  A person holding an elective office in the City
of Apache Junction, Arizona.



(Prior Code, § 2-13-1)



§ 2-13-2  DUTY TO FILE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.



   (A)   In addition to other statements and reports required by law,
each local public officer as a matter of public record shall file with the
City Clerk, on a form prescribed by the City Clerk, a verified statement
disclosing:



      (1)   His or her name, the name of each member of his or her
immediate family, and all names under which they do business;



      (2)   An identification of each employer and of each other
source of compensation amounting to more than $1,000 annually received by the
local public officer and his or her immediate family in their own names or by
any other person for the use or benefit of the local public officer and his
or her immediate family, and a brief description of the nature of the
services for which the compensation was received, except that this division
shall not be construed to require the disclosure of information that may be
privileged by law, nor the disclosure of individual items of compensation
that constitute a portion of the gross income of the business or profession
from which the local public officer and his or her immediate family derive
compensation;



      (3)   The name of every corporation, trust, business trust,
partnership or association in which the local public officer and his or her
immediate family, or any other person for the use or benefit of the local
public officer and his or her immediate family, have an investment or holding
of over $1,000 at the fair market value as of the date of the statement, or
in which the local public officer or his or her immediate family hold office,
or have a fiduciary relationship together with the description of the
investment, office or relationship, except that this division does not
require disclosure of the name of any bank or other financial institution
with which the local public officer or member of his or her immediate family
has a deposit or withdrawal share account;



      (4)   All real property interests located within the limits of
the City of Apache Junction, Arizona, including street address, specific
location, and approximate size or legal description, to which either the
local public officer or his or her immediate family hold legal title, or
beneficial interest in, excluding his or her residence and property used
primarily for personal recreation by the local public officer or his or her
immediate family;



      (5)   The names of all persons to whom the local public
officer and his or her immediate family owe unsecured personal debts in
excess of $1,000 and the names of all persons who owe the local public
officer and his or her immediate family unsecured personal debts in excess of
$1,000;



      (6)   The source of each gift of more than $500 received by
the local public officer and his or her immediate family in their own names
during the preceding twelve months, or by any other person for the use or
benefit of the local public officer or his or her immediate family, except
gifts received by will or by virtue of intestate succession, or received by
way of distribution from any inter vivos or testamentary trust established by
a spouse or by an ancestor, or gifts received from relatives. Political
contributions shall not be construed as gifts;



      (7)   A description of all of the professional, occupational
and business licenses in which either a local public officer or his or her
immediate family has an interest issued by the City of Apache Junction,
Arizona, or by any Arizona State Department, agency, commission, institution
or instrumentality, which requires for its issuance the consideration of the
application by the Mayor and Council, including the name in which the license
is issued, the type of business or profession, and its location; and



      (8)   A description of all professional, occupational and
business licenses in which either a public officer or his or her immediate
family has an interest, issued by any Arizona State Department, agency,
commission, institution or instrumentality, including the name in which the
license is issued, the type of business, or profession, and its location.



   (B)   The statement required to be filed pursuant to this section
shall be filed by each local public officer on or before January 31, of each
year hereafter.



(Prior Code, § 2-13-2)



Statutory reference:



   Related state law provisions, see A.R.S. §§ 38-452 et seq.



§ 2-13-3  DUTY TO FILE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT BY A CANDIDATE FOR
THE COUNCIL.



   A candidate for a local public office shall file a financial disclosure
statement containing the information required as set forth in Vol. I, §
2-13-2 on forms prescribed by the City Clerk, at the time of filing his or
her signed nomination papers.



(Prior Code, § 2-13-3)



ARTICLE 2-14:  REQUESTS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE



Section



   2-14-1   Requests for non-profit funding



   2-14-2   Requests for financial assistance



§ 2-14-1  REQUESTS FOR NON-PROFIT FUNDING.



   (A)   Required documentation.  Any non-profit agency submitting a
request for an allocation or grant of city funds shall submit to the city
specific documentation including, but not limited to, the following:  A copy
of the agency's most recent audit report; a certified copy of the agency's
most recent financial statement; detailed expenditure statements in order to
provide a detailed accounting of all funds previously received from the city;
complete information on the source and amount of funding received from all
other sources such as non-governmental agencies, membership fees and dues,
and private contributions; client service information as it applies to
residents of the city; proof of non-profit status as determined by the
Internal Revenue Service; proof of corporate status to include copies of
by-laws and articles of incorporation; the source and amount of funding
received from other governmental agencies; the names and addresses of current
board members; and any other documentation as may be deemed necessary by the
city.



   (B)   Reporting requirements.  Any non-profit agency receiving an
allocation or grant of city funds shall be required to submit to the city, on
a quarterly basis, a detailed accounting of the expenditure of city funds for
the previous quarter, a written report outlining the agency's performance and
accomplishments within the scope of work outlined in their contractual
agreement with the city, and any other documentation as may be deemed
necessary by the city in order to determine the agency's compliance with the
provisions of the contract.



   (C)   Contract required; procedure for distribution of funds.



      (1)   All city funds allocated or granted to any non-profit
agency shall be by means of a written contract based upon services to be
provided to or work to be performed on behalf of the city and its residents
in compliance with the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes regarding the
use of public funds.



      (2)   All city funds allocated or granted under the provisions
of this section shall be released in equal quarterly installments or
quarterly payments based upon a schedule of anticipated expenses which has
been approved by the Mayor and Council.  No subsequent quarterly allocation
or grant shall be released until such time that the receiving agency has
provided all of the required documentation for the previous quarter and has
provided satisfactory evidence of compliance with the scope of work
stipulated in their contract with the city.



   (D)   Submittal of requests for funding.  All funding requests
submitted by non-profit agencies for the allocation or grant of city funds
shall be submitted to the City Clerk's office during the month of January of
each year. Requests so submitted shall not be subject to city funding unless
approved by the Council and only following adoption of a final budget for
the  subsequent fiscal year.



(Ord. 659, passed 11-3-1998)



§ 2-14-2  REQUESTS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.



   All requests for financial assistance shall comply with the following
stipulations and conditions:



   (A)   All requests shall be filed by or on behalf of a valid,
non-profit organization as qualified by the Internal Revenue Service and as
registered with the Arizona Secretary of State, Arizona Corporation
Commission or other appropriate state office. The registration shall be
current and documentation of such status and registration shall be provided
at the time of the request. This article shall not apply to governmental or
quasi-governmental jurisdictions;



   (B)   All requests shall be submitted to the City Clerk during the
month of January of each year in order to be eligible for consideration in
conjunction with the subsequent fiscal year budget;



   (C)   All requests received in accordance with division (B) above
shall be referred to the appropriate city board or commission for purposes of
review and recommendation to the Council; and



   (D)   In those instances where a request is due to catastrophic
circumstances or when the public health, safety and welfare is at risk, the
requirements of this article may be waived by action of the Council. It is
preferable, however, even in such instances, for the request to receive a
review and recommendation from the appropriate city board or commission.



(Prior Code, Art. 2-14)



ARTICLE 2-15:  INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



Section



   2-15-1   Creation



   2-15-2   Membership and terms of office



   2-15-3   Officers



   2-15-4   Vacancies



   2-15-5   Quorum



§ 2-15-1  CREATION.



   There is hereby established an industrial development authority,
hereinafter referred to as "authority," which shall perform all duties
reserved to industrial development authorities as contained in state and
federal regulations.



(Prior Code, § 2-15-1)



§ 2-15-2  MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The industrial development authority shall consist of 7
members who shall be appointed by the Council.



   (B)   After the expiration of initial appointments, the terms of
members shall be as follows: 2 members with terms beginning from their
appointment and expiring 6 years from the date of appointment by the Mayor
and Council; 3 members with terms beginning from their date of appointment
and expiring 6 years from the date of appointment by the Mayor and Council;
and 2 members with terms beginning from their date of appointment and
expiring 6 years from the date of appointment by the Mayor and Council. All
member terms shall be for a period of 6 years, and shall be so staggered that
the term of no more than 3 members shall expire in any given year.  All
terms shall expire on October 31.



(Prior Code, § 2-15-2)  (Am. Ord. 1328, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 2-15-3  OFFICERS.



   The authority shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among
its members. The Vice Chairperson shall preside at meetings in the absence of
the Chairperson. All officers shall serve until their successors are elected.



(Prior Code, § 2-15-3)



§ 2-15-4  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with Vol. I, § 2-15-2 by the
Council for the unexpired term of the member affected.



(Prior Code, § 2-15-4)



§ 2-15-5  QUORUM.



   A quorum shall consist of 4 voting members for the transaction of all
business.



(Prior Code, § 2-15-5)



ARTICLE 2-16:  EMERGENCY POWERS AND AUTHORITY



Section



   2-16-1   Definitions



   2-16-2   Powers



   2-16-3   Duties of the City Manager



   2-16-4   Enforcement



   2-16-5   Immunity



   2-16-6   Conditions of enactment



§ 2-16-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMERGENCY FUNCTIONS.  Warning and communications services, relocation
of persons from stricken areas, radiological defense, temporary restoration
of utilities, plant protection, transportation, welfare, public works and
engineering, search or rescue, health and medical services, law enforcement,
firefighting, mass care, resource support, urban search or rescue, hazardous
materials, food and energy information and planning and other activities
necessary or incidental thereto.



   EMERGENCY SERVICES.  The preplanning necessary to carry out emergency
functions, other than functions for which military force of federal agencies
are primarily responsible, to prevent or minimize the loss of lives or
property caused by disasters of every kind.



   LOCAL EMERGENCY.  The existence of conditions of disaster or of
extreme peril to the safety of persons or property within the territorial
limits of the City of Apache Junction, which conditions are or are likely to
be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of
the city as determined by the Council and which require the combined efforts
of other political subdivisions.



   PRIVATE SECTOR.  All industry, commerce, business or banking; all
services other than those provided by the government; and all persons other
than those in governmental agencies at any level.



   STATE OF EMERGENCY.  The duly proclaimed existence of conditions of
disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons or property within the
state caused by air pollution, fire, flood or floodwater, storm, epidemic,
riot, earthquake or other causes, except those resulting in a state of war
emergency, which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services,
personnel, equipment and facilities of any single county, city or town, and
which require the combined efforts of the state and the political subdivision.



   STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY.  The condition which exists immediately
whenever this nation is attacked or upon receipt by this state of warning
from the federal government indicating that such an attack is imminent.



(Prior Code, § 2-16-1)



§ 2-16-2  POWERS.



   (A)   The Council, pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 26-307,
has the power to make, amend and rescind orders, rules and regulations
necessary for emergency functions and regulations, but such shall not be
inconsistent with orders, rules and regulations promulgated by the governor
of this state. Those orders, rules or regulations shall be effective when a
copy is filed in the office of the City Clerk. Existing resolutions, rules
and regulations in conflict with A.R.S. §§ 26-301 et seq. and hereafter
amended, are suspended during the time of emergency and to the extent that
they may conflict.



   (B)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 26-307(C) as amended, a state of war
emergency, the Council may waive procedures and formalities otherwise
required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into
contracts, incurring obligations, employing permanent and temporary workers,
utilizing volunteer workers, renting equipment, purchasing and distributing
supplies, materials and facilities and appropriating and expending public
funds when the Council determines and declares that strict compliance with
such procedures and formalities may prevent, hinder or delay mitigation of
the effects of the state of war emergency.



   (C)   In the absence of specific authority in state emergency plans
and programs, the Council will take emergency measures as deemed necessary to
carry out the provisions of A.R.S.§ 26-307(D) and as hereafter amended.



   (D)   This article constitutes authority, pursuant to the provisions
of A.R.S. § 26-311, for the Mayor to declare an emergency and, during the
emergency, to govern by proclamation and to impose all necessary regulations
to preserve the peace and order of the city including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Imposition of curfews in all or portions of the city;



      (2)   Ordering the closing of any business;



      (3)   Closing to public any public building, street or other
public place; and



      (4)   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement
agencies and organizations within or without the County of Pinal for
assistance.



   (E)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 26-311(C), in periods of local
emergency, including an emergency declared by the Mayor, the city has full
power to provide mutual aid to any affected area in accordance with local
ordinances, resolutions, emergency plans or agreements therefor.



(Prior Code, § 2-16-2)



§ 2-16-3  DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   The City Manager, subject to the direction and control of the
Council, shall be responsible for the organization, administration and
operation of the City of Apache Junction Emergency Services. In accordance
with the provision of A.R.S. § 26-312, the City Manager may, on behalf of
the city, accept for purposes of emergency services an offer of the federal
government or an agency thereof, or an offer of any person, firm or
corporation of services, equipment, supplies, material or funds, whether by
gift, grant or loan.



   (B)   There is hereby granted to the City Manager the authority:



      (1)   During non-emergency periods to:



         (a)   Coordinate city emergency service plans,
procedures, programs and other emergency services activities with federal
agencies, the State of Arizona, adjoining county agencies, political
subdivisions and municipalities of the state and with the private sector;



         (b)   Ensure compliance with the provisions of A.R.S.
§§ 26-301 et seq.;



         (c)   Ensure conformance with state emergency plans and
procedures;



         (d)   Achieve adequate operational readiness, adequacy
of training programs and proper utilization of emergency equipment and
supplies;



         (e)   Make such studies and surveys of the private
sector as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the city for
emergency services, and to plan for the most efficient use thereof; and



         (f)   Recommend to the Mayor, for delegation to the
various departments and agencies of the city, appropriate emergency services
responsibilities, and to coordinate the emergency activities of all such
departments and agencies.



      (2)   During declared emergencies to:



         (a)   Coordinate the emergency activities of all city
departments and agencies;



         (b)   Coordinate the emergency activities of the city
with federal agencies, the State of Arizona, adjoining county agencies,
political subdivisions and municipalities of the state and with the private
sector to achieve the most effective use of personnel, equipment, services,
facilities and other existing available resources; and



         (c)   Utilize the services, resources and facilities of
existing departments and agencies of the city, and when necessary to create
new agencies or call upon the private sector to perform emergency tasks and
functions unavailable in departments and agencies of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-16-3)



§ 2-16-4  ENFORCEMENT.



   The law enforcement authorities of the city shall enforce all orders,
rules and regulations issued pursuant to this article.



(Prior Code, § 2-16-4)



§ 2-16-5  IMMUNITY.



   The city, its officers, agents, employees, volunteers duly enrolled or
registered with the city emergency services and unregistered persons placed
into service during a state of war emergency are immune from liability as
provided in A.R.S. § 26-314.



(Prior Code, § 2-16-5)



§ 2-16-6  CONDITIONS OF ENACTMENT.



   The emergency plan, as adopted by the Council, will be the immediate
basis for the conduct and coordination of emergency operations in the city
under the following disaster conditions:



   (A)   Upon declaration of a state of war by the President of the
United States;



   (B)   When the governor of the State of Arizona has proclaimed a
state of emergency in an area including this city; or



   (C)   Upon the order of the Mayor or his or her authorized
representative, provided that the existence or threatened existence of a
local emergency has been duly proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of
the emergency services of this city.



(Prior Code, § 2-16-6)



ARTICLE 2-17:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 2-18:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 2-19:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 2-20:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 2-21:  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS/MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
CORPORATION/PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL RETIREMENT BOARD



Section



   2-21-1   Board of Adjustment and Appeals



   2-21-2   Municipal Property Corporation



   2-21-3   Public Safety Personnel Retirement Board



§ 2-21-1  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.



   There is hereby created, as provided by law, a Board of Adjustment for
the city. The Board of Adjustment shall be composed of 7 members, each of
whom shall be a resident of the city. The members of the Board shall be
appointed for terms of 3 years each, unless sooner removed by the Mayor and
Council, either with or without cause, except that initially 2 members shall
be appointed for a term of 1 year each, commencing July 1, 1979; 3 members
shall be appointed for a term of 2 years each, commencing July 1, 1979; and 2
members shall be appointed for a term of 3 years each, commencing July 1,
1979. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of 3 years. Such terms
shall expire on October 31.  The procedures and powers of the Board of
Adjustment shall be as set forth in Vol. II, Article 1-11.



(Ord. 1328, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 2-21-2  MUNICIPAL PROPERTY CORPORATION.



   Resolution No. 90-16, passed on July 19, 1990, is incorporated herein
by reference. The resolution approved the articles of incorporation and
bylaws of the Municipal Property Corporation ("MPC") and appointed the
incorporators and initial board of directors. There are 5 directors. Each
term shall be 3 years and shall have an expiration date of October 31 of the
year it is scheduled to terminate.



(Ord. 1328, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 2-21-3  PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL RETIREMENT BOARD.



   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 38-847(A) , the city has previously established a
local board to administer public safety personnel retirement matters under
Title 38, Chapter 5, Article 4 (A.R.S. § 38-841 et seq.)  Under A.R.S. §
38-847 (B) , a term for any appointed member shall have an expiration date of
October 31 of the year it is scheduled to terminate.



(Ord. 1328, passed 10-27-2008)



ARTICLE 2-22:  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



Section



   2-22-1   Established



   2-22-2   Membership



   2-22-3   Officers



   2-22-4   Duties



   2-22-5   Meetings



   2-22-6   Voting



   2-22-7   Fees



§ 2-22-1  ESTABLISHED.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Apache Junction is
hereby established.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-1)



§ 2-22-2  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be composed of a
total of 7 members who shall be residents of the city. The members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council. These appointments
shall be for a period of 3 years, unless sooner removed by the Mayor and
Council, either with or without cause. The terms of the members shall be so
staggered that the terms of no more than 3 members shall expire in any one
year. The appointments shall be for 2 members with terms beginning on July 1,
1983, and expiring on June 30, 1986; for 2 members with terms beginning on
July 1, 1982, and expiring on June 30, 1985; and 3 members with terms
beginning July 1, 1981 and expiring on June 30, 1984. Thereafter, upon
expiration of the term of office, all new appointments shall be made by the
Mayor and Council for full 3-year terms, and all terms shall expire October
31, except that in the event of the death or resignation of a member, the
vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor and Council for the
unexpired term. The term of all members shall extend until their successors
are qualified; except that 3 successive unexcused or unexplained absences
from any regular or special meeting shall be grounds for termination at the
will and pleasure of the Mayor and Council without the necessity of a hearing
or notice and such action shall be final.



   (B)   All members shall serve without pay. Members of the Commission
may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their
duties upon prior authorization or ratification by the Commission and
approval of the expenditures by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-2)  (Am. Ord. 1328, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 2-22-3  OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
from among its own members, who shall serve for 1 year and until their
successors are elected and qualified.



   (B)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and exercise all
the usual rights, duties and prerogatives of the head of any similar
organization.



   (C)   The Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths and
to take evidence.



   (D)   The Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of the
Chairperson in the absence or disability of the Chairperson.



   (E)   Vacancies created by any cause shall be filled for the
unexpired term by a new election.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-3)



§ 2-22-4  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Commission to:



   (A)   Formulate, create and administer any lawful plan duly adopted
by the governing body for the present and future growth of the city
pertaining to the use of land and buildings for any purpose, together with
all incidental activities usually associated therewith and commonly known as
"Planning and Zoning;"



   (B)   To make or cause to be made a continuous study of the best
present and future use to which land and buildings shall be put within the
city and in cooperation with adjacent areas;



   (C)   To recommend to the governing body revisions in the plans
which, in the opinion of the commission, are for the best interest of the
citizens of the city; and



   (D)   To promulgate rules of procedure and to supervise the
enforcement of rules so promulgated by the Commission and approved by the
governing body.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-4)



§ 2-22-5  MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall provide in its rules for its meetings; provided,
that special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or in his or her
absence the Vice Chairperson. In addition, any 3 members of the Commission
may make written request to the Chairperson for a special meeting and in the
event the meeting is not called, the members may call the special meetings in
such manner and form as may be provided in the Commission rules.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-5)



§ 2-22-6  VOTING.



   (A)   Four voting members shall constitute a quorum.



   (B)   A simple majority of the quorum voting shall be required for
passage of any matter before the Commission.



   (C)   The minutes of the meetings shall reflect the "ayes" and
"nays" cast on a particular measure and shall reflect the vote of each member
present.



   (D)   A member may abstain from voting only upon a declaration that
he or she has a conflict of interest, in which case that member shall take no
part in the deliberations on the matter in question.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-6)



§ 2-22-7  FEES.



   (A)   The Commission shall be authorized to establish a uniform
schedule of fees for service with all receipts to be paid into the general
fund of the city.



   (B)   These fee schedules shall become effective upon approval by
the Council.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-7)



CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION



      Article




         3-1.   CITY MANAGER





         3-2.   DEPARTMENT OF CITY CLERK





         3-3.   DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE





         3-4.   [RESERVED]





         3-5.   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS





         3-6.   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY





         3-7.   PROCUREMENT PROCEDURE





         3-8.   [RESERVED]





         3-9.   DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES





         3-10.   PERSONNEL SYSTEM





         3-11.   DEPARTMENT OF THE LIBRARY





         3-12.   [RESERVED]





         3-13.   DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION





         3-14.   PROPERTY DISPOSITION




ARTICLE 3-1:  CITY MANAGER



Section



   3-1-1   Definitions



   3-1-2   Office of City Manager created



   3-1-3   Residence



   3-1-4   Eligibility



   3-1-5   Bond



   3-1-6   Acting City Manager



   3-1-7   Compensation



   3-1-8   Power and duties



   3-1-9   Internal relations



   3-1-10   Removal procedures



   3-1-11   Agreements on employment



§ 3-1-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MANAGER.  The City Manager of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona.



   RATIFICATION.  By the Council, is required under this chapter, it
shall be effected only by a majority vote of the 7-member Council, as then
constituted, convened in a regular or special Council meeting.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)



§ 3-1-2  OFFICE OF CITY MANAGER CREATED.



   The Office of the City Manager of the City of Apache Junction is hereby
created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the Council
wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and
qualifications and shall hold office for and at the pleasure of the Council,
subject to any agreements on employment entered into pursuant to Vol. I, §
3-1-11.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)



§ 3-1-3  RESIDENCE.



   Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a City Manager
shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but within 120 days
after reporting for work the City Manager must become a resident of the city
unless the Council approves his or her residence outside the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)



§ 3-1-4  ELIGIBILITY.



   No member of the Council shall be eligible for appointment as City
Manager until 1 year has elapsed after the Council member shall have ceased
to be a member of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-4)



§ 3-1-5  BOND.



   The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved
by the Council in such sum as may be determined by the Council, and shall be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the City
Manager as herein described. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper
charge against the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-5)



§ 3-1-6  ACTING CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   In the event of the absence or disability of the City Manager,
the powers and duties of that office shall fall upon such person as the City
Manager shall designate.



   (B)   In the event of a vacancy in the Office of City Manager such
as that created by termination, resignation or death, the Council may assign
the powers and duties of the office of City Manager to another person until
such time that the City Manager shall be replaced. If such circumstances
occur, the Council shall be obligated to immediately commence proceedings to
seek a permanent replacement for the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-6)



§ 3-1-7  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the
Council shall from time to time determine. In addition, the City Manager
shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or
her in the performance of his or her official duties.



   (B)   Upon termination of the City Manager by reason of involuntary
removal from office for other than willful misconduct in office or conviction
of a felony offense, the City Manager shall receive payment for all accrued
regular working hours, all accrued vacation hours and such severance pay as
established by contract.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-7)



§ 3-1-8  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of
the city under the direction and control of the Council. He or she shall be
responsible for the administration of all affairs of the city which are under
his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as
administrative head, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the
powers set forth in the following divisions.



   (A)   Law enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to
see that all laws and ordinances of the city, and that all franchises,
contracts, permits and privileges granted by the Council are faithfully
observed and to report any failure in that regard to the Council, which shall
give such instruction and direction as it may desire for remedial, corrective
or terminating action by the City Manager.



   (B)   Authority over employees. It shall be the duty of the City
Manager, and he or she shall have the sole authority to control, order and
give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and
employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department
heads.



   (C)   Power of appointment and removal. Subject to the exceptions
expressly provided by this chapter, it shall be the duty of the City Manager
to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of
the city.  As to these officials, the City Manager shall recommend
appointment and removal. All department heads shall be appointed subject to
ratification by the Council, including the Director of Public Works, Director
of Development Services, Director of Public Safety, City Clerk, and Finance
Director. All such actions of the City Manager shall be subject to all
applicable personnel ordinances, rules and regulations and statutes of the
State of Arizona.  The Magistrate, City Attorney and members of the boards,
commissions and committees, shall be appointed by the Council and are not
within the City Manager's power or jurisdiction as noted above.



   (D)   Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to
recommend to the Council for adoption, such measures and ordinances as he or
she deems necessary.



   (E)   Attendance at Council meetings. It shall be the duty of the
City Manager to attend all meetings of the Council unless he or she is
excused therefrom by the Mayor individually or by the Council, except when
his or her removal is under consideration. He or she shall present definite
recommendations relative to each item on the agenda for approval, rejection
or modification by the Council.



   (F)   Financial reports. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to
keep the Council fully advised as to the needs of the city in such form and
at such times as requested by the Council.



   (G)   Budget. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to prepare
and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to
the Council for its approval.



   (H)   Expenditure control and purchasing. It shall be the duty of
the City Manager to see that no indebtedness is incurred or expenditure made
in violation of the Arizona Constitution and the state budget law.



   (I)   Investigations and complaints. It shall be the duty of the
City Manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any
department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of
any obligations of the city and to report all findings to the Council.
Further, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to investigate all
complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city
government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the
city and report all findings to the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-8)



§ 3-1-9  INTERNAL RELATIONS.



   (A)   Council-Manager relations. The Council and its members shall
deal with the administrative services of the city only through the City
Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the Council nor any
member thereof, shall give orders or instructions to any employee or officer
other than the City Manager. The City Manager shall take his or her orders
and instructions from the Council, only when promulgated at a duly convened
meeting of the Council, and no individual Council member shall give any
orders or instructions to the City Manager except for purpose of inquiry.



   (B)   Attendance at Commission meetings. The City Manager may attend
any and all meetings of all commissions, boards or committees created by the
Council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the Council. At
such meetings which the City Manager attends, he or she shall be heard by
such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he or she
wishes to address the members thereof, and he or she shall inform those
members as to the status of any matter being considered by the Council, and
he or she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all
commissions, boards or committees appointed by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-9)



§ 3-1-10  REMOVAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Removal of City Manager. The removal of the City Manager shall
be affected only by a majority vote (4 or more) of the 7-member Council
convened at a regular Council meeting or special Council meeting called for
that purpose.



   (B)   Suspension. After furnishing the City Manager with written
notice of removal, the Council may suspend the City Manager from duty, but
the City Manager's compensation shall continue until the effective date of
his or her termination.



   (C)   Notice of removal. The City Manager shall be furnished with
written notice stating the removal action of the Council. The City Manager
then may request within a 7-day period following delivery of the written
notice detailed reasons for the intended removal. The Council may provide
written detailed reasons for the removal which shall be provided the City
Manager within 7 days after receipt of such request from the City Manager.



   (D)   Hearing. Within 7 days after the delivery to the City Manager
of the notice of removal, the City Manager may, by written notification to
the City Clerk, request a public hearing before the Council. Thereafter, the
Council may fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual
place, but before the expiration of the 30-day period at which the City
Manager shall appear and be heard with or without counsel.



   (E)   Discretion of Council. The Council shall act at its discretion
and its action is not dependent upon providing the City Manager a hearing and
should a hearing be held, its action shall not depend upon any particular
showing or degree of proof at the hearing.



   (F)   Resignation of City Manager. The City Manager shall provide
the Council with 30 days written notice of intention to resign his or her
position. The City Manager shall assist the Council in the recruitment and
selection of a replacement, if requested by the Council. In the event of
resignation due to health reasons, the period of written notice shall be
determined in conference between the City Manager and the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-10)



§ 3-1-11  AGREEMENTS ON EMPLOYMENT.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed as a limitation on the power
or authority of the Council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the
City Manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not
inconsistent with any provisions of this article or of state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-11)



ARTICLE 3-2:  DEPARTMENT OF CITY CLERK



Section



   3-2-1   Department established



   3-2-2   Bond



   3-2-3   Powers and duties



   3-2-4   Vacancies



   3-2-5   Divisions within the Department



   3-2-6   Deputy City Clerk



§ 3-2-1  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The Department of the City Clerk of the City of Apache
Junction is hereby created and established. It shall be the duty of the City
Clerk to attend all meetings of the Council unless at his or her request he
or she is excused therefrom by the Mayor individually or by the Council, and
shall be responsible for recording the minutes and presenting them to the
Council for approval.



   (B)   (1)   The Department of the City Clerk shall consist of the
City Clerk, who shall be head of the department, and all other officers and
employees assigned thereto. All such officers and employees shall perform
their duties subject to the supervision of the City Clerk, who shall report
directly to the City Manager.



      (2)   The City Clerk shall supervise the department in
accordance with applicable personnel ordinances and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties as are conferred and required by applicable
ordinance, resolution or other lawful directives. The City Clerk shall be
appointed and removed by the City Manager subject to ratification of the
Council, and shall serve and receive such compensation as shall be determined
in accordance with applicable personnel ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-1)



§ 3-2-2  BOND.



   Before entering upon his or her duties of office, the City Clerk shall
execute a bond in such amount as is provided by statute, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his or her duties. Any premium for such bond shall be
a proper charge against the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-2)



§ 3-2-3  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Signatures. The City Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts
of the city and all licenses, permits and other documents as shall require
the formality.



   (B)   Money collected. The City Clerk shall turn over all money
received by him or her on behalf of the city to the City Finance Director
promptly upon receipt of the same; and with that money he or she shall give a
statement as to the source thereof.



   (C)   Records. In addition to the record of ordinances and other
records which the City Clerk is required by statute to keep, he or she shall
keep a register of all licenses and permits issued and payments thereon; a
record showing all of the officers of the city; a record showing all
appointed board and commission members; and other records as may be required
by the Council.



   (D)   Seal. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal
and shall affix its impression on documents whenever this is required.



   (E)   Documents. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of all
documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some
other officer.



   (F)   Indices. The City Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index
to all documents and records kept by him or her, so that ready access thereto
and use thereof may be had.



   (G)   Elections. The City Clerk shall be the chief elections officer
of the city and shall perform all duties assigned in accordance with state
statute and local ordinance.



   (H)   Licensing and taxation. The City Clerk shall be responsible
for coordinating city business and privilege license and sales tax collection
programs in accordance with state statute and local ordinance.



   (I)   Ex-officio treasurer. The City Clerk shall be designated
ex-officio treasurer in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-27-1(B)(3)(a).



   (J)   Additional duties. In addition to the duties herein provided
the City Clerk shall perform other duties and functions as may be required by
statute or ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-3)



§ 3-2-4  VACANCIES.



   In case the office of City Clerk shall become vacant for any reason,
the City Manager shall appoint a successor subject to ratification of the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)



§ 3-2-5  DIVISIONS WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   There are hereby created within the Department of City Clerk
the division of licensing and sales tax collections.



   (B)   Any division superintendents and section heads shall be
appointed and removed by the City Clerk, subject to ratification of the City
Manager and the provisions of Vol. I, Article 3-10 as it now exists, or may
hereafter be amended.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)



§ 3-2-6  DEPUTY CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall appoint a Deputy City Clerk who shall
have the power and duty to execute all documents required by any law or
ordinance to be executed by the City Clerk, and affix the seal of the city
thereto whenever required.



   (B)   When signing any documents the Deputy City Clerk shall sign
the name of the City Clerk followed by the word "By" and the Deputy City
Clerk's own name and the words "Deputy City Clerk."



   (C)   The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by
such Deputy City Clerk only in the absence of the City Clerk from his or her
office in the city hall, and only when either written direction has been
given by the City Clerk to exercise such power, or the City Manager has
determined that the City Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to
perform such function.



   (D)   The Deputy City Clerk shall have the authority and power
herein described, and such further power and authority as may be provided by
statute.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)



ARTICLE 3-3:  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE



Section



   3-3-1   Department established



   3-3-2   Powers and duties



   3-3-3   Vacancies



§ 3-3-1  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Department of Finance. This
Department shall consist of the Director of Finance who shall be the head of
the department and all other officers and employees assigned thereto.



   (B)   All the officers and employees shall perform their duties
subject to the supervision of the Director of Finance who shall report
directly to the City Manager. The Director of Finance shall supervise his or
her office in accordance with the applicable personnel ordinances and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties as are customarily conferred and
required by applicable ordinance, resolution or lawful directive.



   (C)   The Director of Finance shall be appointed and removed by the
City Manager subject to ratification of the Council and shall serve and
receive such compensation as shall be determined in accordance with the
applicable personnel ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-1)



§ 3-3-2  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Department of Finance to:



   (A)   Plan, direct and control the operations of the finance office,
including department personnel, reporting, coordination of activities and
organizational and performance reviews of central accounting systems,
including pre-audit, internal audit, posting of expenditure, accounting
controls, fiscal and capital budget, payroll, data processing, purchasing,
investment program, insurance program, bond program and other related
activities;



   (B)   Direct receipt, deposit and investment of all city monies,
together with records thereof;



   (C)   Keep accounts showing all money received and the source and
disposition thereof and other such accounts as may be required by statute or
ordinance. To keep the City Manager/Council fully advised as to the financial
condition of the city with the preparation of revenue, expenditure, debt,
cost and other statements in such form and in such manner as requested by the
Council;



   (D)   Direct the recording of all physical properties of the city
and the department or office to which the respective properties are assigned;
and



   (E)   Direct the maintenance of all special assessment records and
administer the collection of special assessments, including enforcement,
collecting and auditing.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-2)



§ 3-3-3  VACANCIES.



   In case the position of Director of Finance shall become vacant for any
reason, the City Manager shall appoint a successor subject to ratification by
the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-3)



ARTICLE 3-4:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 3-5:  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS



Section



   3-5-1   Department established



   3-5-2   Divisions of department



   3-5-3   Powers and duties



   3-5-4   Division of operations



   3-5-5   Division of engineering



   3-5-6   Assignment and custody of physical properties



   3-5-7   Advice and assistance



§ 3-5-1  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Department of Public Works, an
executive department of the city. It shall consist of the Director of Public
Works who shall be the head of the department and all officers and employees
assigned thereto.



   (B)   All such officers and employees shall perform their duties
subject to the supervision of the director, who shall operate solely under
the guidance and direction of and report directly to the City Manager.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works shall supervise his or her
department in accordance with the applicable personnel ordinances and Vol. I,
Article 3-10 and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are
customarily conferred and required by Vol. I, applicable ordinances,
resolutions or lawful directives.



   (D)   The position of the Director of Public Works is hereby
declared as classified service, and he or she shall be appointed and removed
by the City Manager subject to ratification of the Council; and shall serve
and receive such compensation as shall be determined in accordance with the
applicable city rules and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-1)  (Am. Ord. 1360, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 3-5-2  DIVISIONS OF DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works,
the Division of Operations and the Division of Engineering.



   (B)   Division superintendents and section heads shall be appointed
and removed by the Director of Public Works subject to the ratification of
the City Manager and provisions of Vol. I, Article 3-10 as it now exists or
may be hereafter amended.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-2)  (Am. Ord. 1360, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 3-5-3  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   In addition to those duties set forth in this article, the
Department of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall have charge of and
supervision over the care, maintenance, design, inspection and construction
of all streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways and determination for and
placement of all street signage and traffic control devices; the design,
inspection, construction, operation and maintenance of all storm water and
sanitary sewer systems and facilities, and all street gutters, drains,
drainage ways, water and wastewater treatment facilities, improvement
districts, easements and the appurtenances thereto; the care, maintenance and
construction of all public buildings; the operation, maintenance and
construction of all other public works projects and improvements within the
jurisdiction of the city.



   (B)   The Department of Public Works Director, or his or her
designee, may also be responsible for, or oversight of, the construction of
all streets, sidewalks, alleys, public ways, sanitary sewers, street gutters,
drains, drainage ways, wastewater treatment facilities, improvement district
easements and appurtenances thereto.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-3)  (Am. Ord. 1360, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 3-5-4  DIVISION OF OPERATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Division of Public Works
Operations, consisting of the Public Works Manager, who shall be the head of
the division, and all officers and employees assigned thereto. All such
officers and employees shall perform their duties subject to the supervision
of the Public Works Manager, who shall operate solely under the guidance and
direction of and report directly to the Director of Public Works. The Public
Works Manager shall supervise his or her department in accordance with the
applicable personnel ordinances and shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as are required by Vol. I, applicable ordinances, resolutions or
lawful directives.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Public Works Manager, or his or
her designee, to evaluate the condition of city streets, to maintain records
regarding the repair and maintenance of city streets, to supervise those
workers engaged in the repair, maintenance and construction of streets,
buildings, grounds and city vehicles; to assist or make the final
walk-through on all off-site construction and utility construction before the
recommendation for city acceptance; to coordinate barricading for special
events or emergencies with law enforcement officials; and to make routine
checks on city streets, buildings, grounds and vehicles to ensure that they
are in good repair and safe for public use.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-4)  (Am. Ord. 1360, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 3-5-5  DIVISION OF ENGINEERING.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Division of  Engineering, which
shall be under the supervision of  the City Engineer, or his or her
designee, who shall be responsible for the design and inspection of all city
streets, the determination for and placement of all street signage and
traffic control devices, sidewalks, alleys and public ways, storm water and
sanitary sewer system and facilities, street gutters, drains, drainage ways,
water and wastewater treatment facilities, improvement districts, easements
and the appurtenances thereto and administration of encroachment permits
under this code.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-5)



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to:



      (1)   Provide professional and technical expertise to assist
the Public Works Director in the performance of those duties assigned to the
Public Works Director; and



      (2)   Perform such other programs or functions related to
public works, public improvements, traffic, street signs and traffic
control  devices, floodplain administration, drainage and private
development that the Public Works Director may, from time to time, authorize
or request.



   (C)   The Public Works Director may also appoint a Traffic Engineer,
or assign his or her duties to an appropriate and qualified employee, who
will be responsible for the following:



      (1)   As authorized by state law, to determine appropriate
locations for stop signs, yield, u-turn and other right-of-way signs and
other traffic control devices and operations;



      (2)   To establish speed limits for city streets as necessary
for public safety in accordance with state law;



      (3)   Designate certain streets as a street prohibited for use
by trucks in excess of the weight listed in Chapter 12 of Vol. I;



      (4)   Issue permits for use on city streets for tires and
associated tire equipment not normally allowed on city streets pursuant to
A.R.S. § 28-958(G);



      (5)   Establish “no parking” zones, “loading zones”
and “bus stops” and other parking limitations relating to time, place,
manner or type of vehicle restrictions;



      (6)   Authorize and install traffic calming devices pursuant
to adopted City Council policy; and



      (7)   Keep accurate records of all parking zones, including
loading zones, established hereunder and shall designate on a map kept for
such purpose the location of all such zones throughout the city.



   (D)   The Public Works Director, or his or her designee, shall
recommend for Council adoption, standards, specifications and regulations
regarding public works improvements. In the event there is a conflict between
or among any of the standards, specifications and regulations adopted herein
by reference, a city code standard, specification or regulation shall prevail
over any standard, specification or regulation prepared by another entity.



Regardless of the designations contained in any standards, details or
specifications adopted by reference, roadway right-of-way enforcement
procedures and roadway right-of-way inspections provided for, shall be the
responsibility of the Public Works Director, or his or her designee.



   (E)   The Public Works Director, or his or her designee, may approve
alternate materials or methods of construction provided he or she finds the
proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the adopted
standard, detail or specification and the proposed material is for the
purpose intended, and at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the
adopted standard, detail or specification, in quality, strength,
effectiveness, durability and safety.



   (F)   The following codes and regulations shall be followed and
enforced by the Public Works Department in the creation and maintenance of
public property:



      (1)   City of Apache Junction Engineering Guidelines set forth
under Apache Junction City Code, Volume II, Chapter 10, as amended;



      (2)   The most current version of the Uniform Standard
Specifications and Details for Public Works Construction Sponsored and
Distributed by the Maricopa Association of Governments (“MAG” Standard
Specifications and Details), with the following modifications:



         (a)   The Public Works Director, or his or her designee,
is authorized to increase standard street cross sections, both pavement and
right-of-way widths, as necessary to maintain required traffic service levels
when a traffic analysis indicates the need for additional lanes of traffic;
and



         (b)   Where MAG refers to corrective actions for
deviations from standards and provides options for when the contracting
agency is the owner or when the contracting agency is not the owner, the
Public Works Director/designee is authorized to utilize any of the corrective
actions listed regardless of whether the city is the contracting agency or
not.



      (3)   The most current version of the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (“MUTCD”); and



      (4)   The most current version of the Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-5)  (Am. Ord. 1360, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 3-5-6  ASSIGNMENT AND CUSTODY OF PHYSICAL PROPERTIES.



   (A)   All physical properties of the city, including any municipal
utilities, systems and facilities and those physical properties not assigned
to some other department or officer, shall be assigned to the Department of
Public Works.



   (B)   The Department of Public Works shall be the custodian of all
tools, equipment and other municipal property assigned to the Department of
Public Works.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-6)  (Am. Ord. 1360, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 3-5-7  ADVICE AND ASSISTANCE.



   The Department of Public Works shall provide technical and operational
advice and assistance to, and cooperate with, all other departments, boards,
commissions, offices or other official entities of the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-7)  (Am. Ord. 1360, passed 4-6-2010)



ARTICLE 3-6:  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY



Section



   3-6-1   Department established



   3-6-2   Function of Department



   3-6-3   Duties of Director; appointment and dismissal



   3-6-4   Divisions of Department



   3-6-5   Policies, procedures and orders



   3-6-6   Status of members



§ 3-6-1  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby created the Department of Public Safety. It shall
include a Director who shall lead the department and shall manage all
officers and employees assigned thereto. The Director shall also hold the
title of "Police Chief." All officers and employees under the Police Chief's
command shall perform their duties subject to the supervision of the Police
Chief, who shall operate solely under the guidance and direction of and
report directly to the City Manager. The Director shall supervise the
Department in accordance with the applicable personnel policies and Vol. I,
Article 3-10 and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are
customarily conferred and required by applicable ordinance, resolution or
lawful directive.



(Prior Code, § 3-6-1)



§ 3-6-2  FUNCTION OF DEPARTMENT.



   It shall be the function of the department to preserve order, enforce
Vol. I, ordinances and laws in the city and the state, preserve the peace,
and render aid in the case of disaster or accident.



(Prior Code, § 3-6-2)



§ 3-6-3  DUTIES OF DIRECTOR; APPOINTMENT AND DISMISSAL.



   (A)   Duties. The Director of Public Safety shall have all the
duties and powers assigned by Vol. I, city ordinance, state or federal law.



   (B)   Appointment and dismissal.  The position of the Director is
hereby declared as a classified career status employee as defined under City
of Apache Junction Personnel Rules, Rule 2, Definition of Terms, § 4, Career
Status. The Director’s appointment by the City Manager shall be ratified by
the Mayor and Council. Removal shall be by the City Manager in his or her
sole discretion without ratification by the Mayor and Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-6-3)  (Am. Ord. 1321, passed 6-17-2008; Am. Ord. 1392,
passed 7-2-2013)



§ 3-6-4  DIVISIONS OF DEPARTMENT.



   There shall be divisions within the Department of Public Safety as the
City Manager deems fit. All heads of divisions shall be appointed and removed
by the Director subject to the ratification of the City Manager and the
provisions of Vol. I, Article 3-10 as it now exists or may be amended
thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 3-6-4)



§ 3-6-5  POLICIES, PROCEDURES AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Director's authority. The Director may make or prescribe
operational policies, procedures and orders for the conduct of the
department. The policies, procedures and orders, when approved by the City
Manager and subject to the legal review and approval by the City Attorney,
shall be binding and may cover the conduct of the members, uniforms and
equipment to be worn, carried or utilized, minimum standards of behavior and
other matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the
Department.



   (B)   City Manager notification to Council. The City Manager shall
notify the Council of the rules and regulations once reviewed and approved as
to form by the City Attorney.



(Prior Code, § 3-6-5)



§ 3-6-6  STATUS OF MEMBERS.



   Members of the Department of Public Safety shall be appointed and
promotions within the department shall be made in the manner provided by law.
Each member of the Department shall have all the responsibility, authority
and liability prescribed by statute or ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 3-6-6)



ARTICLE 3-7:  PROCUREMENT PROCEDURE



Section



   3-7-1   Definitions



   3-7-2   Procurements of $25,000 or more



   3-7-3   Procurements less than $25,000 but at least $1,000



   3-7-4   Exemptions



   3-7-5   Bid protests



   3-7-6   Disposal of property



   3-7-7   Bid disqualification



   3-7-8   Change orders



   3-7-9   Conflicts of interest and penalties



   3-7-10   Administrative procedures



§ 3-7-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHANGE ORDER.  A written order signed by an authorized agent of the
city which directs the contractor to make changes that are authorized by the
changes clause of the original contract.



   CONSTRUCTION.  The process of building, altering, repairing, improving
or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements
to any public real property; construction does not include the routine
operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of existing structures,
buildings or public real property.



   CONTRACT.  A written agreement between the city and another party for
the procurement of materials, supplies or services; the term includes but is
not limited to: contracts of a fixed price, cost, cost plus, fixed fee;
contracts providing for the issuance of job tasks, leases and rentals,
excluding real estate; maintenance agreements; letter contracts; and purchase
orders.



   LOWEST RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BIDDERS.  A person, firm or other
entity that submits a bid:



      (1)   Which is the least amount compared to other bidders;



      (2)   That responds to the invitation for bids in all material
respects; and



      (3)   Which demonstrates the submitting party has the
wherewithal to perform the work per the plans and specifications within the
contract time, as determined by experience, skill, financial strength,
integrity and experience record with the city and/or other municipalities.



   MANAGER OR HIS OR HER DESIGNEE.  Person(s) the City Manager selects in
writing to implement or administer the provisions of this article.



   NOTICE INVITING BIDS.  All documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, which are used for soliciting bids in accordance with the
procedures prescribed herein, including request for proposals and request for
statement of qualifications.



   PROCUREMENT.  The purchasing, sale of, renting, leasing or otherwise
obtaining of any materials, supplies or services.



   SERVICES.  The furnishing of labor, time or effort.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-1)



§ 3-7-2  PROCUREMENTS OF $25,000 OR MORE.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases, leases, rentals and
contracts for supplies, services, equipment and materials and the sale of
personal property of $25,000 or more in estimated value, shall be made by
written contract with the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, pursuant
to the following provisions.



   (A)   Notice inviting bids. A notice inviting bids or request for
proposals/request for statement of qualifications shall:



      (1)   Include a description of the articles to be purchased or
sold;



      (2)   State where notice inviting bids/request for
proposals/request for statement of qualifications forms and specifications
may be obtained; and



      (3)   State the date, time and place for opening bids. A
notice inviting bids/request for proposals/request for statement of
qualifications shall be published at least 10 calendar days before the date
of opening the bids. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 39-204, publication should be made
in a newspaper as follows:



         (a)   If the newspaper is a weekly, publication must
occur once each week for 2 consecutive weeks; or



         (b)   If the newspaper is a daily, publication shall be
made on 4 consecutive days.



   (B)   Bidder's security. When deemed necessary by the City Manager
or his or her designee, bidder's security may be prescribed in the notice
inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to returned bid
security. A successful bidder or request for proposals/request for statement
of qualifications bidder shall forfeit their bid security upon refusal or
failure to execute the contract within the time specified, dating from award
of contract date, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The Council
may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract,
award it to the next lowest responsive and responsible bidder.



   (C)   Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the
City Manager's designee and the bid number and project title shall be
reflected on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the date, time
and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received
shall be available to the public for inspection during regular business hours
for a period of time as prescribed under Arizona law. After bid opening, no
corrections in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the best
interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. Late bids will
be returned unopened to bidders who fail to file their bids in a timely
manner.



   (D)   Bid rejection. At its discretion, the Council may reject any
and all bids.



   (E)   Award of contracts. Based on the bid opening, Council shall
award the contract to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder for
purchases, leases or rental contracts for supplies, services, equipment or
sale of personal property, or professional services which are valued at
$25,000 or more. In awarding the contract, Council shall be advised of and
shall consider the advantages or disadvantages of the proposed purchases,
leases, rentals, contracts or sales as presented by the City Manager or his
or her designee.



   (F)   Payment and performance bonds. The Council shall have the
authority to require a payment and performance bond before entering a
contract in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the
best interests of the city, and if the Council requires a payment and
performance bond, the form and amount shall be described in the notice
inviting bids/request for proposals/request for statement of qualifications.
Bonding shall not be required for contracts under $25,000.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-2)



§ 3-7-3  PROCUREMENTS LESS THAN $25,000 BUT AT LEAST $1,000.



   Purchases, leases, rentals and contracts for supplies, services,
equipment, materials, professional services and the sale of personal property
of an estimated value in the amount of $1,000 or more but less than $25,000,
may be made by the City Manager or his or her designee in the open market by
observing the procedure for inviting and publishing bids with the following
exception: open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at
least 3 written bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-3)



§ 3-7-4  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Professional services. Unless otherwise required by Council,
provisions of this article shall not apply to the following types of
professional services: appraisal, architectural, certified public accountant,
clergy, dental, employment, engineering, financial, legal, medical, nursing,
physician, psychologist, surveying, technological, veterinarian and any
healthcare related affiliations.



   (B)   License and maintenance agreements. Unless otherwise required
by Council, license and maintenance agreements are exempted from this article.



   (C)   Materials and equipment valued less than $1,000. The
provisions of this article do not apply to materials and equipment valued at
less than $1,000.



   (D)   Library materials exemption. The City of Apache Junction
Public Library shall not be required to use the competitive bidding process
as set forth in this article for the purchases of audiovisual materials,
books, periodicals and subscriptions.



   (E)   Public works projects exemption.



      (1)   Public buildings. Any building, structure, addition or
alteration thereto contemplated on city property constructed with the use of
the city's regularly employed personnel or contractors in an amount up to and
including $100,000 (excluding materials and equipment previously acquired by
bid) does not require Mayor and Council approval.



      (2)   Public infrastructure. Any street, road, bridge, water
or sewer work, other than a water or sewer treatment plant or building,
constructed with the use of the city's regularly employed personnel or
contractors in an amount up to and including $100,000 (excluding materials
and equipment previously acquired by bid) does not require Mayor and Council
approval.



      (3)   Public art. Any painting, sculpture, mural, monument,
memorial, fountain, civic statuary, that has been planned and executed with
the specific intention of being sited or staged in the physical public domain
including on any city property and on any city easements, accessible to the
viewing public for the purpose of defining a sense of place for residents
and/or to enhance tourism and historical and cultural awareness of the
community.



   (F)   Single source procurement. Materials, supplies and services
may be procured without competition if the City Manager or his or her
designee determines the needed materials, supplies or services are available
from only 1 source and only when proven by city staff that the advantages and
overriding considerations are paramount to the city's interests.



   (G)   Emergency purchases. The City Manager or his or her designee
may authorize city staff to make emergency purchases without competition if:



      (1)   There exists a threat to public health, welfare or
safety (including but not limited to damaged city property causing such
threat without repair, replacement or substitute);



      (2)   If a situation exists which makes compliance with the
procurement process contrary to the public interest;



      (3)   There is immediate need to prepare for national or local
defense or assistance;



      (4)   There is a breakdown in machinery or in an essential
service which requires the immediate purchase of equipment, supplies or
services to protect the public health, welfare or safety; or



      (5)   An essential departmental operation effecting the public
health, welfare and safety would be greatly hampered if the prescribed
procurement procedure would cause an undue delay in obtaining the needed item
or service.



   (H)   Alternative bid procedure. When deemed to be in the best
interest of the city, supplies, materials and equipment and services not
otherwise exempted herein, may be purchased pursuant to specifications,
solicitation or contracts issued by other local, state or federal
governmental entities or through the state bid procurement lists or by quasi
governmental units or school districts which have used procurement procedures
that are equal to or stricter than the provisions set forth herein. In such
instances, the requirement for the city to obtain sealed or written bids or
to contact prospective suppliers from bidder lists or to publish or post
notices regarding bids is not required.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-4) (Am. Ord. 1386, passed 11-6-2012)



§ 3-7-5  BID PROTESTS.



   Any aggrieved person may protest any aspect of any bid solicitation by
filing such protect at the City Clerk's office within 5 calendar days after
bid opening and shall include the following: name and address of protestor,
bid description, grounds for protest to include all evidence, exhibits or
documents substantiating the protest.  The City Clerk shall within 2
business days after receipt of the protest, forward such protest to the City
Manager, who shall notify the protestor or other interested parties of the
time and place set for hearing on the protest. Interested parties may also
file position statements and may participate in the hearing. The City Manager
or his or her designee shall conduct the hearing within 5 calendar days after
sending the notice of the hearing to the protestor and/or interested parties,
absent any stipulated continuances.  The City Manager or his or her
designee, shall within 5 business days after the hearing has been completed,
issue a written opinion and send it by first class U.S. certified mail to the
protestor and all interested parties. The decision shall be final.  No
protest may be required after award of contract by Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-5)



§ 3-7-6  DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY.



   City staff shall follow the provisions of state law with regard to the
sale, lease, exchange, trade or other disposal of surplus or obsolete city
personal property. The city may also elect to donate any surplus or obsolete
city personal property to a governmental, non-profit or charitable
organization, without public notice, as determined by the City Manager or his
or her designee.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-6)



§ 3-7-7  BID DISQUALIFICATION.



   (A)   Grounds. The City Manager or his or her designee may
disqualify any bidder from consideration of award of bid for materials,
supplies or services for up to 24 months. The following factors may be taken
into consideration in making this determination:



      (1)   Conviction of any person or any subsidiary of affiliate
of any person for commission of a criminal offense arising out of or
obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or
subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;



      (2)   Conviction of any person or any subsidiary of affiliate
of any person under any federal or state statute for theft, embezzlement,
fraudulent schemes and artifices and practices, bid rigging, perjury,
forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records recovering stolen
property or other offenses indicating lack of business integrity or honesty
which affects the responsibility as a city contractor;



      (3)   Conviction or civil judgment finding a violation of any
person or any subsidiary or affiliate of any person under state or antitrust
statutes;



      (4)   Failure to pass any clearance or applicable background
investigation in bids involving sensitive materials or tasks involving public
safety;



      (5)   Failure to pay any transaction privilege taxes resulting
from income received on public contracts; and



      (6)   Violation of contract provisions of a character which
are deemed to be so serious as to justify disqualification, such as:



         (a)   Knowingly failing without good cause to perform in
accordance with the specifications or within the time limits provided in the
contract; and



         (b)   Failure to perform or unsatisfactorily perform in
accordance with the terms of contract, except that failure to perform or
unsatisfactorily perform caused by acts beyond the contract of the contractor
shall not be considered a basis.



   (B)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall send written
notice of the proposed disqualification, including the grounds and period of
proposed disqualification to the disqualified party by first class U.S.
certified mail from the address on the bid. The party shall have a right to a
hearing before the City Manager or his or her designee if an appeal is filed
within 5 business days after the notice is sent. The City Manager or his or
her designee shall provide notice of the hearing date and time to the
disqualified party within 5 business days after hearing of a hearing request.
The party shall have the opportunity to present evidence rebutting the
reasons for disqualification. The City Manager or his or her designee shall
decide the matter within 5 business days of the hearing and shall notify the
disqualified party within an additional 5-business day period. The decision
shall be final, subject only to judicial appeal pursuant to A.R.S. Title 12.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-7)



§ 3-7-8  CHANGE ORDERS.



   The City Manager or his or her designee may authorize change orders to
any contract if the amount does not exceed 10% of the cumulative amount of
the contract and as long as the cumulative amount of the change order plus
the original contract amount is less than $25,000. The Council may exercise
its authority to approve any change orders in any amount substantiated by
staff.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-8)



§ 3-7-9  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   No city employee shall participate directly or indirectly in any
procurement when the employee has a conflict of interest as defined in A.R.S.
§ 38-503. In addition, any person who violates this article could be subject
to criminal penalties set forth in Vol. I, Article 1-8 of the city code, as
well as criminal and civil penalties set forth under state law.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-9)



§ 3-7-10  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee may promulgate
administrative rules and regulations which more specifically delineates the
responsibilities of procurement procedures pursuant to this article.



   (B)   The code adopted herein by reference, is for any reason held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion thereof.



(Prior Code, § 3-7-10)



ARTICLE 3-8:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 3-9:  DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES



Section



   3-9-1   Department established



   3-9-2   Divisions of department



   3-9-3   Powers and duties



   3-9-4   Division of building safety and inspection



   3-9-5   Division of planning



   3-9-6   Division of code compliance



§ 3-9-1  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Department of Development
Services, an executive department of the city. It shall consist of the
Director of Development Services who shall be the head of the department, and
all officers and employees assigned thereto. All such officers and employees
shall perform their duties subject to the supervision of the Director who
shall operate solely under the guidance and direction of and report directly
to the City Manager.



   (B)   The Director of Development Services shall supervise the
Department in accordance with the applicable personnel ordinances and Vol. I,
Article 3-10 of the code and shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties as are customarily conferred and required by Vol. I, applicable
ordinance, resolution or lawful directive. The position of the Director of
Development Services is hereby declared as classified service and shall be
appointed and removed by the City Manager subject to ratification by the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-1)



§ 3-9-2  DIVISIONS OF DEPARTMENT.



   There are hereby created within the Department of Development Services
the divisions of building safety and inspection, division of planning and
division of code compliance. Division managers and assigned staff shall be
appointed and removed by the director of development services subject to the
ratification of the City Manager and the provisions of Vol. I, Article 3-10
of the code as it now exists or may be hereafter amended.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-2)



§ 3-9-3  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   In addition to the duties set forth in this article, the
Department of Development Services shall have responsibility to perform the
duties of Zoning Administrator, Executive Secretary to the Board of
Adjustment, Planning and Zoning Commission, Construction Code Board of
Appeals, and other city boards, commissions and committees as directed.



   (B)   The department shall have charge of and supervision over the
maintenance of city building codes, general plan, zoning and subdivision
ordinances, and other official plans, codes and documents as assigned; the
maintenance of all departmental records as required by A.R.S. §§ 41-1346 et
seq., and the enforcement of a records retention and destruction program as
required by law; the review of all plans submitted for the development or
construction of city streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways, storm water
and sanitary sewer systems and facilities, all street gutters, drains,
drainage ways, water and wastewater treatment facilities, improvement
districts, easements and appurtenances thereto; the planning, organizing,
directing and coordinating of the city's economic development program; and
the writing and managing of grants, and providing housing and housing
rehabilitation services if such programs and services exist.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-3)



§ 3-9-4  DIVISION OF BUILDING SAFETY AND INSPECTION.



   The division of building safety and inspection shall be managed by the
Building Official, who is responsible for exercising the powers and duties of
the Building Official as defined in the Uniform Building Code as adopted by
the city or hereafter amended; enforcing all applicable city ordinances and
codes, including state and federal laws relating to buildings; ordering all
work stopped on the construction, alteration or repair of buildings in the
city when such work is being done in violation of any provision of any code
or ordinance related thereto; and for purposes of inspection, making or
causing entry into any building or premises where alteration, repairing or
construction of any building or structure is occurring.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-4)



§ 3-9-5  DIVISION OF PLANNING.



   The division of planning shall be responsible for receiving and
processing development site plans, zoning amendment requests,
pre-application, preliminary and final subdivision plats, and other such
items as are appropriate and presenting them to the Planning and Zoning
Commission; receiving and processing petitions for variances, special
exceptions and appeals or interpretations and presenting them to the Board of
Adjustment; and preparing notices of public hearings for publication,
preparing meeting agendas, recording meeting minutes and maintaining records
for the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board of Adjustment, and
notifying applicants of the results of such hearings.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-5)



§ 3-9-6  DIVISION OF CODE COMPLIANCE.



   The division of code compliance shall be responsible for inspection,
investigation and enforcement of all laws relating to zoning compliance,
property maintenance and abandoned vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-6)



ARTICLE 3-10:  PERSONNEL SYSTEM



Section



   3-10-1   Personnel system



§ 3-10-1  PERSONNEL SYSTEM.



   (A)   That certain document, entitled Personnel Rules, City of
Apache Junction, 3 copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona, is hereby approved as per
Exhibit "A," adopted by the Council and made a part hereof by reference.



   (B)   That certain document entitled Police Policies and Procedures,
City of Apache Junction, Arizona, 3 copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona, is hereby approved
as per Exhibit "B," adopted by the Council and made a part hereof by
reference.



(Prior Code, Art. 3-10)



ARTICLE 3-11:  DEPARTMENT OF THE LIBRARY



Section



   3-11-1   Department established



   3-11-2   Duties of Library Director



§ 3-11-1  OFFICE ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The Department of the Library of the City of Apache Junction
is hereby created and established. It shall consist of the Library Director
who shall be the chief administrator of the Department and all other
employees assigned thereto. All other employees shall perform their duties
subject to the supervision of the Library Director who shall operate under
the guidance and direction of and report directly to the City Manager. The
Library Director shall supervise his Department in accordance with the
applicable personnel ordinances and shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as are required by Vol. I, applicable ordinances, resolutions or
lawful directives.



   (B)   The position of the Library Director is hereby declared as
classified service, and he or she shall be appointed and removed by the City
Manager subject to ratification of the Council, and shall serve and receive
such compensation as shall be determined in accordance with the applicable
personnel ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-1)



§ 3-11-2  DUTIES OF LIBRARY DIRECTOR.



   The Library Director shall:



   (A)   Retain all duties and responsibilities assigned by Vol. I, law
or ordinance and shall abide by those set forth in A.R.S. §§ 9-411 through
9-420.



   (B)   Consult with the President of the Library Board as to the
items to be included on the agenda of meetings for the Board prior to the
preparation and distribution of the agenda by the Library Director. The
Library Director, if requested by any Board members, shall include on the
agenda any item requested by the Board member.



   (C)   Prepare and distribute the official minutes of all Library
Board meetings.



   (D)   Consult with the Library Board and City Manager on the
establishment of all policies and procedures including, but not limited to
library hours, general standards of service, book selection, policy and fees.



   (E)   Administer and operate existing library facilities and
programs and plan for the development and operation of proposed facilities
and programs in accordance with policies set by lawful directives of the
Library Board and the Council.



   (F)   Make recommendations to the City Manager, with the assistance
of the Library Board, for the annual budget for submittal to the Council.



   (G)   Inform the general public of the services and facilities being
provided by the Library Department; address professional civic and lay groups
on related subjects; solicit suggestions from the general public on
increasing the effectiveness of programs; cooperate with governmental and
voluntary organizations and agencies in the solving of related problems;
provide, upon request, assistance of a technical nature to community agencies
and organizations on problems related to library facilities and programs.



   (H)   Assist community organizations in the promotion of Library
Department services; conduct studies of local conditions and needs for such
services; assist with the recruitment and training of professional library
personnel and volunteer leaders.



   (I)   Upon request, advise the Council, the Library Board and
community organizations concerning the expenditure of public funds for the
library; acquisitions, design and development of facilities; and shall
maintain effective and cooperative relations with all city officials, state
and federal agencies and with local, state and national voluntary
organizations.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-2)



ARTICLE 3-12:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 3-13:  DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   3-13-1   Department established



   3-13-2   Divisions of the Department



   3-13-3   Powers and duties



   3-13-4   Assignment and custody of physical properties



   3-13-5   Banner placement and supervision



§ 3-13-1  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby created the Department of Parks and Recreation, an
executive department of the city. It shall consist of the Director of Parks
and Recreation who shall be the head of the department and all officers and
employees assigned thereto. All such officers and employees shall perform
their duties subject to the supervision of the director, who shall operate
solely under the guidance and direction of, and report directly to, the City
Manager. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall supervise the department
in accordance with the applicable personnel ordinances and Vol. I, Article
3-10 and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are
customarily conferred and required by Vol. I, applicable ordinances,
resolutions or lawful directives. The position of Director of Parks and
Recreation is hereby declared as classified service, and the Director shall
be appointed and removed by the City Manager subject to ratification of the
Council and shall serve and receive such compensation as shall be determined
in accordance with the applicable personnel ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 3-13-1)



§ 3-13-2  DIVISIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT.



   There are hereby created within the Department of Parks and Recreation,
the divisions of recreation, park development and maintenance; and other such
divisions as the Director deems appropriate for the efficient and expeditious
operation of the department. Division heads shall be appointed and removed by
the Director of Parks and Recreation subject to ratification by the City
Manager and the provisions of Vol. I, Article 3-10 as it now exists or may be
hereafter amended.



(Prior Code, § 3-13-2)



§ 3-13-3  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall:



   (A)   Administer and operate existing recreation and park areas,
facilities and programs and plan for the acquisition, development and
operation of proposed facilities and programs in accordance with policies set
by the Director, by lawful directives, by the Council and, when possible,
with the recommendations formulated by the Parks and Recreation Commission;



   (B)   Prepare an annual budget for presentation to the Council;



   (C)   Inform the general public of the services and facilities being
provided by the Department of Parks and Recreation; address professional
civic and lay groups on recreational subjects; solicit suggestions from the
general public on increasing the effectiveness of the recreation programs;
cooperate with governmental and voluntary organizations and agencies in the
solving of recreation problems; provide, upon request, assistance of a
technical nature to community agencies and organizations on problems related
to recreation and park facilities and programs;



   (D)   Assist community organizations in the promotion of recreation
services; conduct studies of local conditions and needs for recreation
services; assist with the recruitment and training of professional recreation
personnel and volunteer leaders;



   (E)   Upon request, advise the Council, the Parks and Recreation
Commission and community organizations concerning the expenditure of public
funds for recreation and parks; acquisition, design and development of
recreation facilities and areas; and shall maintain effective and cooperative
relations with all city officials, state and federal agencies and with local,
state and national voluntary recreation organizations;



   (F)   With the approval of the Mayor and Council, post such rules
and regulations as deemed necessary for the conduct of persons in the parks
and other recreational facilities under his or her jurisdiction; and



   (G)   Supervise, process and approve all requests for placement of
banners at designated public property locations currently and as established
in the future, in accordance with Vol. I, § 3-13-5.



(Prior Code, § 3-13-3)



§ 3-13-4  ASSIGNMENT AND CUSTODY OF PHYSICAL PROPERTIES.



   All parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities and open space
properties of the city shall be and are hereby assigned to the Department of
Parks and Recreation. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be the
custodian of all tools, equipment and other personal property assigned to the
department of community services.



(Prior Code, § 3-13-4)



§ 3-13-5  BANNER PLACEMENT AND SUPERVISION.



   (A)   Any person, partnership, association, company or corporation
may request the placement of banner(s) on designated locations on city-owned
property by filing with the Director of the Parks and Recreation Department
or designee thereof (hereinafter "director") an installation fee as
established in Vol. I, Article 4-1 Parks and Recreation Fee Schedule, and a
completed application provided by the parks and recreation department stating
the following: name of applicant, address, phone number, sponsoring
organization, contact person, purpose of banner, complete description of
activity being promoted and description of the message, artwork and logos to
be displayed.



   (B)   Permission to display a banner is subject to a "first-come,
first-serve" basis, provided that the following is satisfied: the banner
promotes an event or service available for or open to the general public
which is of community-wide interest in the city; and the request for the
display of the banner has been initiated at least 30 consecutive calendar
days before the desired date of placement.



   (C)   All banners may be displayed for a maximum of 14 consecutive
calendar days once a year. All banners shall be made and supplied by
applicant or its agent and shall be made of flame retardant heavy canvas
(12-ounce minimum), 18-ounce vinyl or equivalent in strength and durability
according to industry standards. All banners must have printing on both
sides, with perimeter grommets spaced no further than 2 feet apart, with a
minimum of eight 6-inch wind relief holes or baffles, and can be no larger
than 3 feet tall and 30 feet long.



   (D)   The Director shall supervise city personnel in actual removal
and placement of banners at initial placement and at other times for
maintenance and replacement as requested by applicant. However, applicant
shall have the responsibility for informing the Director of the need for such
replacement and maintenance based on a visual inspection. Applicant must
deliver a new banner to the director in situations in which replacement is
needed. If the Director observes at any time after the banner has been
displayed that it is damaged, insecurely fastened or obstructs the view of
any motorists or pedestrians, the Director may cause such banner to be
removed without first notifying the applicant. In such case, the Director
shall notify the applicant that the banner was removed and allow the
applicant 48 hours to provide the Parks and Recreation Department with a new
banner to be displayed. Any display interruption due to removal of the banner
by the Director caused by any of the 3 reasons set forth above will not toll
the time limitations referenced in division (C) above.



   (E)   Corporate and/or commercial sponsors and their logos may be
listed on such banners, but the name and logo of the sponsor shall not exceed
1/3 the height and length of the name of the event, as printed on the banner.
Banners cannot be used by political candidates or political committees for
campaign purposes.



   (F)   Permission to display banners may be revoked by the Director
if applicant fails to follow any of the above-noted requirements. Once the
14-day display period has expired, city personnel shall remove the banner(s)
and shall store the banner(s) for 14 additional days, and shall thereafter
discard such banner(s) if directed to do so in writing by applicant or if
applicant fails to claim the banner(s) at the end of the storage period.



   (G)   Applicant agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the city, its
officers, agents and employees for any and all suits relating to any injury
or accident or property damage caused by the banners.



   (H)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director must file
a written appeal with the City Manager, or designee thereof within 5 working
days of the decision. The City Manager shall schedule a hearing and hold the
hearing within 5 working days upon receiving the notification. The City
Manager shall inform the appellant in writing of the decision to overrule,
modify or sustain the Director's action within 3 working days after
conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the City Manager shall be final
and binding subject only to the civil appeal remedies under A.R.S. §§
12-981 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 3-13-5)



ARTICLE 3-14:  PROPERTY DISPOSITION



Section



   3-14-1   Property disposition



§ 3-14-1  PROPERTY DISPOSITION.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.  Those regulations which the city creates
relating to weapons disposition.



   HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE.  Some special or important past.



   LICENSED DEALERS.  Those persons, firms, or other entities which hold
current and valid governmental authorization to trade,  sell or barter
weapons.



   PRESERVATION ENTITY.  Any governmental or private agency, association,
or organization that displays to the public for a fee or for free, weapons in
their original condition or those that have been restored.



   (B)   General applications. All seized or appropriated weapons in
the possession of the Apache Junction Police Department shall be generally
handled as follows:



      (1)   Destroyed or disposed of in a manner the Chief of Police
believes is commercially viable and appropriate under the following
circumstances:



         (a)   Firearms that have been illegally modified or are
specifically illegal to possess under Arizona or federal law.



         (b)   Firearms that were used in the commission of a
crime, or that were used in the commission of a suicide, following the
conclusion of the investigation/prosecution and with appropriate release from
the prosecutorial agency involved. Such discretion noted above includes
return of such weapons to their lawful owners as determined by the Chief of
Police in consultation with the City Attorney.



         (c)   Firearms whose serial numbers have been altered or
defaced, except for handguns which were manufactured before 1938 and long
rifles manufactured before 1968. In such cases,  the Chief of Police
shall:  1) if they can be obtained, notify ATF; and 2) dispose of such
weapons through an auction after having such firearms examined and valued by
an expert as identified in division (C)(4) of this section. Such value shall
be the opening bid price at any auction.



      (2)   Shall be subject to test firing if in the opinion of the
Criminal Investigation Division Commander, such test firing is viable, with
such results then being entered into the National Integrated Ballistic
Information Network.



   (C)   Alternative dispositions. Weapons that are not destroyed
pursuant to division (B) of this section  may be disposed by one of the
following methods:



      (1)   Returned to the lawful owner, if he or she is not a
prohibited possessor as defined under A.R.S. § 13-3101 or otherwise has not
been prohibited from possessing such weapon(s) pursuant to a plea agreement
or court order.



      (2)   Converted to use by members of the City of Apache
Junction Police Department in performance of their duties, as determined by
the Chief of Police.



      (3)   Transferred to other law enforcement agencies for
official law enforcement purposes, as determined by the Chief of Police.



      (4)   Transferred or sold to appropriate museums or other
preservation entities if such weapons have historical significance, as
determined by an expert in antiquities and rare items employed by the State
of Arizona or a private museum.



      (5)   Offered at auction to licensed weapon dealers.
Administrative procedures for the auction of firearms shall be followed in
accordance with Arizona law.



   (D)   Fund allocation. Any funds collected as a  result of
City-initiated weapon auctions shall be placed in the City of Apache Junction
General Fund  and be specifically allocated to the Police Department budget.



(Ord. 1285, passed 2-20-2007; Am. Ord. 1374, passed 4-19-2011)



CHAPTER 4: FEES



      Article




         4-1.   PARKS AND RECREATION FEE SCHEDULE





         4-2.   RETURNED PAYMENT FEES





         4-3.   ANIMAL CONTROL FEE SCHEDULE





         4-4.   PLANNING, ZONING REVIEW AND SUBDIVISION FEES





         4-5.   [RESERVED]





         4-6.   PUBLIC WORKS FEE SCHEDULE





         4-7.   PUBLIC SAFETY FEE SCHEDULE





         4-8.   MUNICIPAL COURT FEE SCHEDULE




ARTICLE 4-1:  PARKS AND RECREATION FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   4-1-1   Facility and equipment rental fees



   4-1-2   Deposits



   4-1-3   Program and activity fees



   4-1-4   Refunds



   4-1-5   Promotional discounts



   4-1-6   Priority use



   4-1-7   Priority reservations and registrations



§ 4-1-1  FACILITY AND EQUIPMENT RENTAL FEES.



 


Description

 

User fee





1.   Meeting and Classroom Space


Multi-purpose room (“MGC”)
 
$60.00 per hour


Large classroom/meeting room
 
$30.00 per hour


Small classroom/meeting room
 
$20.00 per hour


2.   Sports Fields


Field preparation softball/ baseball
 
$30.00 per field


Field preparation - soccer/ football
 
$60.00 per field


Daytime sports field usage
 
$10.00 per hour


Evening sports field usage
 
$17.00 per hour


3.   Group Use (Designated Areas Only)


Small Ramada (max. 30 people; 2 hr. min.)
 
$10.00 per hour


Large Ramada (max. 50 people; 2 hr. min.)
 
$15.00 per hour


Multi-use area
 
$8.00 per hour


4.   Rodeo Park


Arena preparation
 
$50.00 per prep


Daytime arena usage
 
$8.00 per hour


Evening arena usage (including lights)
 
$17.00 per hour


Multi-use area
 
$8.00 per hour


Concession stand
 
$8.00 per hour


5.   Pool Entry/Passes


Daily fees (17 and under)
 
$1.50


Daily fees (18 and over)
 
$2.50


Season pass (17 and under)
 
$50.00


Season pass (18 and over)
 
$70.00


Family season pass (up to 6 members)
 
$110.00


Additional members on family pass
 
$20.00


6.   Swimming Pool


Pool rental - shared use, less than 100 people (2 hour minimum; includes
lifeguard)
 
$100.00 per hour


Pool rental - shared use, 100 to 149 people (2 hour minimum; includes
lifeguard)
 
$150.00 per hour


Pool rental - exclusive use, 150 or more people (2 hour minimum; includes
lifeguard)
 
$200.00 per hour


Pool rental - competition pool only (2 hour minimum; includes lifeguard)
 
$100.00 per hour


7.   Multi-Generational Center Entry/ Memberships


Daily fees (17 and under)
 
$3.00


Daily fees (18 and older)
 
$5.00


Monthly pass (17 and under)
 
$16.00


Monthly pass (18 and older)
 
$27.00


Monthly pass (family up to 6 members)
 
$60.00


Each additional member
 
$10.00


Six month pass (17 and under)
 
$82.00


Six month pass (18 and older)
 
$132.00


Six month pass (family up to 6 members)
 
$297.00


Each additional member
 
$25.00


Annual pass (17 and under)
 
$132.00


Annual pass (18 and older)
 
$198.00


Annual pass (family up to 6 members)
 
$528.00


Each additional member
 
$40.00


10-day punch pass
 
$35.00


8.   Sport Courts


Daytime court usage
 
$2.50 per hour


Evening court usage (includes lights)
 
$5.00 per hour


Gymnasium
 
$75.00 per hour


9.   Veteran’s Memorial Park


Veteran’s Memorial Park
 
$15.00 per hour


10.   Special Services/Equipment


Barricades
 
$3.00 each


Bleachers - 3 row (includes delivery)
 
$50.00 per day


Bleachers - 5 row (includes delivery)
 
$65.00 per day


Field marker
 
$6.00 per bag


Folding chairs
 
$1.00 each


Folding tables
 
$6.00 each


Malt beverage permit - single day fee
 
$10.00 per day


Malt beverage permit - multiple day fee
 
$25.00 per event


Personnel services (per employee)
 
$25.00 per hour


Rodeo arena PA system
 
$30.00 per day


Single sport package
 
$6.00 per day


Tractor/loader (includes operator)
 
$55.00 per hour


Traffic cones
 
$1.00 each


Used softballs
 
$1.00 each


Water truck (includes operator)
 
$55.00 per hour


Electronic messaging board
 
$50.00/10 days


Mobile stage *
 
$500.00 per day


Mobile stage setup/close down fee
 
$250.00 per event


Mobile stage refundable security/cleaning deposit
 
$500.00 per event


* Stage must stay inside city limits, no reduced fees, additional staff
assessed at personnel fee rate ($25.00 per hour), requires insurance with
city as additional insured.




 



(Ord. 1415, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 4-1-2  DEPOSITS.



   (A)   The Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee
may require deposits or clean-up fees for equipment/facility rentals deemed
necessary equal to or up to the amount of the rental fee.



(Ord. 1415, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 4-1-3  PROGRAM AND ACTIVITY FEES.



 


Description

 

User Fee





1.   Adult Sports


Leagues (teams)
 
$50.00 - 500.00


Instruction
 
$0.00 - 100.00


2.   Aquatics


Swim instruction
 
$10.00 - 50.00


Swim team
 
$30.00 - 75.00


3.   Dance/Fitness/Exercise


per session
 
$0.00 - 75.00


4.   Open Gym Programs


per session
 
$3.00 - 300.00


5.   Special Events


Per event
 
$0.00 - 10.00


6.   Special Interest Classes


per session
 
$0.00 - 200.00


7.   Youth Sports


Leagues
 
$20.00 - 75.00


Instruction
 
$0.00 - 150.00




 



(Ord. 1415, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 4-1-4  REFUNDS.



   All refunds shall be made in full, except for a 10% administrative
processing fee, with a $5 minimum.



(Ord. 1415, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 4-1-5  PROMOTIONAL DISCOUNTS.



   (A)   Intent. The Parks and Recreation Director or his or her
designee may from time to time establish promotional discounts to encourage
and increase participation in programs and memberships, especially for off
season events.



   (B)   Limitation. With the exception of a limited quantity of free
day passes to the multi-generational center or aquatic center, no promotion
may exceed 50% off the regular price of admission.



(Ord. 1415, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 4-1-6  PRIORITY USE.



   (A)   No fee category. The Parks and Recreation Department has
priority use of all facilities and recreational areas. When facilities are
not in use for Parks and Recreation sponsored activities, they shall be
available on a permit/no fee basis to the following:



      (1)   All other city departments.



      (2)   City council approved special events (considered
annually during budget process).



      (3)   Partner agencies with formal agreements.



   (B)   Partial fee category. Groups that meet the following Local
Youth Serving Agency criteria will have priority use with those above, on a
reduced fee basis (25% of regular public rates):



      (1)   Youth Serving Agency is a 501(c)(3) non-profit
organization.



      (2)   Youth Serving Agency is governed by local, unpaid
volunteer board and unpaid staff.



      (3)   Participant members are made up of a majority of City of
Apache Junction residents.



      (4)   Youth Serving Agency participation is open to the public
and not “by invitation only” or limited by any means other than the
natural makeup of the league (i.e. no cuts and must have minimum
participation/play rules in place).



   (C)   Full fee category. When facilities are not in use by the Parks
and Recreation Department, or the groups listed above, they will be made
available to other Apache Junction residents, groups or organizations on a
permit/fee basis. Groups or organizations from outside the Apache Junction
area are discouraged from using facilities, unless the activity is open to
Apache Junction residents, promotes the welfare of the community, and a
portion of the proceeds benefit a local non-profit entity.



(Ord. 1415, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 4-1-7  PRIORITY RESERVATIONS AND REGISTRATIONS.



   The Parks and Recreation Director or his or her designee may establish
a priority registration or priority reservation period for Apache Junction
residents. Programs and facilities with the highest participation and/or use
shall be considered for priority registration or priority reservation for
Apache Junction residents.



(Ord. 1415, passed 6-16-2015)



ARTICLE 4-2:  RETURNED PAYMENT FEES



Section



   4-2-1   Returned payment fees



§ 4-2-1  RETURNED PAYMENT FEES.



   (A)   Whenever the city is paid any fees authorized or required by
this code, or for any services or commodities in the form of a check, debit
card, credit card, automated clearing house ("ACH") transaction or other
acceptable form of electronic payment and the financial institution refuses
payment of the amount, a fee as outlined in A.R.S. § 44-6852 plus any
directly related costs, including but not limited to postage and special
postal handling charges, shall be charged to the maker for each check, debit
card, credit card, ACH or other acceptable form of electronic payment that is
refused.



   (B)   Any debt to the city for which a check, debit card, credit
card, ACH or other form of electronic payment has been tendered and returned
by any financial institution, shall be satisfied by payment in full of the
amount, including the returned payment fee, as outlined in A.R.S. § 44-6852,
plus any directly related costs including but not limited to postage and
special postal handling charges. Payments shall only be accepted in the form
of cash,  cashier's check or money order.



   (C)   The city may use any legal means to collect amounts owed to it
including returned payment fees. The city's legal remedies shall include, but
are not limited to, the filing of a legal action in a court of competent
jurisdiction. Should a legal action be filed, recovery may include the city's
reasonable attorney's fees and court costs.



   (D)   The city may waive any additional fee pursuant to this section
in a situation in which the payment was dishonored for reasons beyond the
maker's control.



(Ord. 1395, passed 11-19-2013)



ARTICLE 4-3:  ANIMAL CONTROL FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   4-3-1   Animal control fee schedule



§ 4-3-1  ANIMAL CONTROL FEE SCHEDULE.



 

 
Fee




License fees (dogs)


   Sterilized
 
$10 per dog


($5 per dog for senior citizens at least 62 years of age or older and
physically disabled persons with proof of disability, such as but not limited
to a disabled parking decal or medical card in the name of the disabled
person)


   Non-sterilized
 
$18 per dog


License fees (pot-bellied pigs)


   Sterilized
 
$7 per pig


   Non-sterilized
 
$12 per pig


Impound fee for dogs at-large
 
$40 per animal, per event


$20 additional per each subsequent impound


Microchipping fees
 
$25 per at-large dog


$12 per adopted cat


Board fee (feeding, cleaning and general care)
 
$10 per animal, per day


Dog kennel permit fees
 
 


   Commercial dog kennel permit
 
$80 annually (12-month period)


   Personal dog kennel permits
 
Class 1: $40 annually (12-month period, plus individual license fees)


Class 2: $60 annually (12- month period, plus individual license fees)


Class 3: $80 annually (12- month period, plus individual license fees)


   Late fee
 
$15 (delinquent 30 calendar days from date of expiration)


Quarantine fee (biting dogs)
 
$40 per animal, per event (plus $10 per day per animal board fee plus
applicable license and vaccination fees)


Tag replacement
 
$5 per replacement


Pick up live dogs or pot-bellied pigs for surrender
 
$10 per event, per animal (in-city service only)


Euthanasia fee


   Dogs


      Over 40 pounds without disposal
 
$55 per animal


      Over 40 pounds with disposal
 
$65 per animal


      Under 40 pounds without disposal
 
$45 per animal


      Under 40 pounds with disposal
 
$55 per animal


   Cats


      Any weight without disposal
 
$35 per animal


      Any weight with disposal
 
$40 per animal


Vaccinations (rabies only)


   Dogs (3 months and older)
 
$15 per animal


   Puppies (less than 3 months)
 
$15 per animal


   Cats (any age)
 
$15 per animal


Animal traps (for city residents only)
 
$15 refundable deposit plus $10 for each 10-day use period;


$3 per day late return fee


Adoption fees (includes sterilization)*


   Dogs
 
$90 per animal


   Cats (any age)
 
$70 per animal


Adoption fee for sterilized animals*


   Dogs
 
$40 per animal


   Cats
 
$30 per animal


   Others
 
$40 per animal**


*   The Director or his or her designee may waive adoption fees during
official adoption events in order to encourage adoptions to reduce high
inventories of animals.

**   The Director or his or her designee may also request payment for
reasonable expenses relating to livestock adoptions.




 



(Ord. 1311, passed 4-15-2008; Am. Ord. 1416, passed 6-16-2015)



ARTICLE 4-4:  PLANNING, ZONING REVIEW AND SUBDIVISION FEES



Section



   4-4-1   Building permit fees



   4-4-2   Building and other building official-related fees



   4-4-3   Plan review; pool/spas/hot tubs; wrecking buildings;
manufactured home and accessory building permit fees



   4-4-4   Building valuations; Group 2006 International Building Code;
types of construction; cost per square foot



   4-4-5   Electrical permit fees and related electrical permit fees



   4-4-6   Mechanical permit fees



   4-4-7   Plumbing permit fees



   4-4-8   Grading plan reviews



   4-4-9   Grading permit fees



   4-4-10   Planning and zoning fees



   4-4-11   Development services engineering fees



   4-4-12   Special sign permit fees



§ 4-4-1  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



 


Total Valuation

 

Fee





$1 to $500
 
$29.50


$501 to $2,000
 
$29.50 for the first $500.00 plus $3.83 for each additional $100.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00


$2,001 to $25,000
 
$87.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $17.58 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00


$25,001 to $50,000
 
$490.40 for the first $25,000.00 plus $12.65 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00


$50,001 to $100,000
 
$808.62 for the first $50,000.00 plus $8.79 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00


$100,001 to $500,000
 
$1,247 for the first $100,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00


$500,001 to $1,000,000
 
$4,060 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.96 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00


$1,000,001 and up
 
$7,315.00 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $4.11 for each $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 10-3-2006)



§ 4-4-2  BUILDING AND OTHER BUILDING OFFICIAL-RELATED FEES.



   Applies to building, structural, electrical, mechanical and plumbing.



 



1.    Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge: 4
hours)
 
$60 per hour


2.    Re-inspection fees
 
$60 per hour


3.    Inspections or services for which no fee is specifically indicated
(min. charge-2 hours)
 
$60 per hour


4.    Additional review required by changes, additions or lost plans or
plan review comment sheets (minimum charge-1 hour) on in house reviews
 
$60 per hour


5.    For use of outside consultants for inspections
 
Actual costs


6.    Site plan review (or revision) for residential standard plan
 
$75 per hour


7.    Review of deferred submittals (Submitted after initial plan review)
 
$175 per submittal


8.    Request for certificate of occupancy for change of use group
 
$50


9.    Replication of plans (when legally authorized)
 
Actual replication costs plus $50


10.    Certificate of completion for commercial shell buildings
 
$100


11.    Certificate of occupancy for commercial buildings
 
$100


12.    Certificate of occupancy for commercial tenant improvement
 
$50


13.    "Foundation only" permit
 
Additional 25% of plan review fee


14.    Sign permit
 
Based on valuation


*Or the total hourly cost to the city, whichever is the greatest. This cost
shall include supervision overhead, hourly wages and fringe benefits of the
employees involved.


**Actual costs include consultant's fees and city administration and overhead
costs at a cost of $50 per hour with a minimum charge of 1 hour or normal
plan review fees, whichever is greater.




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 4-4-3  PLAN REVIEW; POOL/SPAS/HOT TUBS; WRECKING BUILDINGS; MANUFACTURED
HOME AND ACCESSORY BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Plan review fees. Plan review fee shall be 65% of the permit
fees as shown in building valuation data. In no case shall plan review fee be
less than $25.



   (B)   Permit fee schedule. Unless otherwise indicated, the following
fees will be applicable to residential and non-residential projects:



 



Swimming pools; in-ground
 
$250


Spas/hot tubs
 
When standard pool/spa/hot tub plans are not on file with the Building
Official, a $100 plan review fee will also be charged


Wrecking buildings


Residential accessory building or garage
 
$25


Single-family residence
 
$100


Structures other than residential single-family
 
$100


Manufactured home


Permit fee
 
$200


Plan review fee
 
$50


Factory built building


Residential
 
$400


Commercial
 
$2.00 per lineal foot per story


Temporary sales trailer


Building permit
 
$200


Plan review
 
$50


Generators for temporary trailers(each)
 
$25


Note: These fees do not include electrical or development fees




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 10-3-2006)



§ 4-4-4  BUILDING VALUATIONS; GROUP 2006 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE; TYPES
OF CONSTRUCTION; COST PER SQUARE FOOT.



 

Occupancy and Type
 
Cost per Square Foot; Average




1.    Apartment house


Type I or II*
 
$88.70


(Good)
 
$109.20


Type V-Masonry (or Type III)
 
$72.40


Type V-Wood Frame
 
$63.80


(Good)
 
$82.00


Type I-Basement
 
-


Garage
 
$37.40


2.    Auditoriums


Type I
 
$104.80


Type II-A
 
$75.90


Type II-B
 
$71.80


Type III-B
 
$79.80


Type V-A
 
$76.30


Type V-V
 
$71.20


3.    Banks


Type I*
 
$148.10


Type II-A
 
$109.10


Type II-B
 
$105.60


Type III-A
 
$120.40


Type III-B
 
$116.10


Type V-A
 
$109.10


Type V-B
 
$104.50


4.    Bowling alleys


Type II-A
 
$51.00


Type II-B
 
$47.60


Type III-A
 
$55.50


Type III-B
 
$51.90


Type V-A
 
$37.40


5.    Churches


Type I
 
$99.20


Type II-A
 
$74.50


Type II-B
 
$70.80


Type III-A
 
$81.00


Type III-B
 
$77.40


Type V-A
 
$75.70


Type  V-B
 
$71.20


6.    Convalescent homes


Type I or II
 
$139.20


Type II-A
 
$96.60


Type III-A
 
$99.00


Type V-A
 
$93.30


7.    Dwelling


Type V-masonry
 
$75.70


(Good)
 
$96.90


Type V-wood frame
 
$67.30


(Good)
 
$92.40


Basements


Semi-finished
 
$20.10


(Good)
 
$23.20


Unfinished
 
$14.60


(Good)
 
$17.70


8.    Fire stations


Type I*
 
$114.40


Type II-A
 
$75.30


Type II-B
 
$71.00


Type III-A
 
$82.40


Type III-B
 
$78.90


Type V-A
 
$77.30


Type V-B
 
$73.30


9.    Homes for the elderly


Type I
 
$103.70


Type II-A
 
$84.20


Type II-B
 
$80.60


Type III-A
 
$87.70


Type III-B
 
$84.10


Type V-A
 
$84.70


Type V-B
 
$81.80


10.    Hospitals


Type I*
 
$163.20


Type III-A
 
$135.10


Type V-A
 
$128.90


11.    Hotels and motels


Type I*
 
$101.00


Type III-A
 
$87.50


Type III-B
 
$83.40


Type V-A
 
$76.20


Type V-B
 
$74.70


12.    Industrial plants


Type I
 
$56.90


Type II-A
 
$39.60


Type II-B
 
$36.40


Type III-A
 
$43.60


Type III-B
 
$41.10


Tilt-up
 
$30.00


Type V-A
 
$41.10


Type V-B
 
$37.60


13.    Jails


Type I
 
$159.10


Type III-A
 
$145.50


Type V-A
 
$109.10


14.    Libraries


Type I
 
$116.40


Type II-A
 
$85.20


Type II-B
 
$81.00


Type III-A
 
$90.00


Type III-B
 
$85.50


Type V-A
 
$84.50


Type V-B
 
$81.00


15.   Medical offices


Type I*
 
$119.50


Type II-A
 
$92.20


Type II-B
 
$87.60


Type III-A
 
$100.00


Type III-A
 
$93.10


Type V-A
 
$90.20


Type V-B
 
$87.00


16.   Offices**


Type I*
 
$106.80


Type II-A
 
$71.50


Type II-B
 
$68.10


Type III-B
 
$77.20


Type III-A
 
$73.80


Type V-A
 
$72.30


Type V-B
 
$68.10


17.   Private garages


Wood frame
 
$24.30


Masonry
 
$27.40


Open carports
 
$16.60


18.   Public buildings


Type I*
 
$123.40


Type II-A
 
$100.00


Type II-B
 
$95.60


Type III-A
 
$103.80


Type III-B
 
$100.20


Type V-A
 
$95.00


Type V-B
 
$91.60


19.   Public garages


Type I*
 
$48.90


Type I or II* (open parking)
 
$36.70


Type II-B
 
$28.00


Type III-A
 
$37.00


Type III-B
 
$32.90


Type V-A
 
$33.70


20.   Restaurants


Type III-A
 
$97.40


Type III-B
 
$94.10


Type V-A
 
$89.20


Type V-B
 
$85.70


21.   Schools


Type I
 
$111.20


Type II-A or II-B
 
$75.90


Type III-A
 
$81.20


Type III-B
 
$78.10


Type V-A
 
$76.10


Type V-B
 
$72.60


22.   Service stations


Type II-B
 
$67.20


Type III-A
 
$70.10


Type V-A
 
$59.70


Canopies
 
$28.00


23.   Stores


Type 1
 
$82.40


Type II-A
 
$50.40


Type II-B
 
$49.30


Type III-A
 
$61.30


Type III-B
 
$57.50


Type V-A
 
$51.60


Type V-B
 
$47.70


24.   Theaters


Type I
 
$109.80


Type III or VA
 
$80.00


Type II or VB
 
$76.20


Type III-A
 
$75.30


Type III-B
 
$71.20


25.   Warehouses


Type I
 
$49.40


Type II or VA
 
$29.30


Type II or VB
 
$27.50


Type III-A
 
$33.20


Type III-B
 
$31.60


Equipment


Air conditioning:


Commercial
 
$4.20


Residential
 
$3.50


Sprinkler systems
 
$2.60




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 4-4-5  ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES AND RELATED ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES.



 



Basic permit
 
$37.60


Supplemental permit
 
-


Swimming pools
 
$79.20


Temporary power pole/pedestal
 
$37.60


Temporary lighting/receptacle outlets for construction sites, decorative
light, Christmas tree sales lots, firework stands and the like:


Receptacle, switch, lighting:
 
$63.80


First 20, each
 
$1.76


Additional fixtures, each
 
-


Pole/platform mounted fixtures
 
$37.60


Theatrical type lighting fixtures
 
$1.60


Residential appliances or outlets such as wall mounted electric ovens,
garbage disposals, dishwashers and the like
 
$7.60


Signs-supplied/1 branch circuit
 
$1.60


Addn. branch circuit, each
 
$19.50


Services:


600v or less/not over 200 amp
 
$48.00


600v or less/over 200 amp to 1,000 amp, each
 
$99.00


Over 600v or over 1,000 amps
 
$198.00


Electrical conduits, conductors which no fee is herein set forth-not
applicable when a fee is paid for 1 or more services, outlets, fixtures,
appliances and the like


Motor < 1 hp
 
$7.60


<=10 hp
 
$19.50


<=50 hp
 
$39.00


<=100 hp
 
$79.00


Motor > 100 hp
 
$118.00


Misc
 
-


Other inspection fees:


Reinspection fees (per hour)
 
$60.00


Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
approved plan (per hour)
 
$60.00


Hourly fees; 1/2-hour minimum
 
$60.00




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 4-4-6  MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES.



 



Basic permit
 
$37.60


Inst/relocation each forced air/gravity type
 
$29.12


Same as above/over 100,000 Btu/h
 
-


Floor furnace inc. vents
 
$23.68


Suspended heater, recessed wall heater or floor
 
-


Each appliance vent installed and not included in
 
$11.60


Heating appliance, refrigeration unit, cooling
 
$23.68


Boiler compressor to and including 3
 
-


Boiler compressor over 3-15 horsepower over
 
-


Each evaporative cooler
 
$17.00


Each ventilation system not a portion of any
 
$17.00


Each hood
 
$17.00


Each appliance not previously classed
 
$17.00


Generator
 
$19.00


Incinerator
 
$22.72


Wood stove
 
$17.00


Fireplace
 
$17.00




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 4-4-7  PLUMBING PERMIT FEES.



 



Basic permit
 
$32.00


Supplemental permit:


Each plumbing fixture on 1 trap
 
$11.00


Each building sewer
 
$56.00


Each water heater vent
 
$11.00


Each gas piping system 1 to 5 outlets
 
$8.00


Each installation, alteration, repair or water piping, water treatment
equipment.
 
$11.00


Each repair or alteration of drainage, vent piping, each fixture
 
$11.00


Each lawn sprinkler system on any 1 meter
 
$11.00


Atmospheric type vacuum breakers not included in previous items:


1 to 5
 
-


Over 5
 
-


Each backflow device other than atmospheric type vacuum breakers:
 
$11.00


Backflow devices >2
 
$8.00


Grease traps
 
$56.00


Waste interceptors
 
$64.00


Solar panel system
 
$20.00


Hot tub system
 
$36.00


Septic abandonment
 
$48.00




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 4-4-8  GRADING PLAN REVIEWS.



 



101 to 1,000 cubic yards (77.2 to 764.6 m3)
 
$37.00


1,001 to 10,000 cubic yards (765.3 to 7645.5 m3)
 
$49.25


10,001 to 100,000 cubic yards (7646.3 to 76,455 m3)
 
$49.25 for the first 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3), plus $24.50 for each
additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.


100,001 to 200,000 cubic yards (76,456 to 152,911 m3)
 
$269.75 for the first 100,000 cubic yards (76,455 m3), plus $13.25 for each
additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.


200,001 cubic yards (152,912 m3) or more
 
$402.25 for the first 200,000 cubic yards (152,911 m3), plus $7.25 for each
additional 10,000 cubic yards (7545.5 m3) or fraction thereof.


Other fees:


Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plans
or to plans for which an initial review has been completed
 
$50.50*


*Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest.
This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and
fringe benefits of the employees involved.




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 4-4-9  GRADING PERMIT FEES.



   The fee for a grading permit authorizing additional work to that under
a valid permit shall be the difference between the fee paid for the original
permit and the fee shown for the entire project.



 



101 to 1,000 cubic yards (77.2 to 764.6 m3)
 
$37.00 for the first 100 cubic yards (76.5 m3) plus $17.50 for each
additional 100 cubic yards (76.5 m3) or fraction thereof.


1,001 to 10,000 cubic yards (765.3 to 7645.5 m3)
 
$194.50 for the first 1,000 cubic yards (764.6 m3), plus $14.50 for each
additional 1,000 cubic yards (764.6 m3) or fraction thereof.


10,001 to 100,000 cubic yards (7646.3 to 76,455 m3)
 
$325.00 for the first 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3), plus $66.00 for each
additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.


100,001 cubic yards (76,456 m3) or more
 
$919.00 for the first 100,000 cubic yards (76,455 m3), plus $36.50 for each
additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.


Other inspections and fees:


1.    Inspection outside of normal business hours, per hour (minimum
charge: 2 hours)
 
$60.00**


2.    Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 305.8 per
inspection
 
$60.00**


3.    Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated, per hour
(minimum charge: 1/2-hour)
 
$60.00**


**Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greatest. This
cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment hourly wages and fringe
benefits of the employees involved.




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 4-4-10  PLANNING AND ZONING FEES.



 


Description

 

Fee





Conditional Use Permits (CUPs)


CUP(residential use/extension/amendment)
 
$700


CUP  (non-residential use/extension/amendment  (sign package included if
submitted with CUP))
 
$800


Sign package by CUP
 
$800


Landscape ordinance appeal by CUP
 
$600


Zoning/Rezoning


Rezoning
 
$825 + $50/acre to $5,500 maximum


Planned development (commercial/residential)
 
$925 + $50/acre to $5,500 maximum


Major amendment to planned development
 
$925 + $50/acre to $5,500 maximum


Minor amendment to planned development
 
$250


Zoning ordinance text amendment
 
$1,300


Zoning verification letter
 
$250


Written interpretation of Zoning Administrator
 
$150


Review & letter of non-conforming
 
$250


Appeals


Residential variance
 
$500


Non-residential variance
 
$750


Appeal of Zoning Administrator’s decision (residential)
 
$500


Appeal of Zoning Administrator’s decision (non-residential)
 
$750


Appeal of Development Fee Administrator
 
$350


Development Agreements


Development agreement (new)
 
$3,075


Development agreement (amendment that is developer initiated)
 
$1,675


Permits


Administrative use permit
 
425


Cargo container/portable storage permit
 
$100


Special density permit/caretaker unit permit
 
$100


Special density permit annual renewal
 
$50


Temporary use permit
 
$250


Subdivisions


Preliminary plat
 
$1,575 + $21/lot to $2,500 maximum


Preliminary plat amendment
 
1,575 + $21/lot to $5,500 maximum


Preliminary plat extension
 
$500


Final plat
 
$1,575 + $21/lot to $2,500 maximum


Final plat amendment/replat
 
$1,575 + $21/lot to $2,500 maximum


Plat recordation fee & document handling
 
$100 plus actual recording fee


Minor land division/land split
 
$250


General Plan Amendment


Text amendment
 
$1,300


Major map amendment
 
$1,550 + $10/acre to $5,500 maximum


Minor map amendment
 
Included in rezoning


Miscellaneous Fees


Landscape plan review
 
$150


All continuances
 
$250


Required public hearing notice advertising
 
$500


Administrative relief (residential)
 
$150


Administrative relief (commercial)
 
$250


Copies-11 x 17
 
$0.50/sheet for 11x17


Copies - larger than 11x17
 
$0.19 linear foot


Copies - for a commercial purpose
 
$0.50/page for 8.5x11




 



(Ord. 1422, passed 4-5-2016)



§ 4-4-11  DEVELOPMENT SERVICES ENGINEERING FEES.



 



SWPPP Plans
 
$250, up to 3 reviews, $100 for each additional review


Improvement plan, cover sheet, G&D plan, utility-plan detail sheet and street
improvements
 
$400, up to 3 reviews,$150 for each additional review


Engineering cost estimate
 
$100, up to 3 reviews, $35 for each additional review


Legal descriptions
 
$100, up to 3 reviews, $35 for each additional review


Drainage report
 
$250, up to 3 reviews, $35 for each additional review


Non-refundable application fee
 
$25


Paving
 
$0.45/sy


Manholes
 
$40 each


Sidewalk
 
$0.10/sf


Sidewalk ramps
 
$25 each


Driveway
 
$0.25/sf


Valley gutter
 
$0.25/sf


Curbs
 
$0.20/1f


Scuppers
 
$40 each


Catch basin
 
$40 each


Fire hydrant
 
$25 each


Conduit, pipelines, culverts, cable < 4 inches dia.
 
$0.15/1f


Conduit, pipelines, culverts, cable > 4 inches dia.
 
$0.45/1f


Street light plan
 
$250, up to 3 reviews, $100 for each additional review


Traffic impact analysis report
 
$150, up to 3 reviews, $50 for each additional review


Traffic signal plans
 
$250, up to 3 reviews, $100 for each additional review


Pre-plat
 
$250, up to 3 reviews, $75 for each additional review


Final plat
 
$300, up to 3 reviews, $100 for each additional review


Geo-technical report
 
$200, up to 3 reviews, $75 for each additional review


Sewer analysis report
 
$200, up to 3 reviews, $75 for each additional review


Water analysis report
 
$200, up to 3 reviews, $75 for each additional review




 



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 4-4-12  SPECIAL SIGN PERMIT FEES.



   Annual special sign permit fees:



   (A)   Off-site development sign; 1 sign per application: $300; and



   (B)   Weekend directional sign:



      (1)   Up to 5 signs: $300;



      (2)   Six to 10 signs: $350; and



      (3)   Eleven to 15 signs: $400.



(Ord. 1274, passed 9-5-2006)



ARTICLE 4-5:  RESERVED




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 4-6:  PUBLIC WORKS FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   4-6-1   Public Works fee schedule



   4-6-2   Small wireless facilities rights-of-way fees and charges



§ 4-6-1  PUBLIC WORKS FEE SCHEDULE.



   Roadway abandonment and right-of-way easement extinguishment fees:



   (A)   Application and filing processing fee for abutting industrial,
commercial or multi-family property: $450 per application;



   (B)   Application and filing processing fee for abutting residential
property: $350 per application; and



   (C)   Abandonment fee for abutting residential property: $100 per
application.



   (D)   Applicant shall, before any permit is issued, provide the city
with a fee to offset expenses incurred in connection with processing and
inspecting work.



   (E)   Development’s plan review fees:



 

Design report,  drainage report, traffic impact analysis (first, second, 
and third review)
 
$200 per report


Design report,  drainage report, traffic impact analysis  (fourth review)
 
$75 per report


First review of improvement plans (off-site improvements only)
 
$200


Second review and third review of off-site improvements
 
No charge


Fourth review of improvement plans (off site improvements only)
 
$50 per sheet


Revision/changes after plan approval
 
$50 per change



 



   (F)   Engineering permit inspection fees:



 


Description

 

Unit Cost

 

Unit





Permit application fee
 
$50
 

EA



Curb, Curb & gutter
 
$0.20
 

LF



Driveway
 
$0.10
 

SF



Sidewalk
 
$0.10
 

SF



Sidewalk ramp
 
$25
 

EA



Valley gutter
 
$0.30
 

SF



Catch basin
 
$35
 

EA



Headwall
 
$35
 

EA



Manhole
 
$40
 

EA



Scupper
 
$25
 

EA



Dirt/concrete channel
 
$0.10
 

LF



Conduit, pipeline, culverts, cable < 4"
 
$0.40
 

LF



Conduit, pipeline, culverts, cable > 4"
 
$1
 

LF



Landscaping
 
$0.05
 

SF



Fire hydrants
 
$15
 

EA



Tap/sleeve/valves/meters
 
$3
 

EA



Special concrete structure
 
$40
 

EA



Pavement replacement
 
$0.35
 

SY



Mill and overlay (SY)
 
$0.25
 

SY



Overlay top course
 
$0.15
 

SY



Asphalt cuts on new streets within 2 yr:
 
 
 




   5 sq. yds. or less
 
$330
 

SY



   5 sq. yds. to 100 sq. yds.
 
$1,650+$18/SY over 5 SY
 




SY



   Larger than 100 sq. yds.
 
$3,360+$14/SY over 100 SY
 




SY



Asphalt cuts on new streets 2 yrs - 4 yrs:
 
 
 




   5 sq. yds. or less
 
$230
 

SY



   5 sq. yds. to 100 sq. yds.
 
$1,150.00+$13/SY over 5 SY
 




SY



   Larger than 100 sq. yds.
 
$2,385+$10/SY over 100 SY
 




SY



Asphalt cuts on new streets 4 yrs - 6 yrs:
 
 
 




   5 sq. yds. or less
 
$130
 

SY



   5 sq. yds. to 100 sq. yds.
 
$650+$8/SY over 5 SY
 

SY



   Larger than 100 sq. yds.
 
$1,410+$5/SY over 100 SY
 

SY



Asphalt cuts, pit backfill, patch on 6+yrs.
 
$1.50
 

SY



Survey monuments
 
$10
 

EA



Utility adjustments
 
$10
 

EA



Manhole adjustment
 
$50
 

EA



Street lights
 
$50
 

EA



Utility poles
 
$35
 

EA



Street signs
 
$15
 

EA



Trenching and boring (LF)
 
$0.30
 

LF



Boring only (LF)
 
$0.20
 

LF



Fire line with backflow
 
$40
 

EA



Overtime inspections:
 
 
 




   Weekdays (1 hr. min.)
 
$90
 

HR



   Weekends (4 hr. min.)
 
$90
 

HR



   Holidays (4 hr. min.)
 
$120
 

HR



Other:

(Special work not incl. in fee schedule)
 
TBD
 

LS





 



   (G)   Inspection for which no rate is specified will be determined
by the public works department. Inspections by the director of public works
for work performed on weekends, holidays and after normal working hours must
be requested in advance by the applicant or contractor. Authorization to work
must be mutually agreed upon by the director of public works and the
applicant and/or contractor prior to the commencement of work. Fees for
overtime inspections are as follows:



 


Description

 

Cost



Weekdays (before/after normal working hours)
 
$90 per hour, 1-hour minimum


Weekends (Friday, Saturday, & Sunday)
 
$90 per hour, 4-hour minimum


Holidays
 
$120 per hour, 4-hour minimum



 



   (H)   Requests for inspections or plan reviews beyond normal working
hours may be performed at the pleasure of the city as a courtesy to the
applicant and is not intended to be a mandated service. This extra work may
be performed by the city predicated on the availability of manpower and the
employee1s agreement to work, accordingly .providing their normal job
requirements and health are not negatively impacted.



(Ord. 1425, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 4-6-2  SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES RIGHTS-OF-WAY FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The following schedule of fees shall apply to a small wireless
facilities (“SWF”) placed in public rights-of-way (“ROW”):



 

ROW use fee
 
$50/year x number of SWFs


ROW use fee for monopoles and associated wireless facilities
 
Limited to not more than the direct and actual cost of managing the ROW as
determined by the public works department


Authority utility pole attachment
 
$50/year


SWF collocation
 
$100 per SWF up to five $50 per additional SWF



 



 

Batched applications up to 25 SWFs :


First five SWFs at $100
 
$500


Additional 20 sites at $50
 
$1,000


Total for batch of 25
 
$1,500



 



 

Applications submitted from July 1 - December 31 of any given year:


Annual use fee - city ROW
 
$25


Annual use fee - city pole in ROW
 
$25



 



 

Ordinary permit use fee:


SWF as defined in A.R.S.  § 9-591(19)
 
$750.00


SWF as defined in A.R.S.  § 9-594
 
$1,000



 



 

Utility pole and monopole applications:


New, replacement or modified utility poles
 
$750



 



 

Violation use fees*:


Failure to restore ROW or correct violations of specifications, code,
ordinance or standards within ten (10)  business days after receiving notice
to correct.
 
$600 per day


Failure to make books and records available.
 
$250 per day


Any action or non-action by Provider contrary to Standard Terms that causes
inconvenience costs and is not cured after three  (3) business days notice.
 
$500 per occurrence



 



* Violation use fee is in addition to any cost the city may incur to restore
the ROW or correct the violation.



   (B)   Assignment fee: provider shall pay to city in advance five
hundred dollars ($500) non-refundable fee for legal, administrative and other
expenses related to each pre-approved assignment or to any request for a
consent to assign, whether or not City grants such request.



   (C)   Late fees: should any violation use fee not be paid on or
before the due date, a late fee in the amount of the greater of ten percent
(10%) or one hundred dollars ($100) shall be applied. Any violation use fee
that is not timely paid shall accrue interest at the rate of one and one-half
percent (1.5%) per month from the date the amount first came due.



(Ord. 1454, passed 12-5-2017)



ARTICLE 4-7:  PUBLIC SAFETY FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   4-7-1   Public safety fee schedule



§ 4-7-1  PUBLIC SAFETY FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Department, accident reports and computer aided dispatch
("CAD") requests:



      (1)   Commercial: $5.00 for pages 1 through 20, $0.25 for each
page thereafter;



      (2)   Non-commercial: $0.25 per page; and



      (3)   Victims of crime: no charge.



   (B)   Certified copies of department and accident reports: $10.00
for pages 1 through 20, $0.50 for each page thereafter.



   (C)   Photos:



 

3 by 5 color
 
$5.00 each photo


8 by 10 color
 
$5.00 each photo


Polaroids
 
$5.00 each photo


8-1/2 by 11 color copies sheet
 
$5.00 each sheet


8-1/2 by 14 color copies sheet
 
$6.00 each sheet


11 by 17 color copies sheet
 
$7.00 each sheet


Negative duplication
 
$5.00 each negative



 



   (D)   Cassette tape: $5 each.



   (E)   Video tape (VCR): $25.00 each, not including outside vendor
charges, if applicable.



   (F)   Crime statistics: $10.00 for pages 1 through 20, $0.25 for
each page thereafter.



   (G)   Letters of clearance: $5.00 each.



   (H)   Compact disc (AV): $10.00 each.



   (I)   Compact disc (photo): $10.00 each.



   (J)   Security alarm permit fees.



 


Alarm User

 

Description

 

Fee





Residential
 
Initial registration
 
$15.00


 
 
Annual renewal
 
$15.00


 
 
Reinstatement fee
 
$25.00


 
 
First and second false alarm
 
No fee


 
 
Third false alarm
 
$50.00


 
 
Each subsequent false alarm
 
$50.00 increments


Commercial
 
Initial registration
 
$25.00


 
 
Annual renewal
 
$25.00


 
 
Reinstatement fee
 
$25.00


 
 
First false alarm
 
No fee


 
 
Second false alarm
 
$50.00


 
 
Each subsequent false alarm
 
$50.00 increments


 
 
First false panic alarm
 
No fee


 
 
Second false panic alarm
 
$100.00


 
 
Each subsequent false panic alarm
 
$100.00 increments


Non-registered
 
First false alarm
 
$100.00


 
 
Second false alarm
 
$200.00


 
 
Each subsequent false alarm
 
See Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 16, § 16-1-5(C) (2)(I)




 



   (K)   Fingerprinting: $10.00 each fingerprint card.



   (L)   Local records check: $5.00 for each name.



   (M)   A $150.00 fee is hereby established for the release of
properly immobilized or impounded vehicles and for the administrative costs
relating to vehicle removal, immobilization and impoundment by the request of
Apache Junction Police Department representatives.



(Prior Code, Art. 4-7)  (Am. Ord. 1263, passed 4-4-2006; Am. Ord. 1333,
passed 1-20-2009; Am. Ord. 1435, passed 1-17-2017)



ARTICLE 4-8:  MUNICIPAL COURT FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   4-8-1   Municipal Court fee schedule



§ 4-8-1  MUNICIPAL COURT FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Payment of costs of confinement. Any person who is convicted
of a misdemeanor criminal offense in the Municipal Court and who, as a
consequence, is incarcerated in the Pinal or Maricopa County jail or the city
jail, or other city or county jail system, may as part of any sentence
imposed, be required to reimburse the City of Apache Junction for its
expenses incurred for such confinement. The cost shall take into account the
announced billing practices of the Pinal or Maricopa County Sheriff or other
applicable authority as they are amended from time to time.



   (B)   Administrative fee for warrants for failure to comply. When
the Municipal Court issues a warrant for failure to pay a fine, restitution
or any monetary obligation, or for failure to comply with a term or condition
of sentence, an administrative fee of $75 shall be imposed upon the person
for whom the warrant is issued. This fee shall be added to the amount set
forth in the warrant.



   (C)   Administrative fee for default judgments on civil traffic
violation cases. The Municipal Court shall assess the defendant a default fee
of $50 for each default judgment entered in a civil traffic violation case
upon a failure to appear or failure to pay a civil sanction, unless the
default judgment is set aside under the Rules of Procedure for Traffic
Violations.



   (D)   Administrative fee for court appointed counsel. The Municipal
Court shall assess the defendant an administrative fee of $125 for the
appointment of defense counsel payable as a condition of probation.



   (E)   Municipal Court Enhancement Fund.



      (1)   There is hereby created a Municipal Court Enhancement
Fund, which shall be used exclusively to improve the technological,
operational and security capabilities of the Municipal Court.



      (2)   The Municipal Court Enhancement Fund shall be assessed
in the base amount of $20, which shall be applied by the Municipal Court on
each civil and criminal charge where a fine, sanction, penalty or assessment
is imposed by the court. Any surcharge, fee, assessment or other sum required
to be charged by state law or Arizona Supreme Court Rule as an addition to
the base amount of $20 shall also be imposed by the court.



      (3)   The Court Enhancement Fund shall be designated as a fund
account. The City Finance Director or his or her designee, shall invest the
monies in the fund in the same manner as general city funds. Interest earned
on fund monies shall be deposited in the fund.



      (4)   The Municipal Court shall administer the fund and may
make expenditures from the fund for the purposes approved in this section.



   (F)   Collection fees and charges. For restitution, fines,
sanctions, surcharges, assessments, penalties, bonds, costs and fees that are
forwarded to a collection agency for collection, the Municipal Court shall
assess the defendant a collection fee and charge in the amount of any fees or
charges assessed by the collection agency which is licensed under state law
or authorized to pursue collection activities in the Supreme Court of Arizona.



   (G)   Copying, certification, filing and other miscellaneous
collection fees.



      (1)   The Municipal Court is authorized to collect all
court-related fees and costs imposed by or created by other ordinances, laws
and statutes, such as, but not limited to, copying, certification, City Clerk
research, payment history report, notary services and check returns.



      (2)   Charges shall be assessed pursuant to the applicable
amount at the time of the service.



   (H)   Court deferred prosecution/diversion fee.  A deferred
prosecution fee/diversion fee in the amount of $50 shall be imposed on each
criminal charge for each criminal case which the court defers or diverts
prosecution thereon.



   (I)   Authority to waive fees and costs. A magistrate may waive all
or any part of any fee or cost provided for or created by this article,
giving consideration to an individual’s indigence or financial hardship and
the interests of justice.



   (J)   Prosecution assessment recovery fee.  A prosecution
assessment recovery fee in the amount of $86 shall be imposed on each
criminal case and shall be applied by the Municipal Court on all criminal
cases that are prosecuted by the City Attorney’s office.



   (K)   Probation fees.



      (1)   Any person accepting probation and ordered to be
screened for probation qualification shall pay the cost of such screening
which, if done by the Apache Junction Municipal Court probation monitor, 
shall be a fee of $65.



      (2)   The Municipal Court shall assess each defendant placed
on court-monitored probation, a monitoring fee of $50 a month and shall
assess defendants ordered to complete education, treatment and/or counseling
a verification fee of $50.



      (3)   Any person, after accepting the terms of probation, who
fails to appear at the time and place set by the probation officer for an
appointment with a probation officer shall be assessed a missed appointment
fee in the amount of $15.



      (4)   A separate collection account will be established by the
City Finance Department to accrue fees paid under this section.



(Prior Code, Art. 4-8)  (Am. Ord. 1332, passed 1-20-2009; Am. Ord. 1357,
passed 2-16-2010; Am. Ord. 1366, passed 8-3-2010)



CHAPTER 5: MUNICIPAL COURT



      Article




         5-1.   MUNICIPAL COURT




ARTICLE 5-1:  MUNICIPAL COURT



Section



   5-1-1   Municipal court established; jurisdiction



   5-1-2   Definitions



   5-1-3   Presiding Magistrate



   5-1-4   Qualification of municipal court judges



   5-1-5   Hearing officers



   5-1-6   Magistrate Pro-Tem



   5-1-7   Powers and duties of Presiding Magistrate



   5-1-8   Proceedings of court



   5-1-9   Formation and summoning of juries; juror pay



   5-1-10   Court personnel



§ 5-1-1  MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.



   The municipal court is established as a separate, independent branch of
city government, which has exclusive jurisdiction of all violations of the
city code, and jurisdiction concurrently with justices of the peace of
precincts in which the city is located for violations of misdemeanors
committed within the limits of the city.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 5-1-2  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.



   ASSOCIATE MAGISTRATE.  A full time termed judge of the city court,
appointed by the city council, other than the presiding magistrate.



   CITY MAGISTRATE.  Any judge of the municipal court, including the
presiding magistrate, associate magistrate, pro tern magistrate and interim
magistrate.



   CIVIL TRAFFIC HEARING OFFICER.  a city court employee assigned special
duties by . the presiding magistrate pursuant to the city code.



   DISCIPLINARY ACTION.  action taken by the State Bar of Arizona or the
Supreme Court of Arizona, or any other licensing authority for attorneys or
judges including reprimand,  censure, suspension or disbarment.



   INTERIM MAGISTRATE.  A judge appointed by the city council to perform
the duties of a presiding magistrate during an absence or vacancy greater
than three weeks, but not greater than six months.



   PRESIDING MAGISTRATE.  The full time judge appointed by council,
charged with the management and administrative responsibility of the
municipal court.



   PRO-TEM MAGISTRATE.  A full or part time temporary judge of the city
court appointed by the city council or presiding magistrate.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 5-1-3  PRESIDING MAGISTRATE.



   (A)   The presiding officer of the municipal court shall be the
presiding magistrate, who shall be appointed by the council for a minimum
term of two years with the dates of the term to be set by contract. The
council may suspend, discipline, or remove any city magistrate as follows:



      (1)   If the judge pleads guilty or no contest, or is found
guilty, of a crime punishable as a felony under any laws of this state,
another state, or a federal law, or of any other crime that involves moral
turpitude under the laws of this state;



      (2)   If the judge has a disability that prevents the judge
from performing the essential functions of the position;



      (3)   If the judge engages in actions constituting willful
misconduct in office, willful and persistent failure to perform his or her
duties, or conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice that brings
the judiciary into disrepute; or



      (4)   If the judge is subjected to disciplinary action by the
Arizona Supreme Court or State Bar of Arizona.



   (B)   The Presiding Magistrate shall be considered a non-career
contract employee after being appointed and all other terms shall be
negotiated and set forth in a written employment contract.



   (C)   The city council shall appoint one or more full time
magistrate for a term as the city council deems necessary pursuant to this
chapter. In the event of an absence or vacancy in the position of presiding
or associate magistrate, council may appoint an interim magistrate who must
meet all of the requirements as a city magistrate.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 5-1-4  QUALIFICATIONS OF CITY MAGISTRATES.



   (A)   Every magistrate shall:



      (1)   Be an active member of the State Bar of Arizona in good
standing for at least five years prior to appointment;



      (2)   Have no discipline by any State Bar or State Supreme
Court for a period of ten years prior to appointment.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 5-1-5  HEARING OFFICERS.



   Civil traffic hearing officers shall:



   (A)   Be assigned to one or more employees of the magistrate court
at the discretion of the presiding magistrate;



   (B)   Meet the qualifications established by the Arizona Supreme
Court for such officers to be eligible for the special assignment;



   (C)   Have the authority to hear cases involving civil traffic
matters arising under state law or city code, cases involving orders of
protection, injunctions against harassment, and such other civil cases as may
be authorized by law; and



   (D)   Not receive additional compensation for performing such duties.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 5-1-6  MAGISTRATE PRO-TEM.



   (A)   In the absence of the presiding magistrate, or in those
instances’ where the presiding magistrate has been disqualified by the
action of the prosecution, defendant, recusation on the part of the presiding
magistrate or other cause, the presiding magistrate of  the municipal court
may assign such action to a magistrate pro-tem to hear such action.



   (B)   Magistrates pro-tem shall be appointed by the presiding
magistrate.



   (C)   Magistrates pro-tem shall be active members of the State Bar
of Arizona.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 5-1-7  POWERS AND DUTIES OF PRESIDING MAGISTRATE.



   The powers and duties of the presiding magistrate shall include:



   (A)   Those set forth and conferred upon the magistrate under the
provisions of the state constitution and statutes, administrative orders of
the State Supreme Court or Superior Court, and the ordinances and resolutions
of the city;



   (B)   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action
and the proceedings of the court therein;



   (C)   Responsibility over fixing and receiving all bonds and bails
and receiving all fines, penalties, fees and other monies as provided by law;



   (D)   Payment of all fines, penalties and other monies collected by
the court to the city finance director or his or her designee;



   (E)   Monthly report submittal to the council summarizing court
activities;



   (F)   Preparation of a schedule of traffic violations, not involving
the death of a person, listing specific bail for each violation;



   (G)   Supervision of the judicial and internal administrative
functions of the municipal court in a professional manner utilizing
appropriate management techniques to organize and direct the efficient
operation of the court;



   (H)   Department director status as a non-career employee under the
Apache Junction Personnel Rules, and shall as any director, manage municipal
court employee grievance procedures, termination, evaluation or other
personnel related matters;



   (I)   Delegation of duties and responsibilities to and supervision
of magistrates pro-tem and other judicial and non-judicial personnel as
necessary who directly affect the operation of the court;



   (J)   Establishment and implementation of proper case management
techniques and standards;



   (K)   Determination of judicial assignments for each magistrate
pro-tem and within guidelines established by council, establishment and
maintenance of standard working hours and times to effectively discharge
these assignments;



   (L)   Establishment and implementation of standards and parameters
for indigence screening and guidelines for the purpose of appointing defense
counsel;



   (M)   Establishment of specific parameters within the bounds of the
law and sound management practice, under which a defendant shall be granted
the time to pay monetary sentences imposed, and authority to specify the
standards for establishment of payment amounts;



   (N)   Exclusive supervisory authority over all court personnel while
such personnel are performing work for the court, including but not limited
to the court administrator, clerical support, courtroom support staff, and
bailiffs and security screeners;



   (O)   Exercising of administrative supervision over the court in
accordance with the principle of judicial independence under the doctrine of
separation of powers as defined in the Arizona State Constitution, Article
III;



   (P)   Exercising similar other administrative authority as necessary
to maintain and enhance the ability of the court to do justice for all who
come before the court;



   (Q)   Cooperation and coordination with the presiding superior court
judge(s) concerning the administration of the municipal court; and



   (R)   Keeping in custody and taking charge of and safely keeping and
disposing of, according to court rules, all books, papers and records which
may be filed or deposited in custody; destruction of all documents, records,
instruments, books, papers, dispositions, exhibits and transcripts in any
action or proceeding in the municipal court or otherwise filed or deposited
in custody pursuant to rules established by the Supreme Court, and
notification to the appropriate state office for records retention.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 5-1-8  PROCEEDINGS OF COURT.



   (A)   The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the
Arizona State Constitution, applicable state statutes and rules of the State
Supreme Court pertaining to municipal courts. The proceedings shall also be
conducted in accordance with the Rules of Criminal Procedure for the Superior
Court and Arizona Revised Statutes Titles 13 and 22 including the provisions
regarding filing complaints, bail, issuance of subpoenas, summons, warrants
and punishment for disobedience so far as applicable and when not otherwise
prescribed.



   (B)   The magistrate shall cause to be prepared a schedule of
criminal traffic or misdemeanor violations not involving the death of a
person or any felony traffic offense,  listing specific bail for each
violation.



   (C)   The magistrate shall cause to be prepared a schedule of civil
traffic violations, listing a specific deposit for each violation.



   (D)   When the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted either by the
court or by a jury, the court shall pronounce judgment on the plea or verdict.



   (E)   A sentence of a fine, imprisonment or both, and other things
such as probation, community restitution, victim restitution, counseling and
screening and other appropriate requirements, may be pronounced at the time
of sentencing and shall be included in the judgment.



   (F)   If the court sentences the defendant to pay a fine, and the
defendant fails to comply with the order, the court, after a hearing, may
order that the defendant receive credit toward payment of the fine for jail
time served as determined by state law for each day of imprisonment.



   (G)   The sentence, shall not extend beyond the term of imprisonment
for which the defendant might be sentenced for the offense of which the
defendant has been found guilty.



   (H)   A sentence and judgment that the defendant pay a fine, with or
without the alternative of imprisonment, shall constitute a lien such as
which can typically be ordered in a civil action.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 5-1-9  FORMATION AND SUMMONING OF JURIES;  JUROR PAY.



   (A)   The formation and summoning of juries and drawing and
disposition of names and impaneling of jurors in municipal court shall be
done in the same manner as provided for by law in courts of record, or as
permitted by A.R.S.  § 21-331,  and as may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Each juror shall be paid by the city for each day in
attendance in the municipal court a sum as provided for in state statutes for
payment of jurors, as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 5-1-10  COURT PERSONNEL.



   (A)   The authority of the presiding magistrate for making decisions
regarding the overall function of the court applies to decisions concerning
handling of court mail and records, hiring, supervision, discipline and
dismissal of court personnel, provided that decisions regarding hiring,
supervision and dismissal of court personnel are consistent with the
municipal court personnel policy. Personnel rules adopted by the city for the
employment, grievance procedures, termination, sick leave, overtime, vacation
time and other items are applicable to employees of the municipal court,
unless otherwise stated in a written policy approved by the presiding
magistrate. In employing additional personnel, the existing city personnel
procedures shall be followed.



(Ord. 1400, passed 5-6-2014)



CHAPTER 6: ANIMALS



      Article




         6-1.   RULES AND REGULATIONS





         6-2.   IMPOUNDING GENERALLY





         6-3.   DOGS





         6-4.   CONTRACTUAL AGREEMENT





         6-5.   CONFINED ANIMALS





         6-6.   KEEPING OF ANIMALS





         6-7.   POTBELLIED PIGS





         6-8.   KEEPING OF SWINE FOR SPECIAL PROJECTS





         6-9.   VIOLATIONS




ARTICLE 6-1:  RULES AND REGULATIONS



Section



   6-1-1   Definitions



   6-1-2   Dangerous animals



   6-1-3   Noises



   6-1-4   Strays; housing



   6-1-5   Swine prohibited



   6-1-6   Pet shops



   6-1-7   Commercial dog kennel permits



   6-1-8   Personal dog kennel permits



   6-1-9   Veterinary hospitals



   6-1-10   Wild animals



   6-1-11   Cruelty and neglect



§ 6-1-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ABANDONMENT.  To desert, forsake, or give up an animal without having
secured another owner or custodian for the animal, or by failing to provide
the elements of basic care (food, water and shelter).



   A.J.C.C.  Apache Junction City Code.



   ALTERED.  A spayed female animal or a neutered male animal.



   ANIMAL.  Any mammal of a species that is susceptible to rabies, except
humans and livestock.



   AT LARGE.  In any street, alley, public park, private or public school
property or other public place or on other private property without being
secured by physical restraint such as a leash, chain, or rope, or is
otherwise not confined in a secured enclosure.



   CAT.  A member of the Felis catus family.



   COLLAR.  A band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the
neck of an animal to which a license may be affixed.



   COMMERCIAL DOG KENNEL.  Any establishment exclusive of one providing
dental, medical or surgical care which maintains any dogs over four months of
age for trade, business, profit or gain.



   COMMERCIAL DOG KENNEL PERMIT.  City authorization provided under §
6-1-7 allowing operation of a commercial dog kennel.



   CONSECUTIVE BUSINESS DAYS.  Monday through Friday are considered
business days; business days do not include Saturdays, Sundays or city
holidays even if the animal control division is open during these days.



   CONTAMINATION.  Anything that is harmful to animals or livestock that
could lead to illness or death.



   CRUEL MISTREATMENT.  To torture or otherwise inflict physical injury
upon an animal or to kill an animal in a manner that causes suffering to such
animal.



   CRUEL NEGLECT.  To fail to provide an animal with food, water or
shelter or medical treatment required to maintain health.



   DOG.  A member of the Canis familiaris family.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  Any public or private elementary or
secondary school, or secondary technical or vocational school.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Any certified peace officer, or any City of
Apache Junction animal control officer.



   EQUINE.  Horses, mules, burros and asses.



   FEE.  Amounts enumerated in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 4-7-1.



   FOOD.  A substance of sufficient quantity and nutritious value to
maintain each animal in good health, provided at suitable intervals but at
least once daily or as otherwise prescribed by a licensed veterinarian,
appropriate to the species.



   FOWL.  A bird of any kind, domesticated or wild, including poultry.



   HOUSEHOLD.  All individuals who share the same residence, whether
related or unrelated.



   IMPOUND.  The act of taking or receiving into custody by the
enforcement officer any animal for the purpose of confinement in an
authorized impound facility in accordance with the provisions of this article.



   IMPOUND FACILITY.  Any establishment authorized for the confinement,
maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs and other animals that come into
the custody of the enforcement officer in the performance of his or her
official duties.



   INTENTIONALLY.  With respect to a result or to the conduct described
by a statute defining an offense where a person’s objective is to cause
that result or to engage in that conduct.



   KENNEL.  An enclosed controlled area inaccessible to other animals, in
which a person keeps, harbors or maintains dogs under controlled conditions.



   KNOWINGLY.  With respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by
a statute defining an offense, that a person is aware or believes that the
person’s conduct is of that nature or that the circumstance exists; it does
not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of the act or omission.



   LIVESTOCK.  Bovine, equine, sheep, goats, swine, llamas and ratite.



   MANAGER.  A person duly authorized by the owner to conduct business,
act as an agent or otherwise carry out the legal rights and duties of the
owner.



   MANURE.  Refuse of stables, yards, corrals or barnyards consisting of
animal, livestock or fowl excreta with or without litter.



   MEDICAL ATTENTION. Recommended procedures used to treat a particular
disease, injury, infestation or ailment which an animal may have in order to
heal, alleviate, or lessen the effects of such condition, or to prevent the
animal from pain and suffering; treatment may be administered by either a
licensed veterinarian appropriate to the species or the person who has
custody or control of such animal depending on the severity of the condition
and the knowledge, skills and ability of the person to provide the proper
treatment.



   OWNER.  Any person exercising care, custody or control of any animal
for more than six consecutive calendar days or claiming any legal interest in
such animal; indicators of ownership also include any license, permit,
certificate, registration or other documentation which establishes a legal
interest in such animal.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or
other legal entity.



   PERSONAL DOG KENNEL.  Any location where more than four dogs are kept,
owned or controlled by a person or entity for companionship, enjoyment of the
species, or for training for field working or obedience trials or exhibition
for organized shows.



   PERSONAL DOG KENNEL PERMIT.  City authorization provided under §
6-1-8 allowing a personal dog kennel.



   PET SHOPS.  Any commercial establishment at which animals, fowl or
cold blooded species are kept for sale, groomed or treated for vermin.



   POTBELLIED PIG.  Only registered purebred miniature Vietnamese
potbellied pigs or other similar registered purebred miniature potbellied
pigs.



   PROTRACTED SUFFERING.  Allowing an animal to continue suffering a
painful condition.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  An odor or noise that interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or
neighborhood or by a considerable number of persons; when investigating
public nuisance allegations, the enforcement officer shall take into
consideration all factors which support any such allegations, including but
not limited to: distances in which the complaining parties live from the
offensive premises, number of complaining witnesses, number of complaining
parties residing on the street or in the vicinity of the offensive premises,
duration that the conditions existed, prior history of similar complaints,
and communications between the complainants and offending party.



   PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR.  The person appointed by the city manager
pursuant to A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Article 3-6 as the department head of the
public safety department of the city or his or her appointed designee.



   RABIES QUARANTINE AREA.  Any area in which a state of emergency has
been declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or
adjacent to this area.



   RECKLESSLY.  With respect to a result or to a circumstance described
by a statute defining an offense, which a person is aware of and consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the result will occur or
that the circumstance exists; the risk must be of such nature and degree that
disregard of such constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of conduct
that a reasonable person would observe in the situation; a person who creates
such a risk but who is aware of such risk solely by reason of voluntary
intoxication also acts recklessly with respect to such risk.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  Any person currently delegated by the owner to
exercise care, custody or control of an animal for more than six consecutive
calendar days.



   SHELTER.  A protection from the elements, either manmade or natural
with regards to the geographical locations and the type of protection needed
located within an animal’s enclosure, in order to allow the animal free
choice to utilize such protection. Notwithstanding the previous sentence,
shelter is not required for livestock.



   SWINE or PIGS.  Only those pigs kept, maintained or harbored for a
limited period of time in conjunction with 4-H, Future Farmers of America or
other similar educational projects of a political subdivision of the state or
an educational institution.



   UNSANITARY PREMISES.  Those premises on which animals, livestock or
fowl are kept in a manner that creates insect and rodent breeding, noxious or
offensive odors, or any other condition that is offensive to the senses of a
reasonable person.



   VACCINATION.  The administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to animals
by a veterinarian, or an authorized impound facility by employees trained by
a veterinarian licensed by the State of Arizona,



   VETERINARIAN.  Any veterinarian licensed to practice in Arizona or any
veterinarian employed in Arizona by a governmental agency.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL.  Any establishment operated by a veterinarian
licensed to practice in Arizona that provides clinical facilities and houses
animals or birds for dental, medical or surgical treatment; a veterinary
hospital may have adjacent to it or in conjunction with it or as an integral
part of it, pens, stalls, cages or kennels for quarantine, observation or
boarding.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL.  Any animal of the carnivore order that has a
propensity to attack, to cause injury to or otherwise endanger the safety of
human beings or other domesticated or companion animal without provocation,
or that has been so declared after a hearing before a justice of the peace,
city magistrate, or superior court judge. Proof of provocation of any animal
attacked by the person injured shall be a defense to any action for damages
or petition for declaration of viciousness. Provocation shall be measured by
whether a reasonable person would expect that the conduct or circumstances
would likely encourage an animal to attack. This definition does not apply to
dogs utilized by law enforcement officers.



   WATER.  A transparent, odorless, and tasteless liquid compound of
hydrogen and oxygen, of ambient temperature in sufficient volume as needed to
maintain normal hydration for an animal.



   WILD, DANGEROUS OR UNDOMESTICATED ANIMAL.



      (1)   That which is not of a species customarily used as an
ordinary household pet, but one which would ordinarily be found in the
wilderness of this or any other country, or one which otherwise causes a
reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm or property damage. Except as
specifically listed below, fish in an aquarium are not included in this
definition.



      (2)   WILD, DANGEROUS, OR UNDOMESTICATED ANIMAL includes:



         (a)   All venomous animals including rear-fang snakes;



         (b)   Bears (Ursidae species “spp.”);



         (c)   Bison (Bison spp.);



         (d)   Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus);



         (e)   Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more;



         (f)   Coyotes (Canis latrans);



         (g)   Crocodilians (Crocodilia spp.), 30 inches in
length or more;



         (h)   Deer (Cervidae spp.): includes all members of the
deer family, for example, white tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose;



         (i)   Elephants (Elephas spp. and Loxodonta spp.);



         (j)   Game cocks and other fighting birds;



         (k)   Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae spp.);



         (l)   Hyenas (Hyaenidae spp.);



         (m)   Jaguars (Panthera onca);



         (n)   Leopards (Pantherapardus);



         (o)   Lions (Panthera led);



         (p)   Lynxes (Lynx spp.);



         (q)   Non-human primates including prosimians, monkeys
and apes;



         (r)   Piranha fish (Characidae spp.);



         (s)   Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars,
mountain lions and panthers;



         (t)   Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae);



         (u)   Sharks (class Chondrichthyes);



         (v)   Snow leopards (Panthera uncid);



         (w)   Tigers (Panthera tigris);



         (x)   Wolves (Canis lupus).



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-1-2  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   It is unlawful to permit any dangerous, or vicious animal of
any kind to run at large within the city. Exhibitions or parades of animals
which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon
securing a permit from the public safety director.



   (B)   Only enforcement officers are authorized to kill any dangerous
animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or
property.



   (C)   It is unlawful to own, harbor or maintain any animals of the
wolf hybrid species, except those animals which are licensed and registered
with the animal control division as of January 30, 1995. Except for renewals,
no wolf hybrid shall be allowed to be licensed after January 30, 1995. Any
license issued for a wolf hybrid shall not be allowed to transfer to a new
owner.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-1-3  NOISES.



   It is unlawful and hereby declared a public nuisance for any person to
harbor or keep any animals which habitually bark, howl, yelp, squeal, shriek
or make any other sounds which disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, or in such a manner as to interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood or by a
considerable number of persons. When investigating public nuisance
allegations, the enforcement officer shall take into consideration all
factors which support any such allegations, including but not limited to:
distances in which the complaining parties live from the offensive premises,
number of complaining witnesses, number of complaining parties residing on
the street or in the vicinity of the offensive premises, duration that the
conditions existed, prior history of similar complaints, and communications
between the complainants and offending party.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-1-4  STRAYS; HOUSING.



   Any person who keeps or causes to be kept any horses, mules, cattle,
burros, goats, sheep, other livestock or poultry, shall keep such animals in
a pen or similar enclosure to prevent their roaming at large. Any such
livestock or poultry running at large shall be impounded as provided in this
chapter. It is unlawful to cause or allow any stable or place where any
animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-1-5  SWINE PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful to keep any live swine or pigs within the corporate
limits of the city except as provided by A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Article 6-7, and
registered purebred miniature Vietnamese potbellied pigs or other similar
registered purebred miniature potbellied pigs. Any miniature pigs shall be
subject to all other conditions and requirements as set forth in A.J.C.C.,
Vol. I, Article 6-7.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-1-6  PET SHOPS.



   (A)   No sick or injured animal shall be maintained or held or
offered for sale on the premises of pet shops.



   (B)   Animals which are unweaned, under the age of eight weeks, or
so young that their sale would be injurious to them, shall not be sold,
offered for sale nor given away.



   (C)   Every person maintaining a pet shop shall cause a notice to be
framed and enclosed under glass, and to be posted in such a location as to be
legible at all times from the outside containing; the name, address and
telephone numbers of persons to be notified in case of emergency at any time
who will, at the request of any enforcement officer or other designated
authority, respond to the location to assist in any emergency or other
situation in which such person’s presence is indispensable.



   (D)   Dogs and cats kept in pet shops shall be caged so that each
animal is afforded no less than 20 square feet in area per each dog or cat.
Each dog or cat over three months of age shall be kept in individual cages.



   (E)   Premises where animals and birds are kept shall be ventilated
to the external air and adequately lighted to provide visibility. The
premises shall be properly plumbed and have septic tanks or sewer connected
sinks and shall have adequate supply of water readily accessible to the
portions of the premises in which the animals or birds are kept. Cages shall
be constructed and designed so that their parts are easily cleaned. Floors
shall be concrete, tile or similar non-porous material.



   (F)   The premises, implements, cages, yards, runs and appurtenances
shall be kept clean, sanitary, free of animal and bird parasites, droppings
or other health hazards and shall be cleaned and disinfected at least once
daily. Flies shall be controlled.



   (G)    No portion of a pet shop shall be used for human habitation,
nor shall food for human consumption be prepared or served in the same room
in which animals or birds are kept.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-1-7  COMMERCIAL DOG KENNEL PERMITS.



   (A)   Any person who owns, maintains or harbors any dogs over three
months of age for trade, business, profit or gain must obtain a commercial
dog kennel permit.



   (B)   The commercial dog kennel permit shall be valid for 12 months
and will expire on the first anniversary of the permit. A renewal is required
within 30 calendar days from the date of expiration, otherwise the matter
will be considered delinquent, and a late fee, as established in A.J.C.C.,
Vol. I, Article 4-3, shall be charged. Each subsequent permit that is issued
will be valid for 1 year and will expire on the respective anniversary date.
The fee is established in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Article 4-3. No commercial dog
kennel permit fee shall be prorated or refunded nor shall the permit be
transferable.



   (C)   All zoning requirements established by the city for commercial
business shall be met before a commercial dog kennel permit can be issued.
The owner/manager of any commercial dog kennel shall obtain and have on
display a valid city license as required by A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Chapter 8,
Business, Article 8-1, General Business and Licensing Provisions.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the kennel to pay the
applicable kennel fee on or before the date of establishing a kennel in the
city. The kennel fee shall be paid to the animal control division of the
police department.



   (E)   The permittee shall operate the kennel so as to eliminate
excessive or untimely noise from animals and offensive odors from the kennel.
The kennel and grounds shall be maintained in a sanitary condition.



   (F)   The permittee shall retain the name, address and telephone
number of the owner of each boarded dog and the license number of each dog.
This register must be exhibited to any enforcement officer upon demand. The
permittee shall also have on file proof of rabies vaccination for each dog
housed on the premises.



   (G)   The permittee shall retain the name and address of each person
selling, trading or giving any dog to the kennel.



   (H)   The permittee shall provide an isolation ward for sick or
injured dogs, so as not to endanger the health of other dogs or cause
exposure to further injury.



   (I)   The permittee shall notify the owner of a boarded dog when
such dog refuses to eat or drink, or when such dog is injured or becomes weak
or ill.



   (J)   Any violations of this chapter and Vol. I, Chapter 8, shall be
cause to revoke any commercial dog kennel permit. The permit may be revoked
by the public safety director after notice and hearing. The notice, hearing
and appeal procedures shall be handled in the manner set forth below in §
6-1-7(L).



   (K)   The animal control division shall, within 30 calendar days
before the annual renewal date for the commercial dog kennel permit, inspect
the premises to confirm compliance with provisions of this chapter. In no
event shall a renewal be issued unless the inspection is made and all
non-compliant matters are corrected before the annual renewal date. The
public safety director may cause random inspections anytime it is deemed
necessary from 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday without notice to
the kennel proprietor.



   (L)   Notice, hearing and appeal procedure:



      (1)   To suspend or revoke a permit, the animal control
division shall deliver or mail by certified mail to the business address as
shown by the permit application, a written notice that such permit is
suspended or revoked. The reason for such suspension or revocation shall be
set forth in the notice. The notice shall also contain the permittee’s
rights and procedures to appeal such suspension or revocation. A suspended or
revoked permit shall be surrendered to the animal control division on demand.



      (2)   The animal control division shall grant on demand to any
permittee whose permit has been revoked or suspended a full hearing on the
merits of such suspension or revocation. Appeal of the animal control
division’s action to a hearing officer appointed by the public safety
director, pursuant to division (L)(3) of this section, shall not be had prior
to the hearing. Demand for hearing shall be made within 10 working days of
receipt of the animal control division’s notice of suspension or
revocation, and failure to demand a hearing within that time will constitute
a full waiver. After considering evidence presented at the hearing, the
animal control division shall make a decision to uphold or repeal the permit
suspension or revocation; and shall deliver or mail by certified mail to the
business address as shown on the permit application the results of the
decision.



      (3)   Any person aggrieved by the animal control division’s
decision pursuant to division (L)(2) of this section shall have the right of
appeal to the designated hearing officer. The appeal shall be filed with the
public safety director within 14 working days after receipt of the animal
control division’s decision. The appeal shall contain a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The hearing officer shall set
a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided for notice of
hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the hearing officer shall be
final and conclusive, except any person aggrieved may pursue any proper
judicial proceedings under state law.



      (4)   No person may reapply for any permit after denial,
revocation or non-renewal of such permit unless the cause for such denial,
revocation or non-renewal has been removed or corrected.



   (M)   A commercial dog kennel permit shall not be issued or renewed
to any person who has been convicted of a violation of A.R.S. §§ 13-2910
(cruelty to animals) or 13-2910.01 (dog fighting), or any other state,
county, or municipal animal welfare law, except civil violations of leash
laws.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-1-8  PERSONAL DOG KENNEL PERMITS.



   (A)   Personal dog kennel permits.



      (1)   Class 1 permit. A Class 1 permit for a personal dog
kennel shall be required for any person who owns, maintains or harbors from 4
to 5 dogs over 3 months of age.



      (2)   Class 2 permit. A Class 2 permit for a personal dog
kennel shall be required for any person who owns, maintains or harbors from 6
to 8 dogs over 3 months of age.



      (3)   Class 3 permit. A Class 3 permit for a personal dog
kennel shall be required for any person who owns, maintains, or harbors from
9 to 12 dogs over 3 months of age.



      (4)   Any person who owns, maintains or harbors 3 or less dogs
over 3 months of age is not required to obtain a personal dog kennel permit.



      (5)   The provisions of Code of Federal Regulations, Title 9,
Volume I, § 3.6, relating to animal floor space, shall be considered when
granting the above-noted permits.



      (6)   The permit provisions do not apply to emergency
situations where a person or nonprofit entity boards dogs, subject to the
following conditions:



         (a)   The person boarding dogs will submit a sworn and
notarized statement that they are caring for the dogs for a maximum of 30
calendar days per dog.



         (b)   This statement shall contain the name, address,
and phone number of the individual or organization who provided the dog to
the boarder.



         (c)   No more than 2 dogs will be permitted under this
emergency exception.



         (d)   The boarder will provide the animal control
division with the final disposition of the animal within the 30-calendar day
period for each dog noted on the original statement, as well as the name and
contact information of the adopting party. Extensions of the 30-day time
limit may be permitted at the discretion of the animal control division, but
in no event shall such extension exceed 6 months per animal.



         (e)   The goal of this emergency exception is to protect
the animals that are in foster care rather than to punish law abiding pet
owners.



      (7)   Any service animal as defined under applicable Arizona
law including but not limited to A.R.S. §§ 9-500.32, 11-1024, and 13-2910,
is not to be counted toward the maximum allowed dogs under this section, and
no license fees shall be applied for such animals pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-500.32, nor any search and rescue dog as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-500.32.



   (B)   Each personal dog kennel permit shall be valid for 12
consecutive months and expire on the first anniversary of the permit and
shall become delinquent 30 calendar days from the date of expiration. Each
subsequent permit issued will be valid for a 1-year period and expire on the
respective anniversary date. The fee is established in A.J.C.C., Vol. I,
Article 4-3. A late fee shall be charged on all delinquent personal dog
kennel permits, as established by A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Article 4-3. No personal
dog kennel permit shall be prorated or refunded nor shall the permit be
transferable.



   (C)   All dogs covered by a personal dog kennel permit shall be
vaccinated, licensed and spayed or neutered. A dog owner may apply for a
waiver of the spay or neuter requirement as long as they obtain a
veterinarian’s written opinion that such surgery would endanger the safety
of the dog, or a certification from a veterinarian determining that the other
dogs owned by the owner or those maintained or harbored at the same address
are spayed and/or neutered. At the discretion of the animal control division
and upon documented proof, the spaying and neutering requirement shall not
apply to American Kennel Club or Canadian Kennel Club dogs.



   (D)   At no time shall dogs covered under this section be used for
trade, business, profit or gain. There shall be no boarding or breeding of
dogs covered by this permit. All dogs shall be the exclusive property of the
permittee.



   (E)   The permittee shall operate the personal dog kennel so as to
eliminate excessive or untimely noise from animals and offensive odors from
the kennel. The kennel and grounds shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition. The property covered by this permit shall be surrounded by a fence
of sufficient height and strength to confine the dogs. Sufficient height and
strength will be determined by an enforcement officer based on the size of
the dog being confined.



   (F)   Any violations of this chapter and A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Chapter 8
shall be cause to revoke any commercial dog kennel permit. The permit may be
revoked by the public safety department director after notice and hearing.
The notice, hearing and appeal procedures shall be handled in the same manner
set forth below in § 6-1-8(G).



   (G)   Notice, hearing and appeal procedure:



      (1)   To suspend or revoke a permit, the animal control
division shall deliver or mail by certified mail to the business address as
shown by the permit application, a written notice that such permit is
suspended or revoked. The reason for such suspension or revocation shall be
set forth in the notice. The notice shall also contain the permittee’s
rights and procedures to appeal such suspension or revocation. A suspended or
revoked permit shall be surrendered to tire animal control division on demand.



      (2)   The animal control division shall grant on demand to any
permittee’s whose permit has been revoked or suspended a full hearing on
the merits of such suspension or revocation. Appeal of the animal control
division’s action to a hearing officer appointed by the public safety
director, pursuant to division (G)(3) of this section, shall not be had prior
to the hearing. Demand for hearing shall be made within 10 working days of
receipt of the animal control division’s notice of suspension or
revocation, and failure to demand a hearing within that time will constitute
a full waiver. After considering evidence presented at the hearing, the
animal control division shall make a decision to uphold or repeal the permit
suspension or revocation; and shall deliver or mail by certified mail to the
business address as shown on the permit application the results of the
decision.



      (3)   Any person aggrieved by the animal control division’s
decision pursuant to division (G)(2) of this section shall have the right of
appeal to the designated hearing officer. The appeal shall be filed with the
public safety director within 14 working days after receipt of the animal
control division’s decision. The appeal shall contain a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The hearing officer shall set
a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided for notice of
hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the hearing officer shall be
final and conclusive, except any person aggrieved may pursue any proper
judicial proceedings under state law.



      (4)   No person may reapply for any permit after denial,
revocation or non-renewal of such permit unless the cause for such denial,
revocation or non-renewal has been removed or corrected.



   (H)   Any dogs over the allotted number allowed will either be
surrendered to the animal control division or to new homes found by the owner
within a 36-hour period after the discovery of the excess number of dogs by
enforcement officers. The holder of a personal dog kennel permit shall not be
bound by the same requirements governing a commercial dog kennel permit.



   (I)   The animal control division shall, within 30 calendar days
before the annual renewal date for the personal dog kennel permit, inspect
the premises to confirm compliance with provisions of this chapter. In no
event shall a renewal be issued unless the inspection is made and all non-
compliant matters are corrected before the annual renewal date.



   (J)   A personal dog kennel permit shall not be issued to any person
who has been convicted of a violation of A.R.S. §§ 13-2910 (cruelty to
animals) or 13-2910.01 (dog fighting), or any other state, county, or
municipal animal welfare law, except civil violations of leash laws.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-1-9  VETERINARY HOSPITALS.



   (A)   The provisions of A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 6-1-6 Pet Shops,
subsections (C) through (G) shall apply to veterinary hospitals, as defined
in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 6-1-1. In addition, caged areas shall contain no less
than 20 square feet per any dog or cat boarded.



   (B)   Veterinary hospitals and clinics shall keep records for each
animal or bird treated, including an accurate description of the animal or
bird, the treatment given, including diagnosis, if possible, vaccinations and
dates of admission and discharge. Such records shall be made available for
inspection by an enforcement officer.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-1-10  WILD ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall harbor, maintain or control a wild, dangerous
or undomesticated animal, as defined in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 6-1-1, within
the city limits.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any keeping
of such wild animals in a bona fide licensed veterinary hospital for
treatment, bona fide educational institution, circus, zoo or other event for
education or entertainment which has obtained a special permit from the
animal control division. The animal control division shall issue a special
permit if it determines:



      (1)   That the animal is at all times kept or maintained in a
safe manner and that it is at all times confined securely so that the keeping
of such animal will not constitute a danger to human life or the property of
others.



      (2)   That adequate safeguards are made to prevent
unauthorized access to such animal by members of the public.



      (3)   That the health or well-being of the animal is not in
any way endangered by the manner of keeping or confinement.



      (4)   That the keeping of such animal does not constitute a
nuisance, as defined in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 6-1-3, pertaining to noisy
animals, and is in compliance with all city zoning and business licensing and
regulations.



      (5)   That the keeping of such animal will not create or cause
offensive odors or constitute a danger to public health.



      (6)   That the quarters in which such animal is kept or
confined are adequately lighted and ventilated and are so constructed that
they may be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



      (7)   That the applicant for such special permit prove their
ability to respond in damages to and including the amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence, $2,000,000 aggregate, for bodily injury to or death of any person
or persons or for damage to properly owned by any other person which may
result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance or such animal. Proof of
liability to respond in damages may be given by filing with the city attorney
a certificate of insurance stating that the applicant is, at the time of
application, and will be during the period of such special permit, insured
against liability to respond in such damages, or by posting with the city
attorney a surety bond conditioned upon the payment of such damages during
the period of such special permit. The certificate of insurance or bond shall
provide that no cancellation of the insurance or bond will be made unless 30
calendar days’ written notice is first given to the city attorney. The
applicant shall also cause such certificate of insurance to state the “City
of Apache Junction” as an additional insured party, a copy of which must be
sent to the office of the city attorney at least 60 days prior to such
special event.



      (8)   Any violation of this chapter shall be cause to revoke
the special permit. The permit may be revoked by the public safety department
director after notice and hearing. The notice, hearing and appeal procedures
shall be governed by the provisions set forth below in § 6-1-10(C).



   (C)   Notice, hearing and appeal procedure:



      (1)   To suspend or revoke a permit, the animal control
division shall deliver or mail by certified mail to the business address as
shown by the permit application, a written notice that such permit is
suspended or revoked. The reason for such suspension or revocation shall be
set forth in the notice. The notice shall also contain the permittee’s
rights and procedures to appeal such suspension or revocation. A suspended or
revoked permit shall be surrendered to the animal control division on demand.



      (2)   The animal control division shall grant on demand to any
permittee’s whose permit has been revoked or suspended a full hearing on
the merits of such suspension or revocation. Appeal of the animal control
division’s action to a hearing officer appointed by the public safety
director, pursuant to division (C)(3) of this section, shall not be had prior
to the hearing. Demand for hearing shall be made within 10 working days of
receipt of the animal control division’s notice of suspension or
revocation, and failure to demand a hearing within that time will constitute
a full waiver. After considering evidence presented at the hearing, the
animal control division shall make a decision to uphold or repeal the permit
suspension or revocation; and shall deliver or mail by certified mail to the
business address as shown on the permit application the results of the
decision.



      (3)   Any person aggrieved by the animal control division’s
decision pursuant to division (C)(2) of this section shall have the right of
appeal to the designated hearing officer. The appeal shall be filed with the
public safety director within 14 working days after receipt of the animal
control division’s decision. The appeal shall contain a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The hearing officer shall set
a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided for notice of
hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the hearing officer shall be
final and conclusive, except any person aggrieved may pursue any proper
judicial proceedings under state law.



      (4)   No person may reapply for any permit after denial,
revocation or non-renewal of such permit unless the cause for such denial,
revocation or non-renewal has been removed or corrected.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-1-11  CRUELTY AND NEGLECT.



   (A)   Cruelty. It is unlawful for any person to overdrive, overload,
overwork, torture, torment, mutilate or unlawfully kill an animal, or cause
or procure an animal to be so overdriven, overloaded, driven when overloaded,
overworked, tortured, tormented, beaten, mutilated, or killed and whomever,
having charge or custody of an animal as owner or otherwise, inflict cruelty
upon it, drive or work it when unfit for labor, abandon it, or knowingly and
willfully authorize or permit it to be subjected to torture, suffering or
cruelty of any kind.



   (B)   Neglect. Animals under human custody or control shall be
housed in healthy environments and shall be provided with proper food, water,
shelter, medical care and ventilation. Any person owning or having care,
custody or control of any animal shall provide that:



      (1)   The animal receives on a daily basis, food that is free
from contamination and is of sufficient quantity and nutritious value to
maintain the animal in good condition.



      (2)   Potable water is accessible to the animal at all times,
either free flowing or in a clean receptacle. For purposes of this
subsection, “clean” means not unhealthy to an animal.



      (3)   Except for livestock, all animals shall have convenient
access to natural or artificial shelter throughout the year. Any artificial
shelter shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect
the animal from injury and from the elements, and of sufficient size to
permit the animal to enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural
manner. Any shelter which does not protect the animal from temperature
extremes or precipitation, or which does not provide adequate ventilation
does not comply with this section. Any shelter, all bedding and any spaces
accessible to the animal, shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the
risk of the animal contracting disease, being injured, or becoming infested
with parasites.



      (4)   The animal shall receive care and medical attention for
injuries, parasites, and diseases, sufficient to maintain the animal in good
health and minimize the suffering or is humanely euthanized to prevent
protracted suffering and pain to the animal.



      (5)   If the animal is on a tie out, consisting of a chain,
leash, wire, cable or similar restraint, it shall be so located as to keep
the animal exclusively on the secured premises. Tie outs shall be so located
that the animal cannot become entangled with other objects. Collars used to
attach an animal to a tie out shall not be of a choke type. The tie out shall
not weigh more than 1/8 of the animal’s total body weight and shall not be
shorter than 3 times the length of animal, measuring from the tip of the nose
to the end of the tail.



   (C)   Abandonment. It is unlawful for a person to drop off or leave
an animal on a street, road, highway, in a public place or on private
property without food, water or shelter.



   (D)   Violations. Any violation of divisions (A), (B) or (C) shall
be a class 1 misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



ARTICLE 6-2:  IMPOUNDING GENERALLY



Section



   6-2-1   Scope of article



   6-2-2   Impounding of animals at large



   6-2-3   Notice to owners of impoundment



   6-2-4   Conditions and duration of impoundment



   6-2-5   Redemption of impounded animals



   6-2-6   Unclaimed impounded animals



   6-2-7   Impeding Enforcement Officer



   6-2-8   Biting animals; quarantine



§ 6-2-1  SCOPE OF ARTICLE.



   The provisions of this article shall apply to the impoundment of all
animals.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-2-2  IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS AT LARGE.



   It shall be the duty of the enforcement officer to impound all animals
found at large, or not under the charge, care or control of some person in
the street, alleys or other public places, or on vacant or unenclosed lots in
the city. The enforcement officer shall have the right to enter upon private
property when it becomes necessary to do so in order to apprehend any animal
that has been roaming at large. Such entrance upon private property shall be
in reasonable pursuit of such animal(s) and shall not include entry into a
domicile unless it is at the invitation of the occupant or by way of search
warrant or exigent circumstances exist justifying a warrantless entry.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-2-3  NOTICE TO OWNERS OF IMPOUNDMENT.



   If the owner of any impounded animal shall be known to the enforcement
officer and shall reside or have a known place of business in the city, the
enforcement officer shall notify the owner of such animal personally, or by
door-hanger notice, or by letter through the post office within 24 hours
after such animal has been impounded. The notice shall contain a description
of the animal and shall state that unless reclaimed, such animal will be
adopted out or destroyed after such animal is left unclaimed for 3
consecutive business days. If the owner of any impounded animal is not known
to the enforcement officer or does not reside or have a known place of
business in the city, then no notice needs to be sent. If an animal is
suspected to be abandoned, the enforcement officer will leave a 24-hour
notice at the location where the animal is last observed, advising any
interested person should contact the animal control division or the animal
will be removed from the property after such time.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-2-4  CONDITIONS AND DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT.



   The enforcement officer shall keep all captured and impounded animals
in a safe, convenient and comfortable place and shall feed such animals as
necessary and treat them in a humane manner during the time they are
impounded. The duration of impoundment shall not be less than 3 consecutive
business days, unless sooner claimed by the owner.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-2-5  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   If the owner of any animal shall, within 3 consecutive business days
after such animal has been captured and impounded, apply to the enforcement
officer and pay the fees and charges authorized under this chapter, as well
as make current all licensing and vaccination requirements and fees, the
animal control division must make the animal available for return to the
owner at the animal control division office.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-2-6  UNCLAIMED IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   If a dog or cat is not reclaimed within the impound period noted in §
6-2-3 above, the animal control division may place such animal up for sale,
adoption, rescue, or may dispose of the animal in a humane manner. The animal
control division may destroy impounded, sick or injured animals whenever such
destruction is necessary, at any time to prevent such an animal from
suffering, to prevent the spread of disease, or for the safety and welfare of
the public and city employees.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-2-7  IMPEDING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   It is unlawful for any person to, in any manner: a) provide false or
incomplete information to an enforcement officer concerning the whereabouts,
ownership, license status, or current rabies vaccination of any animal; b)
interfere, intervene, impede, prevent, obstruct, intimidate an enforcement
officer in the discharge of his or her duties in capturing or attempting to
capture and impound any and all animals which it shall be his or her duty to
impound under the provisions of this chapter; or c) rescue or attempt to
rescue any animal so captured or to release any animal so impounded.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 6-9-2



§ 6-2-8  BITING ANIMALS; QUARANTINE.



   Whenever any animal bites a person, the person so bitten and the owner
of the animal shall immediately notify the enforcement officer, who shall
quarantine the animal, order the animal held on the owner’s premises if the
animal meets the home quarantine guidelines, and is current on rabies
vaccinations and on licensing, or shall have it impounded for at least 10
calendar days or a longer period if necessary for a complete examination. If
it is determined that the animal is infected with rabies or other dangerous,
contagious and infectious disease, it shall be the duty of the enforcement
officer to destroy such animal in a humane manner. If the animal is
surrendered by the owner to the animal control division and the animal is
acting aggressively or unpredictably, the animal will be humanely euthanized
and its head will be forwarded to the Arizona Department of Health Services
for rabies testing. If the animal dies during the period of quarantine or
impoundment, its head shall be forwarded to the Arizona Department of Health
Services for examination. It is unlawful for a person either to refuse
surrender of the animal for quarantine or fail to abide by the
home-quarantine provisions of this section. If at the end of the quarantine
period, the animal is determined to not be infected with rabies or other
dangerous, contagious or infectious diseases, the animal shall be released to
its owner.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



ARTICLE 6-3:  DOGS



Section



   6-3-1   Licenses and tags generally



   6-3-2   Rabies vaccination required



   6-3-3   Running at large



   6-3-4   Impoundment



   6-3-5   Hearing on disposition of abused and vicious animals



   6-3-6   Vicious dogs



   6-3-7   Owner liability



   6-3-8   Dogs killing animals, livestock or fowl



   6-3-9   Dog fecal matter



§ 6-3-1  LICENSES AND TAGS GENERALLY.



   (A)   License fees, as established in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Article 4-3,
shall be paid for each dog 3 months of age and older that is kept, possessed,
harbored or maintained within the boundaries of the city for at least 30 days
of each calendar year. The amount of fees may differentiate between
sterilized and unsterilized dogs.



   (B)   Durable dog tags shall be provided by the city. Each dog
licensed under the terms of this article shall receive, at the time of
licensing, such a tag on which shall be inscribed the name of the city, the
number of the license and the year of issue. All dog tags shall expire 1 year
from the date of issuance. The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness
which shall be worn by the dog at all times except as otherwise provided in
this article. Whenever a dog tag is lost, a duplicate shall be issued upon
application by the owner and a replacement fee, as established in A.J.C.C.,
Vol. I, Article 4-3, shall be charged.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to counterfeit or attempt to
counterfeit an official license tag or remove such tag from any dog for the
purpose of willful and malicious mischief or place a license tag upon a dog
unless the tag was issued to that dog.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-3-2  RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present
a rabies vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian stating the
owner’s name and address and giving the dog’s description, date of
vaccination and type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine and date
re-vaccination is due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate
issued shall be transmitted to the enforcement officer on or before the tenth
day of the month following the month during which the dog was vaccinated. No
dog shall be licensed unless it is vaccinated in accordance with the
provisions of this article.



   (B)   A dog vaccinated in any other place prior to entry into the
city may be licensed in the city provided that at the time of licensing, the
owner of such dog presents a vaccination certificate, signed by a
veterinarian licensed to practice in that place or a veterinarian employed by
a governmental agency in that place, stating the owner’s name and address
and giving the dog’s description, date of vaccination and type,
manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used. The vaccination must be
in conformity with the provisions of this article.



   (C)   If a dog is impounded and found to be unvaccinated, the
enforcement officer will cause such dog to be vaccinated at the pound at a
cost to be borne by the owner. The vaccination shall be performed by animal
control personnel or other qualified personnel who animal control personnel
have delegated such duty to, and who shall then issue a certificate of
vaccination. The vaccinated animal shall not be released until such time as
all vaccination, care and impound fees are paid in full.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-3-3  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
maintaining any dog shall allow such dog to be at large as defined in
A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 6-1-1. However, notwithstanding such limitations, a dog
is deemed to be not at large under the following circumstances:



      (1)   While such dog is restrained by a leash, chain, rope or
cord of not more than 6 feet in length and of sufficient strength to control
action of the dog.



      (2)   While such dog is used for control of livestock or while
being used or trained for hunting or being exhibited or trained at a kennel
club event or while engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing
Commission.



      (3)   While the dog is actively engaged in dog obedience
training, accompanied by and under the control of the owner or trainer,
provided that the person training the dog has in their possession a dog leash
of not more than 6 feet in length and of sufficient strength to control the
dog, and further, the dog is actually enrolled in or has graduated from a dog
obedience training school which has been approved by an enforcement officer.



   (B)   The enforcement officer shall apprehend and/or impound any dog
running at large. The enforcement officer will enter private property to
apprehend any dog that has been running at large. Such entry shall be in a
reasonable pursuit and shall not include entry into a domicile or enclosure
which confines a dog except at the invitation of the occupant or owner.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-3-4  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   If a dog is impounded for any reason and is not already
microchipped, the animal control division is hereby authorized to cause such
dog to be microchipped at a cost to be borne by the owner. The microchipping
shall be performed by animal control division personnel or other qualified
personnel which have been delegated such duty.



   (B)   Impoundment fees together with fees for care and feeding, as
established in Vol. I, Article 4-3, shall be assessed for the impoundment of
dogs.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-3-5  HEARING ON DISPOSITION OF ABUSED AND VICIOUS ANIMALS.



   An enforcement officer who has impounded an animal pursuant to this
article on a showing of probable cause that the animal has been cruelly
mistreated or cruelly neglected or that the animal is vicious or may be a
danger to the safety of any person or other animal, may request, through the
city attorney’s office, a disposition hearing before the city magistrate to
determine whether the animal has suffered cruel mistreatment or cruel neglect
as defined in A.R.S. § 13-2910 or is vicious as defined in A.J.C.C., Vol. I,
§ 6-1-1. The court shall schedule the hearing within 15 business days after
the request has been filed. The animal will be held by the animal control
division or its designee until the matter has been fully adjudicated by the
municipal court, and all appellate time periods have expired.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-3-6  VICIOUS DOGS.



   It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, allow to run at-large,
or otherwise have under his or her control any vicious dog or direct or
control of any vicious dog. This section shall not apply to zoos, wild animal
parks or animal shelters. Vicious dogs may be impounded if they are found at
large and may be kept impounded until there is a final disposition of any
criminal complaint or payment in full of all civil sanctions imposed arising
from the alleged violation of this section, provided that the criminal or
civil complaint is filed within 30 days of the alleged violation date. Also,
in the judgment of the enforcement officer, any dog at large that is
dangerous, or vicious, and poses an immediate threat to human safety that
cannot be safely impounded, may be immediately disposed of in a humane manner.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-3-7  OWNER LIABILITY.



   (A)   Injury to any person or animal or damage to any property, by
an animal while at large or under the owner’s control, shall be the full
responsibility of the animal owner or person responsible for the animal when
such damages were inflicted.



   (B)   The owner of an animal which bites a person who is in or on a
public place or lawfully in or on a private place, including the property of
the owner of the animal, is liable for damages suffered by the person bitten,
regardless of the former viciousness of the animal or the owner’s previous
knowledge of its viciousness.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-3-8  DOGS KILLING ANIMALS, LIVESTOCK OR FOWL.



   The provisions of A.R.S. § 3-1311 govern situations where dogs kill,
wound or chase livestock, except that the same provisions also apply where
dogs kill, wound or chase any animal or fowl.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-3-9  DOG FECAL MATTER.



   Any person owning, possessing, harboring or having the care, charge,
control or custody of any dog shall immediately remove and thereafter dispose
of any fecal matter deposited by the dog on public or private property,
unless the property owner has given prior approval to use the property for
this purpose.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



ARTICLE 6-4:  CONTRACTUAL AGREEMENT



Section



   6-4-1   Intergovernmental agreements



§ 6-4-1  INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS.



   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the
Council may contract with other agencies to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



ARTICLE 6-5:  CONFINED ANIMALS



Section



   6-5-1   Confined animals in motor vehicles or other places of
endangerment



   6-5-2   Impoundment of animals found in motor vehicles



   6-5-3   Exceptions



§ 6-5-1  CONFINED ANIMALS IN MOTOR VEHICLES OR OTHER PLACES OF ENDANGERMENT.



   No person having charge or custody of an animal, as owner or otherwise,
shall place or confine such animal, or allow such animal to be placed or
confined or to remain in a motor vehicle or in such a location under such
conditions or for such a period of time as may endanger the health or
well-being of such animal due to heat or cold, lack of food, drink, adequate
ventilation or such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to
cause suffering, disability or death.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-5-2  IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS FOUND IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   An enforcement officer who finds an animal in a motor vehicle in
violation of this article may force entry into the motor vehicle if necessary
to remove the animal. The enforcement officer removing the animal shall take
the animal to the animal control division or other place of safekeeping and
shall, in the event the person having custody cannot be otherwise contacted,
leave in a prominent place in the motor vehicle a written notice bearing the
enforcement officer’s name, the office and address where the animal may be
claimed by the owner thereof. The animal will be surrendered to the owner if
the owner claims the animal within 3 business days from the time the animal
was removed from the motor vehicle and shall pay all reasonable charges that
have accrued for the maintenance of the animal. The owner must also at such
time of return of such animal make current all licensing and vaccinations and
pay all associated fines. In addition, the owner shall show proof of payment
of any court fines for any citations that were issued as a result of the
impoundment prior to or at the time the animal is returned to the owner.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-5-3  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the transportation
of horses, cattle, sheep, poultry or other agricultural livestock in trailers
or other vehicles designed and constructed for such purpose.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



ARTICLE 6-6:  KEEPING OF ANIMALS



Section



   6-6-1   Maintenance of property



   6-6-2   Sanitary regulations



   6-6-3   Enforcement



§ 6-6-1  MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to keep or
harbor any animal in such a manner that the housing conditions shall cause
insect or rodent breeding, obnoxious or offensive odors or those that
constitute a public nuisance.



   (B)   All corrals, barns, enclosures or other structures used for
the purpose of housing, keeping or caring for any animal or animals shall be
structurally sound so as to contain such animals safely and securely.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-6-2  SANITARY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Manure shall be removed from any yard, corral, barn, enclosure
or any other structure used for the puipose of housing, keeping or caring for
an animal or livestock as often as necessary to maintain a sanitary premise
that will not cause a hazard to the health of an animal or livestock. Manure
however may be composted or distributed evenly in a thin layer in turnouts or
roundpens for purposes of dust control.



   (B)   Drinking troughs shall contain clean and fresh water and shall
be provided with adequate overflow drainage and such drainage shall be
controlled so as to prohibit any flow onto adjoining properties or the
breeding of mosquitoes or other noxious insects. Livestock must have access
to drinking water at all times.



   (C)   Manure shall not be accumulated in any place or in any manner
whereby it may affect a source of drinking water or groundwater.



   (D)   Spillage and leftovers from animal feedings shall be disposed
of in such a manner that insect or rodent breeding or obnoxious odors do not
exist.



   (E)   Manure shall be located on the property on which the animals
or livestock generating the manure are kept or harbored so as to prevent the
manure from entering onto an adjoining property. Reasonable containment
procedures shall take into consideration acts of nature such as rainfall and
wind, as well as natural drainage courses and sloping terrain.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-6-3  ENFORCEMENT.



   All animals shall be kept or harbored with adequate food, water and
care in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty
of the enforcement officer to impound any animals which are maintained in
such conditions in violation of this code in accordance with the provisions
as contained in A.J.C.C. Vol. I, Article 6-2.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



ARTICLE 6-7:  POTBELLIED PIGS



Section



   6-7-1   Licenses and tags



   6-7-2   Running at large



   6-7-3   Impoundment



   6-7-4   Biting pigs



   6-7-5   Owner liability



   6-7-6   Keeping of potbellied pigs



   6-7-7   Number permitted



   6-7-8   Commercial breeding prohibited



§ 6-7-1  LICENSES AND TAGS.



   (A)   A license shall be required, with a fee as established in
A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Article 4-3, for each potbellied pig 4 months of age or
over that is kept, harbored or maintained within the boundaries of the city
for at least 30 calendar days of each year. The license is valid for 12
months from the month of issue and shall expire if not renewed by the end of
each year.



   (B)   Durable license tags shall be provided by the city. Each
potbellied pig licensed under the terms of this article shall receive, at the
time of licensing, such a tag on which shall be inscribed the name of the
city, the number of the license and the year of issue. All license tags shall
expire 12 months from the month of issue. The tag shall be attached to a
collar or harness which shall be worn by the potbellied pig at all times
except as may be otherwise provided in this article. Whenever a license tag
is lost, a duplicate tag shall be issued upon application by the owner.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to counterfeit or attempt to
counterfeit an official license tag or remove such tag from any potbellied
pig for the purpose of willful and malicious mischief or place a license tag
upon a potbellied pig unless the tag was issued to that potbellied pig.



   (D)   Whenever the ownership of a potbellied pig has changed, the
new owner must obtain a new license and pay the fees.



   (E)   The enforcement officer shall apprehend and impound any
potbellied pig found without a current valid license tag. However, before the
impoundment occurs, the enforcement officer shall attempt to locate the owner
using due diligence so that the owner has the opportunity to comply with the
licensing and tag requirements set forth above.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-7-2  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
maintaining any potbellied pig shall allow such potbellied pig to be at large
as defined in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 6-1-1 subject to the permission of the
public safety director pursuant to this article.



   (B)   The enforcement officer shall apprehend and impound any
potbellied pig running at large.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-7-3  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Impoundment regulations as contained in A.J.C.C., Vol. I,
Article 6-2, except those applied to livestock, shall apply to potbellied
pigs.



   (B)   Impoundment fees together with fees for care and feeding, as
established in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Article 4-3, shall be assessed for the
impoundment of potbellied pigs.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-7-4  BITING PIGS.



   (A)   Any potbellied pig properly licensed pursuant to this chapter
that bites any person may be confined and quarantined at the home of the
owner or wherever the potbellied pig is harbored and maintained with the
written consent of and in a manner prescribed by the enforcement officer. The
potbellied pig shall not be moved or relocated unless the enforcement officer
is so notified. The time for quarantine under this division shall be 10
calendar days.



   (B)   At the completion of the quarantine or impoundment period and
prior to the release of the potbellied pig, the potbellied pig shall be
examined by a licensed veterinarian and released only if the veterinarian
determines that the potbellied pig does not exhibit signs of rabies,
infection or any other dangerous, contagious and infectious diseases.



   (C)   If it is determined that the potbellied pig is infected with
rabies or other dangerous, contagious and infectious disease, it shall be the
duty of the enforcement officer to destroy such potbellied pig in as humane a
manner as reasonably possible. Following such action or if the potbellied pig
dies during the period of quarantine or impoundment, its head shall be sent
to the Arizona Department of Health Services or appropriate diagnostic
laboratory for examination.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-7-5  OWNER LIABILITY.



   (A)   Injury to any person or animal or damage to any property by a
potbellied pig while at large or under the owner’s control shall be the
full responsibility of the owner or person responsible for the potbellied pig
when such damages were inflicted.



   (B)   The owner of potbellied pig which bites a person who is in or
on a public place or lawfully in or on a private place, including the
property of the owner of the potbellied pig, is liable for damages suffered
by the person bitten, regardless of the former viciousness of the potbellied
pig or the owner’s previous knowledge of its viciousness.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-7-6  KEEPING OF POTBELLIED PIGS.



   The provisions of A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Article 6-6 shall be applicable to
the keeping of potbellied pigs.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-7-7  NUMBER PERMITTED.



   No more than 3 potbellied pigs as defined in this chapter, with each
animal weighing no more than 100 pounds, shall be allowed per household.
Potbellied pigs kept in this manner shall be considered as pets provided they
are not kept for purposes of retail sales or commercial breeding.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-7-8  COMMERCIAL BREEDING PROHIBITED.



   No potbellied pigs shall be kept for purposes of commercial breeding or
retail sales. Any potbellied pig as permitted under this chapter shall be
kept only as a pet or as a show animal within the limitations of A.J.C.C.,
Vol. I, § 6-7-7.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



ARTICLE 6-8:  KEEPING OF SWINE FOR SPECIAL PROJECTS



Section



   6-8-1   Limitations on location and quantity



   6-8-2   Time limitations



   6-8-3   Sanitary conditions



   8-8-4   Registration required



   6-8-5   Termination of project



§ 6-8-1  LIMITATIONS ON LOCATION AND QUANTITY.



   The keeping of swine or pigs shall meet the requirements set forth in
A.J.C.C., Vol. II, Land Development Code, Chapter 1, Zoning Ordinance, §
1-6-17, Animal Regulations, as amended.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-8-2  TIME LIMITATIONS.



   All swine or pigs permitted under this article shall be considered as
part of a terminal market project or other similar educational project
subject to the guidelines of a political subdivision of this state or an
educational institution. All guidelines shall specify a period of time for
termination of the project. All swine and pigs kept in conjunction with an
educational project shall be limited to a period of time commencing November
1 and ending on March 31 of the subsequent year in conjunction with the
scheduling of the Pinal County Fair. At no other time shall such swine or
pigs be permitted to remain on any parcel or lot.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-8-3  SANITARY CONDITIONS.



   (A)   All swine or pigs kept in accordance with this article shall
be fed only manufactured swine feed in pellet form and shall not be fed
refuse or garbage.



   (B)   The area in which such swine or pigs are harbored or
maintained shall be kept clean with all manure disposed of properly and on a
daily basis. No standing water or mud bog shall be permitted. Water will be
provided by means of a manufactured animal activated watering system with an
automatic shut-off valve to terminate water flow, such as a lixit system.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)  Penalty, see Vol. I, §§ 6-9-1 and 6-9-2



§ 6-8-4  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   All swine or pigs kept in accordance with this article shall be tagged,
photographed and registered with the Animal Control Division.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-8-5  TERMINATION OF PROJECT.



   If any swine or pig kept in conjunction with a project as permitted by
this article fails, for any reason, to fulfill the requirements as imposed by
this article, the animal may be impounded. Any animal not fulfilling the
project requirements shall not be returned to the participating owners’
residence or to the site at which it was previously harbored. Notwithstanding
the previous two sentences, the enforcement officer shall use due diligence
to locate the owner so that the licensing and tag requirements are met before
any decision is made to impound such animal.



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



ARTICLE 6-9:  VIOLATIONS



Section



   6-9-1   Civil filings and penalties



   6-9-2   Criminal filings and penalties



§ 6-9-1  CIVIL FILINGS AND PENALTIES.



   Except as otherwise noted, any violation of this chapter shall be
handled as a civil offense and shall be filed in the municipal court in the
same manner as civil property maintenance violations pursuant to A.J.C.C.,
Vol. I, § 9-1-4(D). Appeals shall be handled in the same manner pursuant to
A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 9-1-4(E). The fines noted below are the exact fines that
a judge shall impose, which shall not be decreased, increased, or exchanged
for community restitution or other penalties. The court may impose additional
penalties to include court fees, but shall not substitute such fees for the
base fines referenced as follows:



 

First violation
 
Fine of $250


Second violation of same code provision occurring within 24 months of first
violation
 
Fine of $500


Third violation of same code provision occurring within 24 months of first
violation
 
Fine of $750



 



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 6-9-2  CRIMINAL FILINGS AND PENALTIES.



   A fourth violation of the same code provision in this chapter occurring
within 24 months of the first violation shall be filed in the criminal
division of the municipal court as a Class 1 misdemeanor by the city
attorney’s office, which minimum fine shall be $1,000 and a maximum fine of
$2,500, a maximum of 36 months probation, a maximum of 6 months jail time,
and other provisions which the court has jurisdiction to impose, such as
applicable court-imposed penalties, assessments, an order for forfeiture and
destruction of an animal, and other court or probation fees. The judge shall
treat subsequent and successive civil judgments as in the same manner
criminal prior convictions are concerned insofar as the elevated fines noted
above are to be applied. The judge has no discretion to lower these
successive fines. However, violations of the following code provisions,
whenever committed, single incident or repetitive, shall always be handled as
criminal class 1 misdemeanors with the above-noted minimum class 1
misdemeanor penalties:



 

6-1-11
 
Cruelty, neglect and abandonment


6-2-7
 
Impeding Enforcement Officer


6-2-8
 
Biting animals; quarantine


6-3-6
 
Vicious dogs



 



(Ord. 1414, passed 6-16-2015)



CHAPTER 7: BUILDINGS



      Article




         7-1.   BUILDING AND TECHNICAL CODES





         7-2.   REQUIREMENTS FOR SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURES





         7-3.   BUILDING SECURITY STANDARDS





         7-4.   FIREPLACE RESTRICTIONS




ARTICLE 7-1:  BUILDING AND TECHNICAL CODES



Section



   7-1-1   Conformity with the Apache Junction city code, Volume II,
Land Development Code, Chapter, 1 Zoning Ordinance



   7-1-2   Uniform Administrative Code



   7-1-3   International Building Code



   7-1-4   International Fire Code



   7-1-5   International Residential Code



   7-1-6   National Electrical Code



   7-1-7   Uniform Plumbing Code



   7-1-8   International Mechanical Code



   7-1-9   Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings



   7-1-10   Uniform Sign Code



   7-1-11   Arizonans with Disabilities Act



   7-1-12   Mobile/manufactured home standards



   7-1-13   Penalty



§ 7-1-1  CONFORMITY WITH THE APACHE JUNCTION CITY CODE, VOLUME  II, LAND
DEVELOPMENT CODE, CHAPTER 1, ZONING ORDINANCE.



   In addition to the provisions contained in this chapter, all
construction shall conform to the Apache Junction city code, Volume II, Land
Development Code, Chapter 1, Zoning Ordinance.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-2  UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE.



   (A)   The Uniform Administrative Code (1997 Edition), which was
declared a public record by Res. 06-37, is hereby adopted by reference as the
"Uniform Administrative Code of the City of Apache Junction" and made a part
of this chapter the same as though the publication was specifically set forth
in full herein and is hereby amended in the following respects.



   (B)   Sec. 104 Conflicting Provisions is hereby amended by adding
the following subsections:



      104.1 Referenced codes. The other codes referenced elsewhere in
this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each reference. If another code is referenced elsewhere
in this code and has not been adopted, then that section shall be considered
invalid.



   (C)   Any references to the ICC Electrical Code shall be deleted and
the words "Electrical Code adopted by the City of Apache Junction and its
amendments" shall be inserted in lieu thereof.



   (D)   Any references to the International Fuel Gas Code shall be
deleted and the words "Plumbing Code adopted by the City of Apache Junction
and its amendments" shall be inserted in lieu thereof.



   (E)   Any references to the International Zoning Code shall be
deleted and the words "Zoning Code adopted by the city of Apache Junction
Volume II Land Development Code, Chapter 1, Zoning Ordinance and its
amendments" shall be inserted in lieu thereof.



   (F)   Any references to the International Private Sewage Disposal
Code, or International Property Maintenance Code or International Existing
Building Code shall be deleted.



   (G)   104.2 International Energy Conservation Code. The provisions
of the 2003 International Energy Conservation Code shall apply only to
matters governing the design and construction of those structures regulated
in the International Residential Code as adopted by the City of Apache
Junction.



   (H)   Sec. 106 is hereby amended by adding the following paragraph:



      Requests for a modification of code requirements shall be made in
writing on a form provided by the building official. The applicant is
responsible for providing all information, calculations, or other data
necessary to substantiate each request for a modification. The building
official shall approve, approve with stipulations, or deny such applications
based upon the substantiating data submitted and the building official's
determination that the modification does or does not result in substantial
compliance with the intent of the code. In deciding each case, the building
official may consider or require alternative methods or systems to be used in
compensation for the particular code provision to be modified.



   (I)   Sec. 201 Authority, is amended by adding Sec. 201.3 Public
Facilities.



      201.3 Public Facilities. Subject to the criteria set forth below,
the City Manager or designee thereof, may waive all or part of any building
permit, development and/or grading fees which are imposed on any person,
currently in effect or enacted in the future, for the construction of any
structure in the corporate limits of the city:



         1.    Incorporation of greater community access into the
design and construction of new schools;



         2.    Use of multi-purpose rooms such as cafeterias,
libraries and playing fields by the general public; and



         3.    Allowing the construction of extra rooms and
facilities on school sites where such construction is financed and owned by
the city for community use.



   (J)   Sec. 204 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following:



      Sec. 204 Building and Technical Codes Board of Appeals.



         204-1 Creation



         204-2 Membership and Terms of Office



         204-3 Salaries and Personal Expenses



         204-4 Officers



         204-5 Meetings



         204-6 Vacancies



         204-7 Removal of Members



         204-8 Duties



         204-9 Limitations of Authority



      Sec. 204-1  Creation.



         There is hereby established the Apache Junction Board of
Construction Code of Appeals (hereafter the "board"), a board of five members
mandated by the various construction codes adopted by the City.



      Sec. 204-2  Membership and Terms of Office.



         A.   The board shall consist of five members who are
appointed by the mayor and approved by the council.



         B.   The terms of the board's members shall be for two
years and shall end on October 31, two years thereafter or until their
successors are duly appointed by the Mayor and Council. Such terms shall be
so staggered that no more than three member's terms conclude in the same year.



         C.   Members need not be residents of the City (however
every effort should be made to meet the membership of the board from the
citizenry).



         D.   Membership shall consist of members who are
qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to
construction codes. Membership shall be taken from the following areas:



            1.   Professional - 1 architect or engineer.



            2.   Trades - 1 general contractor and 2
additional members from the plumbing, electrical or mechanical trade.



            3.   Lay member - 1 member of the board shall be
from the general residency of the City.



      Sec. 204-3  Salaries and Personal Expenses.



         The members of the board shall receive no salaries or other
remuneration for their services in such capacity and shall not be entitled to
personal expenses incurred by them in the discharge of their official duties,
except to the extent and purposes and amount such expense is first authorized
and approved by the council.



      Sec. 204-4  Officers.



         The board shall elect a chairman and vice chairman to serve
for a period of one year. The vice chairman shall preside at meetings in the
absence of the chairman.



      Sec. 204-5  Meetings.



         The board shall establish a regular meeting day and time at
least once a month. Special meetings may be called as required. A quorum
shall consist of three voting members for the transaction of all business.



      Sec. 204-6  Vacancies.



         Vacancies shall be filled by the city council in accordance
with Sec. 204-2 for the unexpired term of the member affected.



      Sec. 204-7  Removal of Members.



         Members of the board serve at the pleasure of the council
and may be removed by the mayor with the concurrence of the council. A member
shall not be absent from board's regular meetings for more than three
consecutive times without a reasonable excuse. After the absence of three
consecutive meetings, the remaining members of the board shall vote to retain
or recommend to the council that the absentee member be relieved of his or
her duties on the board.



      Sec. 204-8  Duties.



         A.    The board shall hear appeals regarding
interpretation of the construction codes identified in this chapter. Such
decisions shall be binding on the Building Official.



         B.    The board may be asked to make recommendations
regarding changes to the construction codes, adoption of new codes or
procedures necessary to enforce the construction codes.



         C.    The board shall hear appeals in accordance with
the provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.



      Sec. 204-9  Limitations of Authority.



         The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to
interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code or the
administrative provisions of the technical codes nor shall the board be
empowered to waive requirements of this code or the technical codes.



   (K)   Sec. 301.2.1 Building Permits, is hereby amended by adding
Sec. 301.2.1(11) which reads:



      Sec. 301.2.1 (11) Recreational vehicles and their non-habitable
accessory structures when located in a recreational vehicle park which has
entered into a contract with the city for self-regulation.



      Sec. 303.1 Issuance. The word "APPROVED" is deleted and amended
to read as follows: "Reviewed for Code Compliance"



   (L)   Sec. 304.2 Permit Fees, the first sentence is hereby amended
to read as follows:



      The fee for each permit shall be as established by Council
resolution. See CHAPTER 4 FEES of the city of Apache Junction city code.



   (M)   Sec. 304.3 Plan Review Fees, the last sentence of the first
paragraph is hereby amended to read as follows:



      Said plan review fee for building or structures shall be
established by Council resolution. See CHAPTER 4 FEES of the Apache Junction
city code.



   (N)   Sec. 304.3 Plan Review Fees, is hereby amended by the deletion
of Paragraph 2 and 3. The last sentence of Paragraph 5 of this section is
hereby amended to read as follows:



      When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional
plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate
established by Council resolution. See Chapter 4, Fees of the Apache Junction
City Code.



   (O)   Sec. 304.5.2 Fee, the third sentence is hereby amended to read
as follows:



      The minimum investigative fee shall be the same as the minimum
fee as established by council resolution.



   (P)   Sec. 305.5(5) is hereby amended by adding the following
paragraph:



      Property owners shall obtain and display on the residence,
business, or otherwise, the correct building number or numbers as assigned to
such property of the city of Apache Junction in accordance with established
street assignment policy, prior to final inspection and/or issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. the building numbers shall be of a durable material
not less than four inches (4") high with a stroke of not less than one-half
inch (½") in width, permanently attached to the building and must be readily
distinguished and readable from the nearest paved public/common roadway
fronting that property.



   (Q)   Sec. 305.8 Re-inspections, Paragraph 4 is hereby amended to
read as follows:



      To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file application in
writing upon a form furnished for that purpose, and pay the reinspection fee,
as established by council resolution.



   (R)   Sec. 306.1 General, is hereby amended to read as follows:



      In addition to the inspections required by sec. 305, the engineer
or architect of record acting as the owner's agent shall employ one or more
special inspectors who shall provide inspections during construction on the
following type of work:



   (S)   Sec. 306.1 general, is hereby amended by adding the following
subsection:



      306.1.16 Electrical Special Inspection



         1.    Ground-fault protection performance tests for
equipment are required to be provided with ground-fault protection.



         2.    Switchboards, panelboards, motor control centers,
and other equipment rated 1,000 amps or more; or over 600 volts.



         3.    Emergency and standby power systems, including
switchboards, panel boards, distribution boards, transfer equipment, power
source, conductors, fire pumps, and exhaust and ventilation fans.



   (T)   Sec. 307.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with
the following:



      307.1 Electrical Observation. Electrical Observation shall be
provided for the following installations:



         1.    Installation or alteration of that portion of
health care facility electrical systems which fall within the scope of
Article 517, Chapter III of the 2005 National Electric Code where critical
care areas are present.



         2.    Installations or alterations of high voltage
electrical systems, which exceed 600 volts. Installations or alterations of
electrical systems within locations classified as hazardous by the provisions
of the 2005 National Electric Code, or the 2006 International Fire Code,
except for gasoline dispensing installations and systems located within
storage garages, repair garages or lubritoriums.



         3.    When such observation is specifically required by
the building official.



         The owner shall employ the engineer responsible for the
electrical design, or another engineer designated by the engineer responsible
for the electrical design to perform visual observation of complex electrical
equipment and systems for general conformance to the approved plans and
specifications, including but not limited to, placement and interconnection
of equipment.



         Electrical observation shall be performed at significant
stages of the construction and when the installation is complete and ready to
be inspected by the building official.



   (U)   Sec. 309.4 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following:



      309.4   Temporary certificate of occupancy. If the building
official finds no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any
building or portion thereof before the same is completed, a temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued for the use of a portion or portions
of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or
structure provided the applicant agrees that:



         1.    When construction is complete, final inspection
will be requested and a certificate of occupancy issued.



         2.    The applicant will state in writing the length of
time the temporary certificate of occupancy is required. The length of time
shall not exceed 90 days. The temporary certificate of occupancy will expire
at the end of the time period stated in writing, at which time the power will
be de-energized. The building official may extend the temporary certificate
of occupancy upon written request by the permittee or applicant, showing that
circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or applicant have prevented
the completion of the project. The applicant must show the building official
substantial proof the project was unable to be completed within the requested
time frame.



         3.    It is the responsibility of the applicant to
complete any required work prior to the expiration date of the temporary
certificate of occupancy and call for final inspection.



         4.    The building official may request the utility
company to de-energize power, if required work is not completed on or before
the expiration date of the temporary certificate of occupancy. This includes
occupying the structure after The temporary certificate of occupancy has
expired.



         5.    Neither the city of apache junction nor the
utility company will be held liable for any damages or delays, for
deenergization of power.



         Applicant must be the owner or authorized agent. If the
owner is not available to provide signature on the application for temporary
certificate of occupancy, then the owner shall provide a letter on company
letterhead or notarized letter of authorization stating the name of the
person authorized to act on owner's or company's behalf.



   (V)   Chapter 3, table 3-A is hereby amended to read as follows:
Such fees shall be as established by council resolution. See Chapter 4 Fees
of the city of Apache Junction City Code. Chapter 3, Table 3-B is hereby
amended to read as follows: Such fees shall be as established by council
resolution. See Chapter 4 FEES of the city of Apache Junction City Code.
Chapter 3, Table 3-C is hereby amended to read as follows: Such fees shall be
as established by council resolution. See Chapter 4 FEES of the city of
Apache Junction City Code. Chapter 3, Table 3-D is hereby amended to read as
follows: Such fees shall be as established by council resolution. See Chapter
4 FEES of the city of Apache Junction City Code. Chapter 3, Table 3-E is
hereby deleted. Chapter 3, Table 3-F is hereby deleted. Chapter 3, Table 3-G
is hereby amended to read as follows: Such fees shall be as established by
council resolution. See Chapter 4 FEES of the city of Apache Junction City
Code. Chapter 3, Table 3-H is hereby amended to read as follows: Such fees
shall be as established by council resolution. See Chapter 4 FEES of the city
of Apache Junction City Code.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006; Am. Ord. 1328, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 7-1-3  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   The International Building Code, 2006 Edition, which was
declared a public record by Res. 06-37, is hereby adopted by reference as the
"International Building Code of the City of Apache Junction" and made a part
of this chapter the same as though the publication was specifically set forth
in full herein and is hereby amended in the following respects.



   (B)   Chapter 1 Administration is hereby amended by the deletion of
Sections 101 through 115. (For the administration of this Code, see the
Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition).



   (C)   Sec. 202 Definitions, is amended by adding the following
definition:



      CARPORT is a building or portion thereof which is entirely open
on two or more sides which is primarily designed for the storage and keeping
of motor vehicles.



   (D)   Sec. 507.2 is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph before
the exceptions to read as follows:



      With the Building Official's approval, a Building Code Compliance
Covenant and Reciprocal Easement agreement may be used as an alternate method
of compliance with building code property line requirements where a single
development such as a shopping center is divided by lot or tract lines for
financial purposes while the whole development is built and functions like
one building on one undivided lot.



   (E)   Chapter 11, Accessibility, is hereby deleted in its entirety
and insert in lieu of the following:



      The "Arizonans with Disabilities Act" (Arizona Revised Statutes,
Title 41, Chapter 9, Article 8), and the "Arizonans with Disabilities Act
Implementing Rules" (Arizona Administrative Code, Title 10, Chapter 3,
Article 4), which rules incorporate the Federal "Americans with Disabilities
Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities," is hereby adopted
as the Arizonans with Disabilities Act of the City, and shall apply to new
construction and alterations and are not required in buildings or portions of
existing buildings that do not meet the standards and specifications and this
act is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as though fully set
forth in this section.



   (F)   Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency, is hereby deleted in its
entirety.



   (G)   Chapter 31 Special Construction, is amended by adding:



      Sec. 3103.5 Moved Buildings and Temporary Buildings. Buildings
and structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the
provisions of this code for new buildings or structures.



         Exceptions: Awnings or other structures which are accessory
to park models or recreational vehicles may be moved and reassembled to the
standards in effect during initial construction, but in no case less than 10
pounds per square feet design load.



   (H)   Chapter 31 Special Construction, is hereby amended by deleting
Sec. 3109, Swimming Pool Enclosures.



   (I)   Chapter 34, Sec. 3409, Accessibility for Existing Buildings,
is hereby deleted in its entirety. (For accessibility requirements see the
Arizonans with Disabilities Act).



   (J)   Appendix I Patio Covers, Sec. 1101.1 General: The first
sentence is deleted and hereby amended to read as follows:



      Patio covers, carports and storage rooms in RV parks and
subdivisions may be detached or attached to the buildings, manufactured
housing or recreational vehicles as accessories to Group 4; Group R Division
3; or to a single dwelling unit in Group R Division 1 Occupancies.



   (K)   Appendix J, Grading, is hereby deleted and replaced by the
following:



      Appendix J, Excavation and Grading



      SEC. 3304- PURPOSE.



      The purpose of this appendix is to safeguard life, limb, property
and the public welfare by regulating grading on private property within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Apache Junction.



      SEC. 3305- SCOPE.



      This appendix sets forth rules and regulations to control
clearing, grubbing, excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including
fills and embankments; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance
of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading
construction. The standards listed below are recognized standards (see
Sections 3503 and 3504).



         1. Testing.



         1.1. ASTM D 1557, Moisture-density Relations of Soils and
Soil Aggregate Mixtures



         1.2. ASTM D 1556, In Place Density of Soils by the Sand
Cone Method



         1.3. ASTM D 2137, In Place Density of Soils by the Rubber
Balloon Method



         1.4 ASTM D 2937, In place Density of Soils by the Drive
Cylinder Method



         1.5 ASTM D 2922 and D 3017, In Place Moisture Contact and
Density of Soils by Nuclear Methods



      SEC. 3306- PERMITS REQUIRED



         3306.1 Permits Required. Except as specified in Sec. 3306.2
of this section, no person shall do any grading without first having obtained
a grading permit from the Building Official or designee.



         3306.2 Exempted Work. A grading permit is not required for
the following:



         1.   When approved by the Building Official or designee,
grading and/or excavation that does not pose any danger to private or public
property.



         2.   An excavation below finished grade for basements
and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by
valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material
from such excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height
greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) after the completion of such structure.



         3.   Cemetery graves.



         4.   Refuse disposal sites controlled by other
regulations.



         5.   Excavations for wells or tunnels or utilities.



         6.   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or
stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and
provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral
support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent contiguous
property.



         7.   Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil
engineers or engineering geologists.



         8.   An excavation that: (1) is less than 2 feet (610
mm) in depth or (2) does not create a cut slope greater than 5 feet (1524 mm)
in height and steeper than 1 unit vertical in 1 units horizontal (66.7 %
slope), (3) or does not obstruct a drainage course.



         9.   A fill less than 1 foot (305 mm) in depth and
placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than 1 unit vertical in 5
units horizontal (20% slope), or less than 3 feet (914 mm) in depth, not
intended to support structures, that does not exceed 100 cubic yards (38.3
m3) on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course.



         Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter
shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or
ordinances of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona.



      SEC. 3307- HAZARDS



         Whenever the Building Official or designee determines that
any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become
a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the
safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of
the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or
agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the
Building Official or designee, shall within the period specified therein
repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment to eliminate the hazard and
to be in conformance with the requirements of this code.



      SEC. 3308- DEFINITIONS



         For the purpose of this appendix, the definitions listed
hereunder shall be construed as specified in this section.



         APPROVAL is the proposed work or completed work conforms to
this chapter in the opinion of the Building Official or designee.



         AS-GRADED is the extent of surface conditions on completion
of grading.



         BEDROCK is in-place solid rock.



         BENCH is a relatively level step excavated into earth
material on which fill is to be placed.



         BORROW is earth material acquired from an off-site location
for use in grading on a site.



         BUILDING OFFICIAL OR DESIGNEE is the officer or other
designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this
code, or the Building Official's duly authorized representative.



         CIVIL ENGINEER is a professional engineer registered in the
state to practice in the field of civil works.



         CIVIL ENGINEERING is the application of the knowledge of
the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials
to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works.



         COMPACTION is the densification of a fill by mechanical
means.



         EARTH MATERIAL is any rock, natural soil or fill any
combination thereof.



         ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST is a geologist experienced and
knowledgeable in engineering geology.



         ENGINEERING GEOLOGY is the application of geologic
knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally
occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.



         EROSION is the wearing away of the ground surface as a
result of the movement of wind, water or ice.



         EXCAVATION is the mechanical removal of earth material.



         FILL is a deposit of earth material placed by artificial
means.



         GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER (See "Soils Engineer").



         GRADE is the vertical location of the ground surface.
Existing Grade is the grade prior to grading. Finish Grade is the final grade
of the site that conforms to the approved plan. Rough Grade is the stage at
which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.



         GRADING is any excavating or filling or combination thereof.



         KEY: a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated
in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.



         PROFESSIONAL INSPECTION is the inspection required by this
code or the Building Official or designee to be performed by the civil
engineer, soils engineer or engineering geologist. Such inspections include
that performed by persons supervised by such engineers or geologists and
shall be sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct of the work.



         SITE is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination
thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.



         SLOPE is an inclined ground surface the inclination of
which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.



         SOIL is naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying
bedrock.



         SOILS ENGINEER (GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER) is an engineer
experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soils engineering
(geotechnical) engineering.



         SOIL ENGINEERING (GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING) is the
application of the principles of soils mechanics in the investigation,
evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and
the inspection or testing of the construction thereof.



         TERRACE is a relatively level step constructed in the face
of a grade, with a sloped surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.



      SEC. 3309- GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS



      3309.1 Permits Required. Except as exempted in Sec. 3306 of this
code, no person shall do any grading without first obtaining a grading permit
from the Building Official or designee. A separate permit shall be obtained
for each site, and may cover both excavations and fills.



      3309.2 Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first
file an application in writing on a form furnished by the enforcement agency
and such application shall contain the following:(1) The estimated quantities
of work involved; (2) Identification and description of the work to be
covered by the permit for which application is made; (3) Description of the
land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street
address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely
locate the proposed building or work; (4) Plans, diagrams, computations and
specifications and other data as required in Sec. 302 of the 1997 Uniform
Administrative Code and required of the Building Official shall be attached.
(5) Signature by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent.



      3309.3 Grading Designation. Grading in excess of 1,000 cubic
yards (3825 m3) shall be performed in accordance with approved grading plan
prepared by a civil engineer, and shall be designated as "engineered
grading." Grading involving less than 1,000 cubic yards (3825 m3) shall be
designated "regular grading" unless the permittee chooses to have the grading
performed as engineered grading, or the Building Official determines that
special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case grading shall
conform to the requirements for engineered grading.



      3309.4 Engineered Grading Requirements. Applications for a
grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications,
and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report, drainage
report, and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications shall be
prepared and signed by and individual licensed by the state to prepare such
plans or specifications when required by the Building Official or designee.



      Specifications shall contain information covering construction
and material requirements.



      Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper and shall be
of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed
and show in detail that they will conform to provisions of this code and all
relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set
of plans shall give location of the work, the name and address of the owner,
and the person by whom they were prepared. The Plans shall include the
following information:



         1.   General vicinity of the proposed site.



         2.   Property limits and accurate contours of existing
ground and details of terrain and area drainage.



         3.   Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours
to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related
construction.



         4.   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface
drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be
constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work, together with a map
showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any
drainage.



         5.   Location of any buildings or structures on the
property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings
or structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 15 feet (4572mm) of
the property or that may be affected by the proposed grading  operations.



         6.   Recommendations included in the soils engineering
report and the engineering geology report shall be incorporated in the
grading plans or specifications. When approved by the Building Official or
designee, specific recommendations contained in the soils engineering report
and the engineering geology report, which are applicable to grading, may be
included by reference.



         7.   The dates of the soils engineering and engineering
geology reports together with the names, addresses and phone numbers of the
firms or individuals who prepared the reports.



      3309.5 Soils Engineering Report. The soils engineering report
required by Sec. 3309.4 shall include data regarding the nature, distribution
and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading
procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, including buttress
fills, when necessary, and opinion on adequacy for the intended use of sites
to be developed by the proposed grading as affected by soils engineering
factors, including the stability of slopes.



      3309.6 Engineering Geology Report. The engineering geology report
required by Sec. 3309.4 shall include an adequate description of the geology
of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic
conditions on the proposed development, and opinion on the adequacy for the
intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading, as affected by
geologic factors.



      Drainage Report. Engineered grading submittals must include a
drainage report to demonstrate, at a minimum, that the required retention
volume is provided and that off-site drainage flows are adequately conveyed
through the site and safely discharged downstream. (See the City of Apache
Junction Engineering Guidelines for retention and drainage requirements).



      NOTE: A more detailed drainage report may be required to address
on-site drainage as part of the improvement plan submittal process.



      3309.8 Regular Grading Requirements. Each application for a
grading permit shall be accompanied by a plan in sufficient clarity to
indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plans shall give the location
of the work, the name of the owner and the name of the person who prepared
the plan.  The plan shall include the following information:



         1.   General vicinity of the proposed site.



         2.   Limiting dimensions and depth of cut and fill.



         3.   Location of any buildings or structures where work
is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures within 40
feet of the proposed grading.



         4.   Location and size of any (wash or washes).



      3309.9 Protection of utilities. The developer shall be
responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or services.



      3309.10 Protection of adjacent property. The person doing or
causing grading is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent
property. No person shall excavate on land sufficiently close to the property
line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or other public
or private property, without supporting and protecting such property from any
damage that might result.



      3309.11 Tracking of dirt onto public streets. The developer shall
provide for the adequate cleaning of equipment to prevent the tracking of
dirt and debris into or onto the public right-of way.



      3309.12 Revegetation. The loss of trees, shrubs, cacti, ground
cover, and topsoil shall be minimized on any and all grading projects. In
addition to mechanical methods of erosion control, graded areas shall be
protected to the extent practical from damage by erosion by planting trees,
shrubs, ground cover or an approved revegetation seed mix approved by the
City of Apache Junction Parks and Recreation Department. Such plantings shall
provide for rapid, short-term coverage of the slopes as well as long-term
permanent coverage. A plan by a licensed landscape architect may be required.



      3309.13 Off-site Drainage flows. It shall be a violation of this
Code for any person to block or hinder the flow of existing flows that enter
a site. The engineered and regular grading submittals shall both demonstrate
that adequate conveyance is provided for all such flows. The Building
Official or designee may require detailed and hydrologic and or hydraulic
calculations to demonstrate compliance with the requirement.



      3309.14 Issuance. The provisions of Sec. 106.4 are applicable to
grading permits. The Building Official or designee may require that grading
operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which incur
weather-generated problems not considered at the time the permit was issued.
The Building Official or designee may require professional inspection and
testing by the soils engineer. When the Building Official has cause to
believe that geologic factors may be involved, the grading will be required
to conform to engineered grading.



      SEC. 3310 GRADING FEES.



      3310.1 General. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the
provisions of this section or shall be as set forth in the fee schedule
adopted by the jurisdiction. (See City Code Chapter 4 Fees).



      3310.2 Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data are required
to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting
plans and specifications for review. Said plan review fee shall be as set
forth in the City Code, Chapter 4, Fees. Separate plan review fee shall apply
to retaining walls or major drainage structures as required in the code. For
excavation and fill on the same site, the fee shall be based on the volume of
excavation or fill, whichever is greater.



      3310.3 Grading Permit Fees. A fee for each grading permit shall
be paid to the City of Apache Junction as set forth in the City Code, Chapter
4 Fees. Separate permits and fees shall apply to retaining walls or major
drainage structures as required elsewhere in this code. There shall be no
separate charge for standard terrace drains and similar facilities.



      SEC. 3311- BONDS.



      The Building Official or designee may require bonds in such form
and amounts, as may be deemed necessary to ensure that the work, if not
completed in accordance with the approval plans and specifications, will be
corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions. In lieu of a surety bond the
applicant may file a cash bond or instrument of credit with the Building
Official or designee in an amount equal to that which would be required in
the surety bond.



      SEC. 3312- CUTS.



      3312.1 General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved
soils engineering or engineering geology report, cuts shall conform to the
provisions of this section. In the absence of an approved soils engineering
report, these provisions may be waived for minor cuts not intended to support
structures.



      3312.2 Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than
is safe for the intended use and shall be no steeper than 1 unit vertical in
2 unit horizontal (50% slope) unless the permittee furnishes a soils
engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, stating that the site
has been investigated and giving an opinion that a cut at a steeper slope
will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property.



      SEC. 3313- FILLS.



      3313.1 General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved
soils engineering report, fills shall conform to the provisions of this
section. In the absence of an approved soils engineering report, these
provisions may be waived for minor fills not intended to support structures.



      3313.2 Preparation of Ground. Fill slopes shall not be
constructed on natural slopes steeper than 1 unit vertical in 2 units
horizontal (50% slope). The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill
by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable
materials scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill and, where slopes
are steeper than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope) and the
height is greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), by benching into sound bedrock or
other competent material as determined by the soils engineer. The bench under
the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than 1 unit vertical in 5 units
horizontal (20% slope) shall be at least 10 feet (3048 mm) wide but the cut
shall be made before placing the fill and acceptance by the soils engineer or
engineering geologist or both as a suitable foundation for fill.



      3313.3 Fill Material. Detrimental amounts of organic material
shall not be permitted in fills. Except as permitted by the Building
Official, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension
greater than 12 inches (305 mm) shall be buried or placed in fills.



         EXCEPTION: The Building Official or designee may permit
placement of larger rock when the soils engineer properly devises a method of
placement, and continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill
stability. The following conditions shall also apply:



         1.   Prior to issuance of the grading permit, Potential
rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan.



         2.   Rock sizes greater than 12 inches (305mm) in
maximum dimension shall be 10 feet (3048 mm) or more below grade, measured
vertically.



         3.   Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of
all voids with well-grade soil.



      3313.4 Compaction. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of
90 percent of maximum density.



      3313.5 Slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than
is safe for the intended use.  Fill slopes shall be no steeper than 1 unit
vertical in 2 units horizontal (50% slope).



      SEC. 3314- SETBACKS.



      3314.1 General. Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site
boundaries in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be
horizontal distance measured perpendicular to the site boundary.



      3314.2 Top of Cut Slope. The top of cut slopes shall not be made
nearer to a site boundary line than one fifth of the vertical height of cut
with a minimum of 2 feet (610 mm)- and a maximum of 10 feet (3048 mm). The
setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains.



      3314.2 Top of Fill Slope. The toe of fill slope shall be made not
nearer to the site boundary line than one half the height of the slope with a
minimum of 2 feet (610 mm) and a maximum of 20 feet (6096 mm). Where a fill
slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off-site
property is developed, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work
as the Building Official deems necessary to protect the adjoining property
from damage as a result of such grading. These precautions may include but
are not limited to:



         1.   Additional setbacks.



         2.   Provision for retaining or slough walls.



         3.   Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope
surface to minimize erosion.



         4.   Provisions for the control of surface waters.



      3314.4 Modification of Slope Location. The Building Official or
designee may approve alternate setbacks. The Building Official or designee
may require an investigation and recommendation by a qualified engineer or
engineering geologist to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been
satisfied.



      SEC. 3315- DRAINAGE AND TERRACING.



      3315.1 General. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved
grading plan, drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the
provisions of this section for cut or fill slopes steeper than 1 unit
vertical in 3 units horizontal (33.3% slope)



      3315.2 Terrace. Terraces at least 6 feet (1829 mm) in width shall
be established at not more than 30-foot (9144 mm) vertical intervals on all
cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris except that where
only one terrace is required, it shall be at midheight. For cut or fill
slopes greater than 60 feet (18 288 mm) and up to 120 feet (36 576mm) in
vertical height, on terrace at approximately midheight shall be 12 feet (3658
mm) in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than
120 feet (36 576 mm) in height shall be designated by the civil engineer and
approved by the Building Official or designee. Suitable access shall be
provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. Swales or ditches on
terraces shall have a minimum gradient of 5 percent and must be paved with
reinforced concrete not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in thickness or an
approved equal paving. They shall have a minimum depth at the deepest point
of 1 foot (305 mm) and a minimum paved width of 5 feet (1524 mm). A single
run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area
exceeding 13,500 square feet (1254.2 M2)(projected) without discharging into
a down drain.



      3315.3 Subsurface Drainage. Cut and fill slopes shall be provided
with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.



      3315.4 Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to
carry waters to the nearest practicable drainage way approved by the Building
Official or designee or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to
deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be
prevented by installation of non-erosive down-drains or other devices.
Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of 2 percent toward approved
drainage facilities, unless waived by the Building Official or designee.



         EXCEPTION: The gradient from the building pad may be 1
percent if all of the following conditions exist throughout the permit area:



         1.   No proposed fills are greater than 10 feet (3048
mm) in maximum depth.



         2.   No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a
vertical height in excess of 10 feet (3048 mm).



         3.   No existing slope faces steeper than 1 unit
vertical in 10 units horizontal (10% slope) have a vertical height in excess
of 10 feet (3048 mm).



      3315.5 Interceptor Drains. Paved interceptor drains shall be
installed along the top of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage area
above slopes toward the cut and has a drainage path greater than 40 feet (12
192 mm) measured horizontally. Interceptor drains shall be paved with a
minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) of concrete or gunite and reinforced. They shall
have a minimum depth of 12 inches (305 mm) and a minimum paved width of 30
inches (762 mm) measured horizontally across the drain. The slope of drain
shall be approved by the Building Official or designee.



      3316.1 Slopes. The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared
and maintained to control against erosion. This control may consist of
effective planting. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon
as practicable and prior to calling for final approval. Where cut slopes are
not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the
materials, such protection may be omitted.



      3315.2 Other Devices. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing,
riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and
provide safety.



      SEC. 3317- GRADING INSPECTION.



      3317.1 General. Grading operations for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official or designee.
Professional inspection of grading operations shall be provided by the civil
engineer, soils engineer and the engineering geologist retained to provide
such services in accordance with Sec. 3317.5 for engineered grading and as
required by the Building Official or designee for regular grading.



      3317.2 Civil Engineer. The civil engineer shall provide
professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty,
which shall consist of observation and review as to the establishment of
line, grade and surface drainage of the development area. If revised plans
are required during the course of the work they shall be prepared by the
civil engineer.



      3317.3 Soils Engineer. The soils engineer shall provide
professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty,
which shall include observation during grading and testing for required
compaction. The soils engineer shall provide sufficient observation during
the preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the
fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the
conditions of the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this
chapter. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the
approved soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be submitted
to the permittee, the Building Official or designee and the civil engineer.



      3317.4 Engineering Geologist. The engineering geologist shall
provide professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical
specialty, which shall include professional inspection of the bedrock
excavation to determine if conditions encountered are in conformance with the
approved report. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing
from the approved engineering geology report shall be submitted to the soils
engineer.



      3317.5 Permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for the work
to be performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and
in conformance with the provisions of this code, and the permittee shall
engage consultants, if required, to provide professional inspections on a
timely basis. The permittee shall act as a coordinator between the
consultants, the contractor and the building official or designee. In the
event of changed conditions, the permittee shall be responsible for informing
the building official or designee of such change and shall provide revised
plans for approval.



      3317.6 Building Official or designee. The Building Official or
designee shall inspect the project at the various stages of work requiring
approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the
professional consultants.



      3317.7 Notification of Noncompliance. If, in the course of
fulfilling their respective duties under this chapter, the civil engineer,
the soils engineer or the engineering geologist finds that the work is not
being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans,
the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the permittee
and to the Building Official or designee.



      3317.8 Transfer of Responsibility. If the civil engineer, the
soils engineer, or the engineering geologist of record is changed during
grading, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed in
writing to accept their responsibility within the area of technical
competence for approval upon completion of the work. It shall be the duty of
the permittee to notify the Building Official or designee in writing of such
change prior to the recommencement of such grading.



      SEC. 3318- COMPLETION OF WORK



      3318.1 Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work
and at the final completion of the work, the following reports and drawings
and supplements thereto are required for engineered grading or when
professional inspection is performed for regular grading, as applicable,
determined by The Building Official or designee:



         1.   An as-built grading plan prepared by the civil
engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with Sec. 3317.5
showing original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface
elevations, lot drainage patterns, and the locations, and elevations of
surface drainage facilities and of the outlets of subsurface drains.
As-constructed locations, elevations and details of subsurface drains shall
be shown as reported by the soils engineer. The report shall verify all water
retention and detention devices and provide adequate volume per the approved
plans. Civil engineer shall state that to the best of their knowledge the
work within their area of responsibility was done is accordance with the
final approved grading plan.



         2.   A report prepared by the soils engineer retained to
provide such services in accordance with Sec. 3317.3, including locations and
elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests,
other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading
and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved soils
engineering investigation report. Soils engineers shall submit a statement
that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of
responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soils engineering report
and applicable provisions of this chapter.



         3.   A report prepared by the engineering geologist
retained to provide such services in accordance with Sec. 3317.5, including a
final description of the geology of the site and any new information
disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations
incorporated in the approval grading plan. Engineering geologists shall
submit a statement that, in the best of their knowledge, the work within
their area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved engineering
geologist report and applicable provisions of this chapter.



         4.   The grading contractor shall submit in a form
prescribed by the Building Official or designee a statement of conformance to
said as-built plan and the specifications.



      3318.2 Notification of Completion. The permittee shall notify the
Building Official or designee when the grading operation is ready for final
inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including
installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all
erosion-control measures have been completed in accordance with the final
approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-4  INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   (A)   The "International Fire Code (2006 Edition)," which was
declared a public record by Res. 06-37, is hereby adopted by reference as the
"International Fire Code of the City of Apache Junction" and made a part of
this chapter the same as though said publication was specifically set forth
in full herein and is hereby amended in the following respects.



   (B)   Sec. 102.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced to
read as follows:



      102.3 Change of use or occupancy. No change shall be made in the
use or occupancy of any structure that would place the structure in a
different division of the same group or occupancy or in a different group of
occupancies, unless such structure is made to comply with the requirements of
this code and the international building code. Subject to the approval of the
fire code official, the use or occupancy of an existing structure shall be
permitted to be changes and the structure is allowed to be occupied for
purposes in other groups without conforming to all the requirements of this
code and the international building code for those groups, provided the new
or proposed use is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, that the
existing use.



   (C)   Sec. 102.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as
follows:



      102.4 Application of building code. The design and construction
of new structures shall comply with the international building code; and any
alterations, additions, changes in use or changes in structures required by
this code which are within the scope of the international building code shall
be made in accordance therewith.



   (D)   Sec. 105.1.1 is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph to
read as follows:



      It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use a
building or premises or engage in any activities for which a permit is
determined to be required by the fire code official under this code without
first having obtained such permit.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-5  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   (A)   The "International Residential Code (2006 Edition)," which was
declared a public record by Res. 06-37, is hereby adopted by reference as the
"International Residential Code of the City of Apache Junction" and made a
part of this chapter the same as though the publication was specifically set
forth in full herein and is hereby amended in the following respects.



   (B)   Chapter 1 Administration is hereby amended by the deletion of
Sections R101 through R114.



   (C)   For the administration of this Code, see the Uniform
Administrative Code, 1997 Edition.



   (D)   Sec. R201.4 shall be amended by adding to the end of this
subsection:



Webster's Third World International Dictionary of the English Language,
Unabridged, shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings.



   (E)   TABLE R301.2(1) is hereby amended to read as follows:



      GROUND SNOW LOAD WIND SPEED



      SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY WEATHERING



      FROST LINE DEPTH TERMITE



      DECAY



      WINTER DESIGN TEMP



      Not Applicable



      90 M.P.H., EXPOSURE C B



      Moderate



      Not Applicable Moderate to Heavy None to Slight 32 degrees



   (F)   SEC. R310.1 is hereby amended by adding the following sentence
at the end of the paragraph to read as follows:



      Such openings shall open directly into a public street, public
alley, yard or court.



   (G)   Chapters 24-33 are hereby deleted in their entirety and
replaced by the Uniform Plumbing Code (1994 edition), as published by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, with State of
Arizona amendments.



§ 7-1-6  NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.



   (A)   The "National Electrical Code (2005 Edition)," which was
declared a public record by Res. 06-37, is hereby adopted by reference as the
"National Electrical Code of the City of Apache Junction" and made a part of
this chapter the same as though the publication was specifically set forth in
full herein and is hereby amended in the following respects.



   (B)   Article 80- Administration and Enforcement is hereby deleted
in its entirety.



   (C)   For the administration of the Code, see the Uniform
Administrative Code, 1997 Edition.



   (D)   Article 90- Introduction: Sec. 90.1(A) is hereby amended by
adding a second paragraph to read as follows:



      90.1(A) any and all electrical work for light, heat, power, or
any other purposes shall be installed in conformity with the rules and
regulations as set forth in this code, and that document titled, the National
Electrical Code(2005 edition), and in conformity with the rules and
regulations as set forth by the building official.



   (E)   Article 90 is hereby amended by adding a new Sec. 90.10 to
read as follows:



      90.10 wiring in public right-of-way. No person, firm, or
corporation shall place any wire for conduction of electricity for any
purpose across or within the boundaries of any public street, alley, park or
sidewalk, unless such a person, firm or corporation is operating under a
franchise or a permit from the proper authorities to do so.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-7  UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE.



   (A)   The "Uniform Plumbing Code (1994 Edition)," which was declared
a public record by Res. 06-37, is hereby adopted by reference as the "Uniform
Plumbing Code of the City of Apache Junction" and made a part of this chapter
the same as though the publication was specifically set forth in full herein
and is hereby amended in the following respects.



   (B)   Chapter 1 Administration is hereby deleted.



   (C)   For the administration of this code, see the Uniform
Administrative Code, 1997 Edition.



   (D)   Subsection 402.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:



      "The maximum flow rates and quantities for all plumbing fixture
fittings shall be consistent with A.R.S. § 45-312."



   (E)   Subsection 402.2 is hereby deleted.



   (F)   Subsection 713.4 of Sec. 713.0, "Sewer Required," is hereby
amended to read as follows:



      "The public sewer may be considered as not being available only
when so determined by the Superstition Mountain Communities Facilities
District ("SMCFD")."



   (G)   Sec. 1008.2 Approval, is amended by adding the sentence:



      "When a public sewer is available, Superstition Mountain
Communities Facilities District is the Administrative Authority ("SMCFD")."



   (H)   Sec. 1011.1 is amended by adding the sentence:



      "When a public sewer is available, Superstition Mountain
Communities Facilities District is the Administrative Authority ("SMCFD")."



   (I)   Sec. 1012.0 is amended by adding the sentence:



      "When the public sewer is available sizing criteria is determined
by Superstition Mountain Communities Facilities District ("SMCFD")."



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-8  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.



   (A)   That certain publication entitled "International Mechanical
Code (2006 Edition)," which was declared a public record by Res. 06-37, is
hereby adopted by reference as the "International Mechanical Code of the City
of Apache Junction" and made a part of this chapter the same as though the
publication was specifically set forth in full herein and is hereby amended
in the following respects.



   (B)   Chapter 1 Administration is hereby amended by the deletion of
Sections 101 through 109. For the administration of this Code, see the
Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-9  UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS  BUILDINGS.



   (A)   The "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
(1997 Edition)," which was declared a public record by Res. 06-37, is hereby
adopted by reference as the "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings of the City of Apache Junction" and made a part of this chapter the
same as though the publication was specifically set forth in full herein and
is hereby amended in the following respects:



   (B)   Board of Appeals, §§ 205 (a, b) are deleted and amended to
read the same as §§ 204 through 204-9 of the Uniform Administrative Code as
adopted.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-10  UNIFORM SIGN CODE.



   The "Uniform Sign Code (1997 Edition)," which was declared a public
record by Res. 06-37 is hereby adopted by reference as the "Uniform Sign Code
of the City of Apache Junction" and made a part of this chapter the same as
though the publication was specifically set forth in full herein.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-11  ARIZONANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT.



   The "Arizonans with Disabilities Act," and its Implementing Rules, and
"American with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and
Facilities," which was declared a public record by Res. 06-37, is hereby
adopted by reference as the "Arizonans with Disabilities Act," and its
Implementing Rules, and "American with Disabilities Act Accessibility
Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities of the City of Apache Junction" and
made a part of this chapter the same as though the publication was
specifically set forth in full herein.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-12  MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME STANDARDS.



   (A)   Mobile/manufactured homes proposed for installation shall have
affixed thereto a decal certifying that the dwelling unit has been inspected
and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") in effect at the date of manufacture
wherein such date shall not have been prior to June 15, 1976, or such other
succeeding requirements which replace HUD standards.



   (B)   Mobile/manufactured homes proposed for installation shall be
installed in compliance with the standards prescribed by the Arizona
Department of Building and Fire Safety, Office of Manufactured Housing for
either:



      (1)   Ground level installation;



      (2)   Installation of a fully skirted mobile/manufactured
home; or



      (3)   Installation of a unit on a permanent visible foundation.



   (C)   Mobile/manufactured homes proposed for installation outside of
a mobile home park shall have its hitch or tongue removed at the time of
installation; the hitch or tongue may be retained if the unit's tongue is
screened with skirting, or a perimeter foundation, or ground level
installation.



   (D)   This section shall not prohibit the continued occupancy of
non-certified mobile/manufactured homes currently located and occupied as a
private residence within the city.



   (E)   Modifications to or repairs of a mobile/manufactured home
shall be prohibited unless the modifications are made pursuant to applicable
federal, state or local regulations. The Building Official may inspect a
mobile/manufactured home proposed for installation only for gross
modifications. Gross modifications included are those modifications which can
be observed from a visual inspection of the interior and exterior of the
subject unit, or which become apparent to the Building Official while
performing those safety and installation inspections and tests as are
required by an intergovernmental agreement between the city and the Arizona
Department of Building and Fire Safety, Office of Manufactured Housing
executed on May 6, 1986, or as such agreement is subsequently amended or
adopted. When such violations or gross modifications are made known, it shall
be the duty of the Building Official to order modifications to be brought
into compliance before the mobile/manufactured unit is occupied.



   (F)   It is unlawful to install or set up mobile/manufactured homes
which do not comply with the provisions of this section.



   (G)   Division (A) above shall not be applicable to the installation
of units currently installed in the city but proposed for installation in
mobile home parks that were approved before 1986.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-1-13  PENALTY.



   Any violation under this chapter is punishable pursuant to Vol. I, §
1-1-11.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



ARTICLE 7-2:  REQUIREMENTS FOR SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURES



Section



   7-2-1   Enclosures required



   7-2-2   Exceptions



   7-2-3   Assignment of responsibility; limitations on removal



   7-2-4   Barrier details



   7-2-5   Gate requirements



   7-2-6   Door requirements



   7-2-7   Window requirements



   7-2-8   Safety covers



§ 7-2-1  ENCLOSURES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a
permanent fence, wall or barrier intended to restrict access to the swimming
pool from public property, from adjacent private property and directly from
all dwelling units or guest rooms located on the same premises as the
swimming pool. For purposes of this section, the term SWIMMING POOL means any
structure intended for swimming, diving or recreational bathing which
contains water 18 inches or more in depth at any point, including temporary,
portable or permanent swimming pools, hot tubs or spas, whether located
indoors, outdoors, in-ground, on grade or above grade.



   (B)   (1)   The swimming pool enclosure and barrier detail
requirements of this section apply to all new swimming pools installed on or
after February 14, 1991 and to all additions, alterations, repairs or
replacements made to existing swimming pool enclosures.



      (2)   All swimming pools installed prior to February 14, 1991
shall be completely enclosed as required in this section on or before
February 14, 1992.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-2-2  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Existing swimming pools located on single family
residential property on or before February 14, 1991 need not be retroactively
fitted with a barrier between the dwelling and the pool provided all
occupants of the dwelling are at least 6 years of age or older.



      (2)   All other portions of the swimming pool enclosure shall
be installed and maintained as required in this section.



         (a)   This exception does not eliminate an owner's
responsibility for providing a temporary barrier or otherwise physically
restricting visiting children's direct access from the dwelling to the
swimming pool.



         (b)   This exception shall expire and the required
permanent barrier shall be retroactively installed between the dwelling and
the swimming pool whenever 1 or more children under 6 years of age become
occupants of the property.



   (B)   Above ground swimming pools which have non-climbable sides not
less than 48 inches high above the adjacent ground level may be located on
single family residential property without requiring a fence or barrier
between the pool and the dwelling provided any steps or ladder are either
removable without the use of tools, or are designed to be secured in an
inaccessible position with a lock or latch located not less than 54 inches
above the adjacent ground level.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-2-3  ASSIGNMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY; LIMITATIONS ON REMOVAL.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and any
other person in responsible charge of a swimming pool to ensure that the
required swimming pool enclosure including all gates, doors, locks, latches
and other portions of the barrier are maintained safe and in good working
order at all times.



   (B)   No person shall alter or remove any portion of a swimming pool
enclosure except to repair, reconstruct or replace the enclosure in
compliance with the provisions of this article.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-2-4  BARRIER DETAILS.



   (A)   Swimming pool barriers shall be a fence, a wall, a building
wall or a combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool.
The pool side of the barrier shall be not less than 20 inches from the
water's edge. The top of the barrier, including all gates and doors therein,
shall be not less than 5 feet above the floor or underlying ground, measured
on the exterior side of the enclosure.



   (B)   Exception: Barrier fences or walls not less than 4 feet in
height which existed on or before February 14, 1991 may be used for that
portion of the required swimming pool enclosure which separates a swimming
pool from dwellings located on the same premises as the pool, provided the
barrier is kept in repair and is otherwise maintained in compliance with all
other provisions of this section.



   (C)   There shall be no openings, holes or gaps in a swimming pool
barrier large enough for a sphere 4 inches in diameter to pass through. A
barrier fence or wall shall have no handholds, footholds or horizontal
members accessible from the exterior side of the enclosure. Horizontal
members of fences shall be spaced no less than 45 inches apart measured
vertically or shall be placed on the pool side of a fence which has no
opening greater than 1-3/4 inches measured horizontally. Wire mesh or chain
link fences shall have a maximum mesh size of 1-3/4 inches measured
horizontally.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-2-5  GATE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All gates in a swimming pool barrier shall be equipped to
accommodate a locking device. All pedestrian access gates shall be
self-closing and self-latching. All pedestrian access gates installed after
February 14, 1991 shall open outwards away from the pool. Gates other than
pedestrian access gates need not be self-closing or self-latching when they
are kept secured by a padlock or similar locking device.



   (B)   Gate latches shall be located not less than 54 inches above
the underlying ground or shall otherwise be made inaccessible from the
outside to small children.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-2-6  DOOR REQUIREMENTS.



   All doors leading from a dwelling unit or guest room directly into a
swimming pool enclosure shall be self-closing and self-latching and shall be
equipped with a locking device. When a simple latch is used, the release
mechanism for the latch, or a secondary locking device, shall be located not
less than 54 inches above the floor. A locking-latch which uses a key,
electronic opener or integral combination lock may be located at any height
on the door. Sliding doors shall not form part of a required barrier unless
the self-closing and self-latching mechanism is specifically approved by the
building official for this purpose.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-2-7  WINDOW REQUIREMENTS.



   Emergency escape or rescue windows from sleeping rooms which face
within a swimming pool enclosure shall be equipped with a latching device
located not less than 54 inches above the floor. All other openable dwelling
unit or guest room windows facing within a swimming pool enclosure shall be
equipped with a screwed in place wire mesh screen, a keyed-lock that prevents
opening the window more than 4 inches or a latching device located not less
than 54 inches above the floor.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-2-8  SAFETY COVERS.



   A safety cover which complies with ASTM ES-13-89 shall be deemed to
meet all barrier requirements of this article for any spa or hot tub which is
not more than 8 feet width at any point. A key-operated, motorized safety
cover which complies with ASTM ES-13-89 may be used to meet the requirements
of this article for a barrier between a single family dwelling and a swimming
pool accessory to that dwelling provided all other portions of the swimming
pool enclosure are installed and maintained as required herein. The key pool
cover switch shall be located not less than 54 inches above the floor
adjacent ground level and where the entire pool can be visually inspected
during cooperation.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



ARTICLE 7-3:  BUILDING SECURITY STANDARDS



Section



   7-3-1   Purpose



   7-3-2   Scope



   7-3-3   Limitations



   7-3-4   Alternate security provisions



   7-3-5   Exterior swinging doors



   7-3-6   Exterior sliding doors



   7-3-7   Windows



   7-3-8   Garage doors



   7-3-9   Attic access doors



§ 7-3-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards to make
dwelling units resistant to unlawful entry.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-3-2  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this article shall apply to openings into dwelling
units within Group Division 1 Occupancies and Group R. Division 3 Occupancies
and to openings between attached garages and dwelling units. Door openings
into attached garages shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
article.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-3-3  LIMITATIONS.



   The requirements of this article are not intended to prevent egress,
and no security device shall be installed in a manner which would prevent
proper egress through doors and windows as specified in Chapters 3 and 10 of
the Uniform Building Code.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-3-4  ALTERNATE SECURITY PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this article are not intended to prevent the use of
any device, hardware or method of construction not specifically prescribed in
this article, when the alternates provide equivalent security and are
approved by the Building Official.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-3-5  EXTERIOR SWINGING DOORS.



   (A)   All main or front entry doors shall be arranged so that the
occupant has a view of the area immediately outside the door without opening
the door. The view may be provided by a door viewer having a field of view of
not less than 180 degrees or through windows.



   (B)   Swinging doors shall conform to 1 of the following types of
construction:



      (1)   Wood flush-type door 1-3/4 inches thick minimum;



      (2)   Wood panel-type door 1-3/4 inches thick minimum with all
panels fabricated from material not less than 3/8 inch in thickness: provided
all shaped portions of the panels are not less than 1/4 inch thick;



      (3)   Ferrous metal doors of solid or hollow core construction
with surfaces not less than 24 gauge in thickness;



      (4)   Other metal doors with surfaces not less than the
equivalent of 16 gauge sheet metal (0.06 inch) in thickness; or



      (5)   Glass insert doors shall be metal skinned or solid core
in the non-glazed portion.



   (C)   A swinging door, the active leaf of a pair of doors and the
bottom leaf of a Dutch door shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock. The locks
shall:



      (1)   Have a minimum one inch bolt throw and embed a minimum
5/8 inch into the holding device receiving the projected bolt throw;



      (2)   Have a wrench resistant collar;



      (3)   Have fasteners which thread into the cylinder body; and



      (4)   Be able to be opened from the inside without any special
knowledge or the use of a key.



   (D)   The inactive leaf of a pair of doors and the upper leaf of
Dutch doors shall have deadbolts at top and bottom which embed a minimum ½
inch into the device receiving the projected bolt when not prohibited by
Chapter 10 of the Uniform Building Code.



   (E)   The strike plate receiving projection deadbolts in wood
construction shall be fastened to the jambs with not less than 2 No. 8 by
2-inch wood screws, or when attached to metal jambs, shall be attached with
not less than 2 No. 8 machine screws. In wood frame construction, an open
space between trimmers and wood doorjambs shall be shimmed solid not less
than 6 inches above and below the strike plate.



   (F)   When hinges are exposed to the exterior, at least 1 of 3
required hinges shall be equipped with non-removable hinge pins or a
mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the exterior by
removing the hinge pins. In wood construction, an open space between trimmers
and wood door jambs shall be shimmed solid extending not less than 6 inches
above and below the hinge.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-3-6  EXTERIOR SLIDING DOORS.



   All exterior sliding doors shall be so equipped to prohibit the
raising, sliding or removal of the sliding section from the track while in
the closed and locked position. The stationary section shall not be removable
from the outside. Sliding doors shall be provided with an auxiliary or
additional locking device not reachable from the exterior and able to be
opened from the inside without the use of a key or special knowledge.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-3-7  WINDOWS.



   Exterior windows shall be constructed and installed to prohibit
raising, sliding or removal of the sliding section while in the closed and
locked position. A passive window panel shall have weather strip molding or
glazing which is not easily removed from the outside to prevent removal of
the window glass. An auxiliary lock shall be installed on all sliding windows
to allow the window to be locked in a partially open, ventilating position.
Any locking device used on windows in a sleeping room shall be able to be
opened from the inside without the use of a key or special knowledge.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-3-8  GARAGE DOORS.



   (A)   All garage doors not equipped with a power operated mechanism
shall be equipped with at least 2 locking devices of the following types:



      (1)   Throw bolt or flush bolt;



      (2)   Cylinder type lock; or



      (3)   Padlock and hasp.



   (B)   All garage doors shall be capable of being unlocked and opened
from inside the garage without the use of electrical power.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 7-3-9  ATTIC ACCESS DOORS.



   Access doors to attic spaces shall be located in the interior of the
dwelling unit or within a secured room or garage.



(Am. Ord. 1273, passed 9-5-2006)



ARTICLE 7-4:  FIREPLACE RESTRICTIONS



Section



   7-4-1   Fireplace restrictions



§ 7-4-1  FIREPLACE RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate the
construction and installation of fireplaces, woodstoves or other solid-fuel
burning devices to reduce the amount of air pollution caused by particulate
matter and carbon monoxide.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FIREPLACE.  A built-in-place masonry hearth and fire chamber or
a factory built appliance, designed to burn solid fuel or to accommodate gas
or electric log insert or similar device, and which is intended for
occasional recreational or aesthetic use, but not for cooking, heating or
industrial processes.



      SOLID FUEL.  Includes, but is not limited to wood, coal or other
non-gaseous or non-liquid fuels, and those fuels defined by Maricopa and
Pinal County Air Pollution Control Districts as "inappropriate fuel" to burn
in residential woodburning devices.



      WOODSTOVE.  A solid-fuel burning heating appliance, including a
pellet stove, which is either freestanding or designed to be inserted into a
fireplace.



   (C)   Installation restrictions. Beginning January 1, 2001, no
person, firm or corporation shall construct, replace or install a fireplace
or woodstove, and the Building Official shall not approve or issue a permit
to construct, replace or install a fireplace or a woodstove, unless the
fireplace or woodstove complies with 1 of the following:



      (1)   A fireplace which has a permanently installed
non-removable gas or electric log insert;



      (2)   A fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning
appliance which has been certified by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency as conforming to 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart AAA as in
effect on July 1, 1990;



      (3)   A fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning
appliance which has been tested, approved or listed by a nationally
recognized testing agency to meet performance standards equivalent to those
adopted by 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart AAA as in effect on July 1, 1990;



      (4)   A fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning
appliance which has been determined by Maricopa and Pinal County Air
Pollution Control Districts to meet performance standards equivalent to those
adopted by 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart AAA as in effect on July 1, 1990; or



      (5)   A fireplace which has a permanently installed woodstove
insert which complies with the provisions of this section.



   (D)   Exemptions. The following installations are not intended to be
regulated and are not prohibited:



      (1)   Furnaces, boilers, incinerators, kilns and other similar
space heating or industrial process equipment;



      (2)   Cookstoves, barbecue grills and similar appliances
designed primarily for cooking; or



      (3)   Fire pits, barbecue grills and other outdoor fireplaces.



   (E)   Prohibitions on fireplace and woodstove alterations.



      (1)   Beginning January 1, 2001, no person, firm or
corporation shall alter or remove a gas or electric log insert or a woodstove
insert from a fireplace for purposes of converting the fireplace to directly
burn wood or other solid fuel.



      (2)   Beginning January 1, 2001, no person, firm or
corporation shall alter a fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning
appliance in any manner that would void its certification or operational
compliance with the provisions of this section.



   (F)   Permits required. In addition to the provisions and
restrictions set forth in this section, construction, installation or
alteration of all fireplaces, woodstoves and other gas, electric or
solid-fuel burning appliances and equipment shall be done in compliance with
the provisions of the most recently adopted and amended version of the
Uniform Building Code or its equivalent, and shall be subject to the permits
and inspections required thereunder.



(Ord. 1292, passed 3-20-2007)



CHAPTER 8: BUSINESS



      Article




         8-1.   GENERAL BUSINESS AND LICENSING PROVISIONS





         8-2.   SPECIFIC LICENSING AND REGISTRATION PROVISIONS





         8-3.   PEDDLERS





         8-4.   AUCTIONS, PAWNSHOPS AND SECOND HAND DEALERS





         8-5.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS





         8-6.   SWAP MEET OPERATIONS





         8-7.   YARD SALES





         8-8.   REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMUNITY AND CIVIC EVENTS





         8-9.   SALES WITHIN MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
PARKS, MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SUBDIVISIONS AND ALL OTHER
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS





         8-10.   MOBILE AND TEMPORARY FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDORS





         8-11.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS OPERATORS, MANAGERS,
ADULT SERVICE PROVIDERS AND EMPLOYEES





         8-12.   NON-PRESCRIPTION PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT SALES




ARTICLE 8-1:  GENERAL BUSINESS AND LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



   8-1-1   Definitions



   8-1-2   City Clerk; duties



   8-1-3   Other regulatory provisions



   8-1-4   Criminal penalties



§ 8-1-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVERTISEMENT.  The attempt by publication, dissemination,
solicitation, signage or circulation to induce directly or indirectly any
person to enter into any transaction with persons conducting business
activities within or outside the city.



   APPROPRIATE LICENSE.  A privilege tax or use tax license that has been
issued pursuant to the provisions of Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A,
Article III, Licensing and Recordkeeping; or a business or non-profit license
that has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   A.R.S.  Arizona Revised Statutes.



   BUSINESS ACTIVITY.  To practice, transact or carry on any trade,
business, game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation, or the
renting, leasing or licensing for use of real property with the object of
gain, benefit or advantage.



   BUSINESS LICENSE.  A license issued to a person conducting a business
activity within the city.



   CARNIVAL COMPANY.  A collection of shows, exhibitions, feats of
strength, merchandise booths, games of skill, fortunetelling, games of
chance, wheels of fortune or any other amusement device presented or offered
upon the streets or vacant property within the city, other than circuses,
animal shows or side shows with circuses.



   CASUAL ACTIVITY or SALE.  A transaction of an isolated nature made by
a person who neither represents himself or herself to be nor is engaged in a
business activity. CASUAL ACTIVITY never includes the sale, rental, leasing
or licensing for use of real property; nor does it include the sale of
merchandise purchased or manufactured for the purpose of resale.



   CITY.  The City of Apache Junction.



   CLERK.  The City Clerk or designee.



   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.  The department within the city
responsible for the protection of life and property and for the enforcement
of the laws of the State of Arizona and the City of Apache Junction.



   FORTUNE TELLER.  A person who purports to have the ability to predict
a person’s future by palmistry, using a crystal ball or cards, or similar
methods.



   LICENSE.  A business or non-profit license.



   LOCATION.  A place of a separate business establishment, but licensing
does not apply to persons solely renting or leasing residential real property.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business or establishment
conducting business activity wherein any massage therapy techniques are
administered, practiced or used.



   MASSAGE THERAPIST.  An individual who is either licensed or
specifically exempted under A.R.S. Title 32, Chapter 42.



   MERCHANDISE.  Any new or used object, wares, goods, commodities,
personalty and intangibles, real estate, amusements, food concessions or
services.



   NON-PROFIT BUSINESS.  A person who is either:



      (1)   A federally exempt organization which has received a
determination of exemption under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c); or



      (2)   The federal government, the State of Arizona, any other
state or any political subdivision, department or agency; or



      (3)   A public educational entity operated pursuant to any
provision of A.R.S. Title 15.



   NON-PROFIT LICENSE.  A license issued to a person conducting
non-profit activities within the city.



   NON-TAXABLE BUSINESS ACTIVITY.  A person conducting business activity
within the city, the income of which is not taxable in whole or in part
pursuant to any section in Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A, Article IV,
or which meets the provisions of Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A, §
8A-460(c)(4).



   PEDDLER.  Any person operating as a solicitor, peddler, hawker,
salesperson, vendor of goods, wares, merchandise, newspapers, magazines or
services, and who goes from door-to-door, business to business, or to only
one door or business in the city; or who offers such items for sale along a
parade route or on real property other than their own.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, limited liability
company, the federal government, this state, any political subdivision or
agency of this state, or such person’s legal representative. PERSONS
affiliated through common ownership, or where one person owns another person,
are considered separate PERSONS for licensing purposes.



   PREMISES.  Any building, structure, lot or other area at which
business activity is conducted. When the premise involves a building or
structure, that premises shall include all outside areas including the
parking lot.



   PRIVILEGE LICENSE.  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of
Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A, Article III, Licensing and
Recordkeeping to a person conducting taxable business activity within the
city.



   SALE.  A transaction of any type where the title or ownership of
tangible personal property or real property exchanges hands for a
consideration of any type; or where the promise or completion of a service is
exchanged for a consideration of any type.



   STREET BALLYHOO.  Any person advertising by means of any vehicle
containing amplifiers, phonographs, loudspeakers, music rolls, microphones,
broadcasting, radio, public address system or music of any description,
operating upon the public streets or public grounds of the city.



   TAXABLE BUSINESS ACTIVITY.  A person engaged in business within the
city, the income of which in whole or in part is taxable pursuant to any
section in Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A, Article IV.



   TEMPORARY LOCATION.  Operating the same kind of business, for which a
business license has been issued, at such location for no more than 7
consecutive days, except that mobile and temporary food and beverage vendors
shall be limited to the times as set forth in Article 8-10 of this code.



   VALID.  Any license subject to the provisions of this chapter that has
not expired or has not been suspended, cancelled or revoked.



   VENDOR.  Any person soliciting or making a sale, or causing any
advertisement for a product or service.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  The city official who initially determines
zoning and land development compliance, as appointed by the development
services director.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-1-2  CITY CLERK; DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Clerk to
administer the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to this duty shall
issue, renew, deny, suspend, cancel or revoke privilege, use, business and
non-profit licenses.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to file complaints with
the City Attorney against all persons violating any of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to prepare and issue an
appropriate license for every person required to pay a license fee, and to
state in each license the amount thereof, the period of time covered thereby,
the name of the person for whom issued, the specific business activities
conducted by the licensee, and the location and place of business where the
business activities are carried on.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or deputy, before
issuing a license under this chapter to require from every applicant a sworn
application, on a form to be furnished by the city.



   (E)   The City Clerk may appoint license inspectors, and it shall be
the duty of such inspector to inspect places of business activity subject to
the provisions of this chapter and Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A, and
report all violations to the city clerk.



   (F)   No greater or lesser amount of license and/or registration fee
shall be charged or received for any license issued hereunder than is
provided for in this chapter, and no license shall be issued for any period
of time other than as provided in this chapter.



   (G)   In no case shall any mistake made by the City Clerk in
stating, fixing or collecting the amount of any license and/or registration
fee prevent, prejudice or estop the city from collecting the correct amount
due as provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-1-3  OTHER REGULATORY PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Where any business activity is subjected to a certificate of
health or sanitary examination, before any license is issued, the applicant
must produce such certificate or permit from the appropriate county health
department, as provided for in A.R.S. Title 36, Article 4 as amended.



   (B)   No license may be issued until the zoning administrator has
provided preliminary verification that the business is in an approved zone.
The zoning administrator shall furnish such verification within 5 city
business days of the request.



   (C)   In the event the Zoning Administrator subsequently disapproves
the formal zoning certificate, the City Clerk shall revoke the person’s
appropriate license.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-1-4  CRIMINAL PENALTIES.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
deemed guilty of a class one misdemeanor and, shall upon conviction, be
punished pursuant to the provisions of the Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I,
Chapter 1: General, Article 1-1: General, § 1-1-11 Penalty.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



ARTICLE 8-2:  SPECIFIC LICENSING AND REGISTRATION PROVISIONS



Section



   8-2-1   License required



   8-2-2   Issuance of license by Clerk; contents



   8-2-3   General rules



   8-2-4   Peddler registration required



   8-2-5   Application to City Clerk



   8-2-6   Licensing; fees



   8-2-7   Permits; fees



   8-2-8   Delinquency penalty



   8-2-9   Unlawful activities



   8-2-10   Suspension, revocation and cancellation of license



   8-2-11   Notice of hearing and appeal



   8-2-12   Exemption



§ 8-2-1  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association,
company or corporation to commence, transact or carry on any trade, business,
game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation, as set out in this
article, without first having procured a license from the city to do so, or
without complying with any and all regulations of such trade, business, game
or amusement, calling, profession or occupation designated in this article.



   (B)   The practice, transaction or carrying on of any trade,
business, game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation specified in
this article without complying with any and all regulations of such trades,
businesses, games or amusements, callings, professions or occupations,
contained in this article shall constitute a separate violation of this
article for each and every day that such trade, business, game or amusement,
calling, profession or occupation is practiced, transacted or carried on.



   (C)   The granting of a license is not deemed as evidence or proof
that the licensee has complied with the provisions of this article or other
provisions of the Apache Junction City Code or Apache Junction Tax Code, nor
shall it stop the prosecution by the city for any violation of the Apache
Junction City Code or Apache Junction Tax Code.



   (D)   A license shall be required for each business. For instance,
if a person, partnership, association, company, or corporation conducts two
separate businesses (i.e., a travel agency and a blacksmith shop), then two
licenses shall be required. This requirement shall be applicable to
situations where two or more businesses are being operated in the same
location.



   (E)   Should questions as to form of business arise, interpretations
of this section shall be based upon form indicia contained in the following:
Arizona Revised Statutes; Internal Revenue Code and Rules and Regulations
prescribed by the Internal Revenue Service.



   (F)   All transfers of ownership shall be considered to be a new
business and, as such, shall be required to obtain a valid, current business
license and pay a fee in accordance with the schedule for new businesses
listed herein.



   (G)   Any person conducting a taxable business activity shall also
obtain a privilege tax or use tax license and pay the appropriate licensing
fees pursuant to the provisions of Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A,
Article III, Licensing and Recordkeeping.



   (H)   Any federally exempt organization who has unrelated business
income as defined in 26 U.S.C. § 512 from any business activity.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)  Penalty,  See Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 8-2-2  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE BY CLERKS; CONTENTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the clerk, or deputy, to prepare and
issue a license under this article for every person required to pay a license
fee hereunder, and to state in each license the amount thereof, the period of
time covered thereby, the name of the person for whom issued, the trade,
business, game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation licensed and
the location and place of business where such trade, business, game or
amusement, calling, profession or occupation is to be practiced, transacted
or carried on.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the clerk, or deputy, before issuing a
license under this article to require from every applicant a sworn
application, on a form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall give the
following information: business trade name, location of business, business
mailing address, business owner, home street address, home telephone number,
business telephone number, exact nature of business, date business began in
the city and any other state or federal requirement information, signature of
applicant certifying his statements are true and correct and title of
applicant.



   (C)   If the business is to be located within the city limits, a
zoning compliance certificate must be obtained from the zoning administrator
of the city before a license can be issued.



   (D)   Upon verification by the zoning administrator that the
business is in the approved zone, the clerk may issue a license to the
applicant before the formal zoning compliance certificate is approved by the
zoning administrator and that the determination from the zoning administrator
concerning the zoning compliance certificate be forthcoming in a period not
to exceed 5 city business days.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-2-3  GENERAL RULES.



   (A)   Any person having a privilege tax or use tax license shall
also have a city business license and shall pay the appropriate license fee
if it is found that such person is conducting taxable business activity
within the city unless such business license is prohibited by state or
federal law.



   (B)   No person may apply for a license for another person, and no
licensee may allow another person to use his or her license. All licenses
issued hereunder shall be nontransferable and nonassignable.



   (C)   A person engaged in or conducting 1 or more businesses at 2 or
more locations, or under 2 or more business names shall procure a license for
each such location or business name.



   (D)   A new license is not required when a licensee has an address
change; however, such licensee niust provide the city clerk with written
certification that the licensee had changed business locations.



   (E)   A separate license is not required for each type of business
activity provided that the each type of business activity is conducted by the
same person, using the same business name, and at the same business location.
Every person shall have his or her license updated with the city clerk before
engaging in any new business activity.



   (F)   Should questions arise as to form of business, interpretations
of this chapter shall be based upon form indicia contained in the following:
Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A, Arizona Revised Statutes; Internal
Revenue Code; and rules and regulations prescribed by the Internal Revenue
Service.



   (G)   All transfers of ownership, including changes in type of
business entity, shall be considered to be a new business and, as such, shall
be required to obtain an appropriate license and pay the required license fee.



   (H)   An appropriate license shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place at each business or operating location. This division does not apply to
persons solely renting, leasing or licensing for use of real property.
Licensees conducting business activity at temporary locations shall have
available either the license or a copy of the license at the temporary
location. Every person having a license under the provisions of this article
shall produce and exhibit the license upon demand by any city police officer
or city tax and licensing official.



   (I)   No license issued by the city shall be presumed to apply to
any business activity which is a part of interstate commerce; or which such
business activity is conducted as an agency or department of the United
States government for which the government has failed to make provisions
allowing states and municipalities to so license.



   (J)   The granting of a license is not deemed as evidence or proof
that the licensee has complied with the provisions of this chapter, or other
provisions of the Apache Junction City Code, nor shall it stop the
prosecution by the city for any violation of the Apache Junction City Code.



   (K)   A business license shall be valid for a 12 month period from
the month of issue and during such time period the payment shall not be
pro-rated.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-2-4  PEDDLER REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions in A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 8-2-1,
any person operating as a peddler shall register with the city clerk and
obtain an identification card showing the registration.



   (B)   Applicants for registration shall be required to furnish 2
recent satisfactory photographs of the applicant, one to be attached to the
applicant’s identification card and the other to be retained by the City
Clerk’s Office. In the event the applicant is unable to supply such
photographs, photographs will be supplied by the city clerk’s office for a
fee of $3 each. The City Clerk shall require the applicant to file his or her
fingerprint identification with the City Clerk’s Office.



   (C)   Peddlers applying for registration shall be required to
furnish to the city clerk’s office a complete description of the product to
be sold in the city, together with information regarding sales methods to be
used and references that will enable the City Clerk to determine whether or
not the applicant is qualified to receive an identification card as provided
herein.



   (D)   If approved, issuance of an identification card under the
provisions of this article shall be completed within 15 city business days
after the applicant has given the required information.



   (E)   Identification cards under this article shall be issued upon
payment of a $25 registration fee for each person operating as a peddler and
shall be valid for the duration of the related license, unless the City Clerk
discovers any of the following:



      (1)   He or she has a criminal record;



      (2)   He or she is associated with a company that has engaged
in fraudulent dealings; or



      (3)   The proposed sales proposition includes some element of
trickery, fraud or deceit.



   (F)   Identification cards shall be assigned the same status and
duration as the person’s related license: active, suspended, canceled or
revoked.



   (G)   Identification cards issued under the provisions of this
article may be suspended, cancelled or revoked pursuant to the provisions of
A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 8-2-8 subject to hearing and appeal pursuant to the
provisions of A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 8-2-10.



   (H)   Peddlers wishing to continue peddling activities within the
city shall apply for a new identification card upon expiration of the current
identification card.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-2-5  APPLICATION TO CITY CLERK.



   (A)   An application for a license and/or identification card under
this article shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Every application
shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount provided in A.J.C.C.
Vol. I, § 8-2-6. In the event a license and/or identification card is not
issued, the application fee shall not be refunded but shall be applied to
cover the cost of processing the application.



   (B)   All licenses shall be valid only for 1 year from the date
issued unless renewed each year by paying the appropriate fee(s) on or before
the last city business day of the month prior to the annual anniversary of
the original issuance of such license. Payment for renewal must be received
within the City Clerk’s office by such date to be deemed filed and paid.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-2-6  LICENSING; FEES.



   (A)   The business license fee set out in the following schedule is
hereby established for all business activities.



   (B)   In addition to the fee in (A) above, for taxable business
activities the transaction privilege tax and use tax license fee shall be as
set forth in Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A, Article III, Licensing and
Recordkeeping.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other required fee, all dealers in
alcoholic beverages shall submit a $50 non-refundable application fee to the
city prior to the council public hearing on the state liquor license
application to cover the cost of conducting such public hearing. This fee
shall apply to all new, owner-transfer, person-transfer, and
location-transfer applications.



   (D)   A massage therapist operating as an independent contractor
within the city and not as an employee of a massage establishment shall
obtain shall obtain the appropriate license pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.



   (E)   In any action brought under or arising out of any of the
provisions of this article, the fact that the person (defendant) is engaged
in any business activity for which a license is required by this article, or
that the party has conducted an advertisement for such activity shall be
prima facie evidence of such party’s liability to pay the required fee.



   (F)   The conviction and punishment of any person for conducting any
business activity without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person
from the payment of any license fee due or unpaid at the time of such
conviction.



   (G)   The fee schedule for licenses issued under this chapter shall
be as follows:



 


Type of License

 

Initial Fee

 

Renewal Fee



Business license (basic)
 

$50

 

$50



Duplicate or replacement license
 

$25

 

$25



Non-profit license
 

$0

 

$0




 



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-2-7  PERMITS; FEES.



   (A)   Circus and/or carnival businesses must have approval of the
director of public safety, and are required to provide certificate of
insurance naming as additionally insured the City of Apache Junction
officials, employees and citizens. A privilege license is mandatory for such
businesses. Applications for such business activities shall be submitted to
the city clerk no later than six (6) city business days prior to the date the
event begins.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B) above and other
requirements deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the public, circuses and/or carnival companies operating under the
auspices of local non-profit organizations are exempt from the permit fee
prescribed herein.



   (C)   Persons already in possession of an appropriate license, other
than those solely licensed as peddlers, who wish to operate at temporary
locations as defined by A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 8-1-1 shall pay a $10 permit fee
for each such location. Payment of such fee shall be valid for the term of
the license.



   (D)   Permit fees are in addition to licensing fees detailed in
A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 8-2-5 and in Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A,
Article III, Licensing and Recordkeeping. The following permit fees shall be
applied:



 


Type of Permit

 

Initial Fee

 

Renewal Fee





Distiller’s permit
 

$225.00

 

$22.50



Brewer’s permit
 

$225.00

 

$22.50



Winer’s permit
 

$225.00

 

$22.50



Hotel-motel permit to sell all spirituous liquors by individual portions and
in the original containers
 

$450.00

 

$45.00



Hotel-motel permit to sell all spirituous liquors
 

$450.00

 

$45.00



Hotel-motel permit to sell beer and wine by individual portions and in the
original containers
 

$150.00

 

$15.00



Hotel-motel permit to see beer by individual portions and in the original
containers
 

$112.50

 

$11.25



On-sale retailer’s permit to sell all spirituous liquors by individual
portions and in the original containers
 

$300.00

 

$30.00



On-sale retailer’s permit to sell beer and wine by individual portions and
in the original containers
 

$150.00

 

$15.00



On-sale retailer’s permit to sell beer by individual portions and in the
original containers
 

$112.50

 

$11.25



Off-sale retailer’s permit to sell all spirituous liquors
 

$112.50

 

$11.25



Off-sale retailer’s permit to sell beer and wine
 

$112.50

 

$11.25



Off-sale retailer’s permit to sell beer
 

$75.00

 

$7.50



Club permit to sell all spirituous liquors
 

$75.00

 

$7.50



Restaurant permit to sell all spirituous liquors
 

$450.00

 

$45.00



Fortuneteller, palmist (with approval of the director of public safety)
 

$1,200.00

 

$1,200.00



Sexually oriented business
 

$500.00

 

$500.00



Each employee of a sexually oriented business
 

$100.00

 

$50.00



Circus/carnival (per day)
 

$300.00

 

$150.00





 



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-2-8  DELINQUENCY PENALTY.



   (A)   When any license fee provided for herein shall become due and
unpaid, the same shall become delinquent and the City Clerk shall add thereto
a penalty of $25.



   (B)   No license shall be issued or renewed by the City Clerk until
the license or registration fees that are delinquent and the penalties added
thereto have been paid in full.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-2-9  UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business or
operating activity within the city without first having procured the
appropriate license from the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business
activity using a suspended, cancelled or revoked license.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business or
operating activity within the city without complying with any and all
regulations of such activity designated in this chapter.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as provided in
this chapter to operate under any name or conduct business under any
designation not specified on such license.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 8-2-10  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND CANCELLATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   An appropriate license shall be suspended for any person who
fails to renew the license and pay the required renewal fee in a timely
manner. The suspension period shall not exceed a 90 calendar day period. If
the license is renewed with the appropriate payment of renewal fee and
related penalty during the suspension period, the status of the license shall
be restored to current.



   (B)   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
cancelled for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   License renewal has not been completed within 90
calendar days of expiration;



      (2)   The licensee notifies the city clerk in writing with
appropriate signature that the business has been closed, sold or moved out of
the city; or



      (3)   The licensee, upon adequate identification, verbally
notifies the City Clerk that the business has been closed, sold or moved out
of the city.



   (C)   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
the application for license;



      (2)   Any violation of this chapter; or



      (3)   Conducting a business activity in violation of the
Arizona Revised Statutes.



   (D)   Revoked licenses may be reinstated only after the cause of
such revocation has been fully corrected.



   (E)   A person whose license has been suspended, cancelled or
revoked shall be issued a notice to cease business operations within the city.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-2-11  NOTICE OF HEARING AND APPEAL.



   (A)   To suspend or revoke a license, the City Clerk shall deliver
or mail by certified mail to the business address as shown by the license
application, a written notice that such license is suspended or revoked. The
reason for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in the notice.
The notice shall also contain the licensee’s rights and procedures to
appeal such suspension or revocation. A suspended or revoked license shall be
surrendered to the City Clerk on demand.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall grant on demand to any licensee whose
license has been revoked or suspended a full hearing on the merits of such
suspension or revocation. Appeal of the City Clerk’s action to a hearing
officer appointed by the City Manager, pursuant to division (C) below, shall
not be had prior to the hearing. Demand for hearing shall be made within 10
city business days of receipt of the City Clerk’s notice of suspension or
revocation, and failure to demand a hearing within that time will constitute
a full waiver. After considering evidence presented at the hearing, the City
Clerk shall make a decision to uphold or repeal the license suspension or
revocation; and shall deliver or mail by certified mail to the business
address as shown on the license application the results of the decision.



   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the City Clerk’s decision pursuant
to division (B) above shall have the right of appeal to the designated
hearing officer. The appeal shall be filed with the city manager within 14
city business days after receipt of the City Clerk’s decision. The appeal
shall contain a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal. The hearing officer shall set a time and place for a hearing on such
appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same
manner as provided for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and
order of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive, except any person
aggrieved may pursue any appropriate judicial proceedings.



   (D)   No person may reapply for any license after denial, revocation
or non-renewal of such license unless the cause for such denial, revocation
or non-renewal has been removed or corrected.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-2-12  EXEMPTION.



   Any person, partnership, association, company or corporation that has
procured and maintained a valid city transaction privilege tax license for
the calendar year 2017 shall not be required to obtain a city business
license until January 1, 2018.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



ARTICLE 8-3:  PEDDLERS



Section



   8-3-1   Unlawful activities



   8-3-2   Exemptions



   8-3-3   Other regulatory requirements



§ 8-3-1  UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any booth,
stand or counter; or to keep or maintain any wagon, cart, vehicle, movable
booth or stand for the purpose of barter or trade upon any city right-of-way
which includes but is not limited to sidewalks, streets and alleys.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any appropriately licensed and registered
peddler to erect or maintain any booth, stand, counter, wagon, cart or
vehicle on any private property without first having provided a letter of
permission from the business or property owner, and complied with all other
applicable provisions of the city code and other regulations as may be
adopted by the city.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any peddler in the course of his or her
business to ring the doorbell or knock at any building whereon a sign bearing
the words "no peddlers, solicitors or canvassers" or any similar verbiage is
exposed to public view.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person operating as a peddler to ring
the doorbell or knock at any building within the city before the hour of 9:00
a.m. or afer the hour of 6:00 p.m.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a peddler
without first having registered with the City Clerk, without having a valid
identification card in possession while conducting the business activity, or
when failing to exhibit the card upon request by any resident or employee of
the city.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007; Am. Ord. 1367, passed 10-5-2010)  Penalty,
see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 8-3-2  EXEMPTIONS.



   Newspaper deliverers are exempt from the provisions of this article for
the sale of newspaper subscriptions.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-3-3  OTHER REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS.



   Any peddler conducting business along parade routes or at parades shall
provide the city with proof of insurance coverage for any vehicle that is
used in conjunction with such peddling activities, and shall provide the city
with an acceptable certificate of insurance naming the city, its officers and
employees as additional insureds. The coverage shall be a minimum of
$1,000,000 per event per occurrence, $2,000,000 aggregate.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



ARTICLE 8-4:  AUCTIONS, PAWNSHOPS AND SECOND HAND DEALERS



Section



   8-4-1   Definitions



   8-4-2   Suspension of license; appeal



   8-4-3   Reports required



§ 8-4-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY.  Property to which the owner has relinquished all
right, title, claim and possession, with intention of not reclaiming it or
resuming its ownership, possession or enjoyment.



   AUCTIONEER.  Any person who shall operate an auction house or who, as
a principal or agent, shall offer any article for sale by public outcry, and
where the items offered at auction are sold immediately to the highest bidder.



   AUCTION HOUSE.  Any establishment in which the business of auctioning
articles is carried on for sale by public outcry, and where the items offered
for auction are sold immediately to the highest bidder.



   DEALER.  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing or selling
secondhand or cast-off material of any kind, such as any vehicle parts or
accessories, machinery, iron, copper, brass, lead, zinc, tin, steel,
aluminum, metal pipe and other metals, metal alloys, metallic cables, wire,
ropes, cordage, bottles, bagging, rags, rubber, paper and other like
materials which are purchased from persons other than the original
manufacturer or authorized distributor selling same for money, credit or
exchange. For the purposes of this article, the terms SCRAP DEALER and JUNK
DEALER shall have the same meaning as dealer. These provisions shall not
apply to any person engaged solely in recycling metal cans, paper, cardboard
and glass.



   PAWN TRANSACTION.  Either the act between the pawnbroker and a person
pledging tangible personal property or extending credits on the security of
pledged goods, or the act of purchasing tangible personal property with an
expressed or implied agreement or understanding that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed or variable price within a fixed or
variable period of time.



   PAWNBROKER.  Any person engaged in business activity of pawn
brokering, or the business of loaning money for himself or herself or for any
other person, receiving as security for the repayment thereof, pawn
transactions or pledges of personal property, or the business of purchasing
personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell the article to vendors,
their personal representatives or their assignees, at prices agreed upon at
or before the time of such purchase, whether the business be principal or
sole business so carried on, managed or conducted, or merely incidental to,
in connection with or a branch or department of some other business or
businesses.



   PAWNSHOP.  Any room, store or place in which the business is engaged
in, carried on or conducted.



   SECONDHAND DEALER.  Any person engaged in conducting, managing or
carrying on the business of buying, selling, trading or exchanging, or
otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares, merchandise or articles, or old
coins and money, jewelry, precious metals, semi-precious stones and similar
items, whether the business be the principal or sole business so carried on,
managed or conducted or be merely incidental to, in connection with, or
managed, or conducted or be merely incidental to, in connection with, or a
branch or a department of some other business. The term ANTIQUE DEALER shall
have the same meaning as "secondhand dealer". The term SECONDHAND DEALER
shall not be construed to include trade-ins, dealers, or auctioneer in
articles of property, the transfer of title to which is required by the laws
of the state to be evidenced by written instrument and recorded in the office
of the department of the state or county government.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-4-2  SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; APPEAL.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the
license of any auction house, dealer, pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall
be revoked for 1 year upon a showing that the operator or an employee of the
establishment has been convicted of violating any of the provisions of A.R.S.
Title 44, Chapter 11, Article 3 in the conduct of business of the
establishment.



   (B)   Operators and employees of an auction house, dealer,
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be subject to all other license
revocation, suspension and appeal procedures as prescribed by A.R.S. Title
44, Chapter 11, Article 3.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-4-3  REPORTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every person engaged in the business of auction house, dealer,
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall make out and deliver to the Chief of
Police a true, complete and legible report of all goods and articles received
on deposit or consignment, in pawn, pledge, trade or exchange or by purchase.
The report shall be made upon forms furnished by the city and shall be
delivered within 24 hours after the receipt of the property concerned. Each
sheet shall contain the following:



      (1)   A description of the property; including brand name,
model and serial number, if any;



      (2)   The amount loaned or paid for the property, or amount
allowed in trade;



      (3)   The number of the pawn ticket, if any is given;



      (4)   The date and time when property was received;



      (5)   The signature of the person from whom the property was
received;



      (6)   The name (printed), address and age of the person. The
reporting party shall require each person to show proof of his or her name by
exhibiting state or federal identification;



      (7)   A description of the person, consisting of height,
weight, race, date of birth, driver's license number, complexion and hair
color; and



      (8)   The vehicle model and license number used in making
delivery.



   (B)   No article shall be sold or exchanged by any auction house,
dealer, pawnbroker or secondhand dealer until it shall have been in the
custody thereof for 10 calendar days after making out and delivering to the
Chief of Police the report required under division (A) above. Provided that
in the case of an article consigned to an auction house, such article shall
not be sold or exchanged until after it shall have been in the custody
thereof for 3 days after delivering to the Chief of Police the report
required under division (A) above. This division shall not apply to
redemption of pawned or pledged articles.



   (C)   Every person engaged in the business of dealer or secondhand
dealer shall record the description of every article sold for an amount of
$25 or more. He or she shall also record the name and address of the
purchaser of such articles. This record shall be held by the dealer or
secondhand dealer for at least 30 days after the sale.



   (D)   Upon notification by representatives of the Police Department
that goods and articles received on deposit or consignment, in pawn, pledge,
trade, exchange or purchase, are the fruits of a crime, no auction house,
dealer, pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall dispose of the property.
Interest upon the goods and articles pawned or pledged shall cease to accrue
on the date of the notification.



   (E)   Every person engaged in the business of auctioneer, dealer,
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall prominently display a copy of these
provisions in a conspicuous place on the premises of the business.



   (F)   Every person engaged in the business of auctioneer, dealer,
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, who, in the conduct of his or her business,
comes into possession of abandoned property, shall turn over the property to
the Police Department for which a receipt shall be issued. If ownership of
the property is not established within 90 days after delivery to the Police
Department, the property shall be returned to the person from whom the Police
Department obtained possession. This division shall not apply to unredeemed
pawned or pledged articles.



   (G)   The business premises of any auction house, dealer, pawnbroker
or secondhand dealer, along with their transaction records and stock of goods
and articles, shall be open at reasonable hours to reasonable inspection by
representatives of the police department or the City Clerk's office.



   (H)   No person engaged in the business of auctioneer, dealer,
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall knowingly permit a person whose license
is under suspension to be employed in any capacity of such establishment.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



ARTICLE 8-5:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   8-5-1   Definitions



   8-5-2   Application



   8-5-3   Inspection of premises



   8-5-4   Requirements for establishments



   8-5-5   Permitted locations



   8-5-6   Unlawful activities; inspection of premises; hours of service



   8-5-7   Change of location or employment



   8-5-8   Suspension and revocation of license



§ 8-5-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MASSAGE THERAPY.  Any activity as defined in A.R.S. § 32-4201.5 and
any amendments thereto that is undertaken to increase wellness, relaxation,
stress reduction, pain relief and postural improvement, or to provide general
or specific therapeutic benefit.



   PRINCIPAL.  Any decision maker in the management or operation of a
massage establishment.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-5-2  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a business license to operate a
massage establishment shall make application for same to the City Clerk.



   (B)   In addition to the information contained on the standard
license application form furnished by the city, each principal in a business
applying to operate a massage establishment shall submit the following
additional information:



      (1)   The full legal name and current residence address of
each principal;



      (2)   Any other names by which each principal has been known;



      (3)   Written proof that the each principal is over the age of
18 years;



      (4)   Each principal's height, weight and hair and eye color;



      (5)   One portrait photograph of the principal, at least 2
inches by 2 inches in size, taken within the previous 6 months;



      (6)   The business license history of each principal, whether
that license was issued by this city, another city or any state; and whether
the license was ever revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the
business activity or occupation subsequent to such suspension or revocation;



      (7)   All felony convictions of each principal and the grounds
of the conviction; and



      (8)   A copy of the principal's license issued pursuant to
A.R.S. Title 32, Chapter 42.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-5-3  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   (A)   Any applicant for a license pursuant to this article shall
personally appear at the clerk’s office and shall present the application
and additional required information.



   (B)   No license to operate a massage establishment shall be issued
or renewed if any principal has been convicted within the last five years of
any felony or other offense involving moral turpitude or if the application
as deliberately falsified.



   (C)   In addition, the building safety department shall inspect any
premises proposed as the site of a massage establishment and shall make
separate recommendations to the clerk concerning compliance with the
provisions of § 8-5-5.



(Ord. 1367, passed 10-5-2010)



§ 8-5-4  REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENTS.



   No massage business license for a massage establishment shall be issued
or renewed unless inspection by the Building Safety Division of Development
Services Department indicates the site of the proposed establishment complies
with each and all of the following minimum requirements:



   (A)   Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the
Uniform Building Code or equivalent is the current code that the Building
Official relies on, and, in addition, at least 1 artificial light of not less
than 60 watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where services are
performed on patrons and shall be in use whenever those services are being
performed;



   (B)   Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the
Uniform Building Code or other current code which the Building Official
relies on;



   (C)   Adequate equipment shall be provided for disinfecting and
sterilizing instruments used in administering or practicing any massage
therapy techniques;



   (D)   Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times;



   (E)   Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for storage of
clean linens;



   (F)   Adequate bathing, dressing and toilet facilities shall be
provided for patrons. A minimum of 1 dressing area, 1 toilet and 1 wash basin
shall be provided for each massage establishment; provided, however, that if
male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment,
a separate massage room and separate dressing areas shall be provided for
male and female patrons;



   (G)   All walls, coiling, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam
rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good
repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat
rooms, steam or vapor rooms and cabinets, shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation.
Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use;



   (H)   Clean and sanitary towels shall be provided for each patron.
The headrest of each table shall be provided with a clean and sanitary towel,
paper towel or sheet for each patron;



   (I)   A minimum of 1 separate wash basin shall be provided in each
massage establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot
and cold running water at all times, and shall be located within or as close
as practical to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In
addition, there shall be provided at each wash basin sanitary towels placed
in permanently installed dispensers; and



   (J)   A massage establishment shall at all times comply with all
applicable city ordinances, county, state and federal regulations.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-5-5  PERMITTED LOCATIONS.



   (A)   A properly licensed massage therapist or health care
professional shall only be permitted to provide massage therapy at the
following business locations:



      (1)   Full service beauty salon, spa, health club, fitness
center or massage establishment;



      (2)   Medical establishment of a health care professional; and



      (3)   In the home or business location of a client by any
massage therapist or healthcare professional having an appropriate license.



   (B)   A massage therapist or healthcare professional or any students
in conjunction with a recognized school of massage or educational institution
as allowable under A.R.S. Title 32, may perform massages during community and
civic events as long as they meet the requirements set forth in A.J.C.C.,
Vol. 1, Article 8-8 and 8-9 of this code.



(Ord. 1421, passed 11-3-2015)



§ 8-5-6  UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES; INSPECTION OF PREMISES; HOURS OF SERVICE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful:



      (1)   For any person to conduct or operate a massage
establishment on the same premises whereon is also conducted the business of
a cocktail lounge, photography studio, motel studio, art studio, telephone
answering service, motion picture theater or bookstore; and



      (2)   For any person to practice or administer any massage or
touching techniques, whether for a fee or gratuity:



         (a)   In a manner or under circumstances intended to
arouse, appeal to or gratify sexual desires;



         (b)   To any other person whose genital organs are not
covered by opaque material;



         (c)   While dressed in such a way as the genital organs,
buttocks or female breast or breasts are not covered by opaque material; or



         (d)   In any way touch the genital organs of the
individual receiving treatment.



   (B)   For any massage establishment to hire as an employee or
independent contractor to conduct massage therapy without a valid massage
therapist license issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 32, Chapter 42.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 8-5-7  CHANGE OF LOCATION OR EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   A change in location of a massage establishment may be
approved by the City Clerk provided that all ordinances and regulations of
the city are complied with. The City Clerk shall order inspections of the
proposed premises by the Building Safety Division as required by Vol. I,
§§  and 8-5-5.



   (B)   Notification shall be made to the City Clerk by a massage
establishment whenever a massage therapist begins or leaves the employ of the
establishment.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-5-8  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   In addition to the provisions contained in Vol. I, § 8-2-9(C), the
license of a massage establishment may be revoked or denied renewal upon any
of the following grounds:



   (A)   That any principal or employee of the business has been
convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction within the last 10 years of a
felony or of any offense involving prostitution, sexual behavior, indecent
exposure or pornography;



   (B)   That the licensee is has been convicted of untrue, fraudulent,
misleading or deceptive advertising within the last 10 years;



   (C)   That the licensee has been found liable of willful negligence
in the business of massage therapy or operating a massage establishment
within the past 10 years; or



   (D)   That the licensee is engaged in the business of massage
therapy under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another
establishment of a like or different name.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007; Am. Ord. 1367, passed 10-5-2010)



ARTICLE 8-6:  SWAP MEET OPERATIONS



Section



   8-6-1   Definitions



   8-6-2   License required



   8-6-3   Unlawful practices of swap meet proprietor



   8-6-4   Unlawful practices of swap meet vendors



   8-6-5   Regulations



§ 8-6-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SWAP MEET.  A place of commercial activity, popularly known as a swap
meet, flea market or park-and-swap, open to the general public for the
purchase of merchandise on the premises, which place is available to the
general public who wish to sell or barter merchandise on the premises,
whether such sellers or vendors are in the business of vending or are making
casual sales or some combination thereof and which place is normally composed
of stalls, stands or spaces allotted to vendors at least 1 of whom does not
occupy the same allotted space or spaces on an uninterrupted continuous daily
basis.



   SWAP MEET PROPRIETOR.  Any person who rents, sells, donates or
otherwise makes available to swap meet vendors any space within premises
owned or controlled by the proprietor for the purpose of a swap meet sale.



   SWAP MEET VENDOR.  Any person located upon the premises of a swap meet
for the purpose of conducting business activity at a swap meet.



   VENDOR REGISTRATION LOG.  A well-bound volume kept by the proprietor
to identify vendors.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-6-2  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Swap meet proprietor is a person deemed to be engaged in a
taxable business activity. Thus, that person is required to obtain a
privilege license with the city.



   (B)   Swap meet vendors shall obtain the appropriate license with
the city before engaging in business or operating activities at a swap meet.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-6-3  UNLAWFUL PRACTICES OF SWAP MEET PROPRIETOR.



   In addition to the provisions in Vol. I, § 8-2-8, it is unlawful for a
swap meet proprietor to fail to comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   To permit any person to engage in the sale of merchandise upon
parking or other areas owned or controlled by the swap meet proprietor
whenever such areas or sites are not specified on the proprietor's license;



   (B)   To fail to control the entrance to and exit of all swap meet
vendors and merchandise from the premises by the physical presence and
personal supervision on the premises of the swap meet proprietor or his
designated agents during the hours of operation of the swap meet;



   (C)   To fail to keep an accurate vendor registration log for a
period of 4 years;



   (D)   To fail to make available the vendor registration log for
inspection by the City Clerk or the department of public safety; and



   (E)   To fail to inquire of any vendor entering the premises of the
swap meet proprietor for the purpose of doing business, the status of the
vendor's compliance with current city licensing regulations.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-6-4  UNLAWFUL PRACTICES OF SWAP MEET VENDORS.



   In addition to the provisions in Vol. I, § 8-2-8, it is unlawful for a
swap meet vendor to fail to comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   To fail to post, at the swap meet vendor's assigned location,
in a conspicuous place so as to be clearly seen by the public, the
appropriate license that has been issued by the city; and



   (B)   To engage in sales at locations other than the vendor's sales
location assigned that day by the proprietor.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-6-5  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this article, the vendor registration log
shall contain for each swap meet vendor a separate and distinct daily entry
of the name, address, vehicle license numbers; tax, business or operating
license number, drivers license number and other descriptive information in a
form approved by the City of Apache Junction, of any swap meet vendor
entering the premises of the swap meet proprietor for the purpose of a swap
meet.



   (B)   The swap meet proprietor shall make no distinction between
swap meet vendors conducting business activities and those conducting casual
sales. All vendors at a swap meet shall be considered to be conducting
business or operating activities.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



ARTICLE 8-7:  YARD SALES



Section



   8-7-1   Definition



   8-7-2   Regulations



   8-7-3   Conditions under which business license is required



§ 8-7-1  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   YARD SALE.  The retail sale of merchandise by the resident of a
specific residential address, and which complies with the definition of
"casual activity" as defined in Vol. I, § 8-1-1.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-7-2  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Yard sales shall only be conducted by the owner or resident of
the specific residential address.



   (B)   Yard sales shall be limited to no more than 4 times per
calendar year per address at a maximum of 4 days each time.



   (C)   At no time shall any yard sale be permitted to operate if, in
the judgment of the Public Safety Director, a traffic or parking hazard has
been created.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-7-3  CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH BUSINESS LICENSE IS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any individual operating a yard sale in excess of the number
of times permitted under Vol. I, § 8-7-2(B) shall be considered to be
operating a business and shall be required to obtain an appropriate license.



   (B)   Any yard sale licensed as a business under the provisions of
this article shall be wholly conducted within a screened or fenced area
constructed of opaque materials. All such screened or fenced areas shall be
constructed in accordance with applicable city zoning regulations.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



ARTICLE 8-8:  REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMUNITY AND CIVIC EVENTS



Section



   8-8-1   Purpose and intent



   8-8-2   Definitions



   8-8-3   Civic event sponsor requirements



   8-8-4   Civic event vendor requirements



   8-8-5   Community event sponsor requirements



   8-8-6   Community event vendor requirements



   8-8-7   Tax license required



   8-8-8   Business license and tax license required



§ 8-8-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This article is intended to regulate community and civic events for the
benefit of its citizens and visitors which enable the city to:



   (A)   Protect life, health, property and general welfare of the city;



   (B)   Minimize expenditures of public funds for community and civic
events;



   (C)   Minimize business interruptions during events while promoting
business growth and economic development;



   (D)   Implement a high profile, proactive approach to local economic
development through public/private partnerships;



   (E)   Provide a range of community and civic events open to everyone
to improve the quality of life in the city;



   (F)   Facilitate the redevelopment and revitalization of the
downtown and older commercial areas;



   (G)   Assist the city in implementing its overall economic
development goals;



   (H)   Provide a consistent set of standards for community and civic
events;



   (I)   Compete on an equal basis with other communities for tourism
and other economic development projects.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-8-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIC EVENT.  An activity or gathering not exceeding 4 consecutive
days in any calendar year which is conducted, organized and sponsored solely
by the city or in conjunction with a non-profit organization, has been
approved as such by the council during the annual budget process and which is
open to all participants on an equal basis.



   COMMUNITY EVENT.  An activity or gathering not exceeding 4 consecutive
days in any calendar year which is conducted, organized and sponsored by
non-profit organizations or for-profit organizations and is open to all
participants on an equal basis.



   EVENT.  An activity or gathering with the purpose of promoting or
benefitting the city and its residents and/or the sponsoring organizations.
An application will be required for any activity or gathering which meets any
of the following criteria:



      (1)   Use of or impact/encroachment on any city street,
sidewalk, alley or other right-of-way area (which includes any indirect
impact that will affect the flow of typical vehicular or pedestrian traffic)
that requires more than one city department approval, or will require the
approval of more than one city department for inspections, assistance or
permits.



      (2)   Is likely to draw a crowd to a venue not properly suited
and has the potential to require special accommodations, regulations, traffic
control devices or public works or safety personnel;



      (3)   Presence or participation of one or more for-profit or
nonprofit vendors that intend to make a sale, advertise for sale, solicit
sales, offer for sale, or provides a service or offer/advertise to provide a
service. This provision does not apply to vendors already in possession of a
valid city license issued under this code or city tax code;



      (4)   Activities such as weddings, funerals, private yard
sales, car shows or charity car washes shall not be considered an event.



      (5)   A programmed event of a city department shall not be
considered an event, however if the event includes vendors that are not
already properly licensed with the city, then a fee of $15 per vendor shall
be collected for each event. The city department sponsoring the programmed
event shall be responsible for collecting this fee from each participating
vendor. These fees shall be paid in total to the city no later than 8 working
days following the last day of the event.



   FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATION.  Any entity or corporation which has been
established, maintained, or conducted for the purpose of making a profit.



   NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION.  Any religious, social, fraternal or civic
organization which has been designated as a 501C organization by the Internal
Revenue Service and which has a valid operating license as provided for in
Vol. I, Chapter 8 of the city code or the city tax code. Should questions as
to form of business arise, interpretations of this section shall be based
upon form indicia contained in the following: Arizona Revised Statutes;
Internal Revenue Code Rules and Regulations prescribed by the Internal
Revenue Service.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-8-3  CIVIC EVENT SPONSOR REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A non-profit sponsor of any civic event which includes vendors
shall pay a fee of $50 per day. This fee shall be paid no later than 10 city
business days in advance of the first day of the event. A penalty of $5 per
day shall be assessed for each city business day the initial payment is late
beginning with the city business day immediately following the initial
deadline. The civic event fee shall not apply to those events which do not
include vendors or city events.



   (B)   A non-profit sponsor of any civic event shall provide the city
clerk with the name, address and telephone number of the event coordinator or
contact person at least 30 city business days in advance of the event.



   (C)   The sponsor of any civic event shall obtain a completed vendor
application, on a form to be provided by the city, from each participating
vendor and obtain a copy of the vendor’s driver’s license for any
vendor(s) not already properly licensed with the city. The sponsor shall
provide the city with these completed forms in addition to a complete list
containing name, address and telephone number of each participating vendor no
later than 8 city business days following the last day of the event.



   (D)   Any food truck vendor, as defined in this chapter, that is
present at a civic event shall follow the regulatory process in Article 8-10
of this chapter.



   (E)   Obtain the city transaction privilege tax or use tax number
from the vendor in advance of an event and verify with the city that it is a
valid number. No vendor will be permitted to participate in the event without
a valid city tax license.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-8-4  CIVIC EVENT VENDOR REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All civic event vendors who engage or attempt to engage in a
sale at a civic event or who advertise or solicit services or products shall
complete a civic event vendor application in order to participate in the
event. The completed form shall be submitted to the event sponsor.



   (B)   Non-profit organizations which participate as vendors at civic
events shall not be required to complete an event vendor application if their
participation is limited to the distribution of literature or information
relative to their organization.



   (C)   Massage therapists or healthcare professionals or any students
in conjunction with a recognized school of massage or educational institution
as allowable under A.R.S. Title 32 who wish to participate as a vendor at a
civic event shall be permitted to do so as long as such service is provided
by a person holding a valid city business license and who is authorized under
A.R.S. Title 32 to perform massages.



   (D)   Any food truck vendor, as defined in this chapter, that is
present at a civic event shall follow the regulatory process in Article 8-10
of this chapter.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-8-5 COMMUNITY EVENT SPONSOR REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The sponsor of any community event which includes vendors
shall remit to the city a fee of $15 per vendor for those vendors not already
properly licensed for each event. The sponsor shall be responsible for
collecting this fee from each participating vendor. These fees shall be paid
in total to the city no later than 8 city business days following the last
day of the event. A penalty of $5 per city business day shall be assessed for
each city business day that the total fee remains unpaid.



   (B)   The sponsor of any community event shall provide the city
clerk department with the name, address and telephone number of the event
coordinator or contact person at least 30 city business days in advance of
the event.



   (C)   The sponsor of any community event shall obtain a completed
vendor application, on a form to be provided by the city, from each
participating vendor and obtain a copy of the vendor’s driver’s license
for any vendor(s) not already properly licensed with the city. The sponsor
shall provide the city with these completed forms in addition to a complete
list containing name, address and telephone number of each participating
vendor no later than 8 city business days following the last day of the event.



   (D)   Any food truck vendor, as defined in this chapter, that is
present at a special event shall follow the regulatory process in Article
8-10 of this chapter.



   (E)   Obtain the city transaction privilege tax or use tax number
from the vendor in advance of an event and verify with the city that it is a
valid number. No vendor will be permitted to participate in the event without
a valid city tax license.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-8-6  COMMUNITY EVENT VENDOR REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All community event vendors who engage or attempt to engage in
a retail sale or who solicit or advertise in any form at a community event
shall complete a community event vendor application in order to participate
in the event. The completed form shall be submitted to the event sponsor.



   (B)   Non-profit organizations who participate as vendors at
community events shall not be required to complete a community event vendor
application if their participation is limited to the distribution of
literature or information relative to their organization.



   (C)   Vendors who have an appropriate license shall not be required
to pay an additional vendor fee provided they are engaging in an activity
covered by the license.



   (D)   Massage therapists or healthcare professionals or any students
in conjunction with a recognized school of massage or educational institution
as allowable under A.R.S. Title 32 who wish to participate as a vendor at a
community event shall be permitted to do so as long as such service is
provided by a person holding a valid city business license and who is
authorized under A.R.S. Title 32 to perform massages.



   (E)   Any food truck vendor, as defined in this chapter, that is
present at a special event shall follow the regulatory process in Article
8-10 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-8-7  TAX LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any vendor participating at a community or civic event who is engaged
in a taxable activity shall be required to obtain a city privilege tax or use
tax license as set forth in the Apache Junction Tax Code, Chapter 8A, Article
III, Licensing and Recordkeeping. This license shall be obtained in advance
of the event.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-8-8  BUSINESS LICENSE AND TAX LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No city business license shall be required for a community event or
civic event vendor if such vendor is engaged in hobby or craft sales in which
the seller is the creator or non-paid representative of the creator and for
which the gross sales of each hobbyist and craftsman shall not exceed $3,000
in any twelve (12) month period of time. Such vendors are still required to
complete the vendor application and obtain a city privilege tax or use tax
license prior to participating in the event.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



ARTICLE 8-9:  SALES WITHIN MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS,
MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SUBDIVISIONS
AND ALL OTHER RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS



Section



   8-9-1   Purpose and intent



   8-9-2   Definitions



   8-9-3   Violation and penalty



   8-9-4   Market days sponsor requirements



   8-9-5   Market days vendor requirements



§ 8-9-1  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This article is intended to regulate sales and events within mobile
home and recreational vehicle parks, mobile home and recreational vehicle
subdivisions and all other residential subdivisions for the benefit of
residents and visitors and which enable the city to:



   (A)   Protect life, health, property and general welfare of the city;



   (B)   Enable residential areas, mobile home and recreational vehicle
communities to host a range of events for community members whether open to
the general public or not so as to improve the quality of life in the city;



   (C)   Provide a consistent set of standards for sales and events
within Mobile Home Parks, Recreational Vehicle Parks, Mobile Home
Subdivisions, Recreational Vehicle Subdivisions and all other residential
subdivisions.



(Ord. 1421, passed 11-3-2015)



§ 8-9-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MARKET DAYS, COUNTRY STORE, BAZAAR DAYS AND THE LIKE.  An event at a
temporary location not exceeding 1 day per week conducted within a mobile
home park, travel trailer park, recreation vehicle park or mobile home,
recreational vehicle or residential subdivision for the purpose of providing
goods and services, ancillary retail sales and activities intended for
residents and non-residents.



   SPONSOR.  Any non-profit organization, for-profit corporation, home
owners association or any other entity which is legally formed and obligates
itself to organize, operate and manage a market days event.



(Ord. 1421, passed 11-3-2015)



§ 8-9-3  VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   It is unlawful for any sponsor of a market days event to permit any
vendor to set up at the event without the vendor having first met all city
licensing requirements. Violations of this article are punishable under
A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Ord. 1421, passed 11-3-2015)



§ 8-9-4  MARKET DAYS SPONSOR REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The sponsor of any market day events shall apply for and
obtain a transaction privilege tax license from the city clerk prior to
conducting or allowing ancillary retail sales (e.g., market days, craft/art
sales, fundraisers and temporary food vendors).



   (B)   The sponsor shall comply with required sales tax
administration and collection processes and shall be responsible for the
collection and remittance of city sales tax on market days sales.



   (C)   Any food truck vendor, as defined in this chapter, that is
present at a market days event shall follow the regulatory process in Article
8-10 of this chapter,



(Ord. 1421, passed 11-3-2015)



§ 8-9-5  MARKET DAYS VENDOR REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Shall apply to vendors participating in market days if there
is not a market days sponsor as set forth in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 8-9-4.



      (1)   All vendors who engage or attempt to engage in a sale at
a market days event or who advertise or solicit services or products shall
complete the city license application and pay the required fee in accordance
with this chapter and the city tax code in order to participate in the event.



      (2)   Non-profit organizations who participate as vendors at
market days shall not be required to complete a city application if their
participation is limited to the distribution of literature or information
relative to their organization and they have the required city license.



      (3)   Any vendor who conducts business activity at a market
days event shall obtain the appropriate license and pay the applicable
license fee as set forth in the city tax code.



      (4)   Any vendor who conducts business activity at a market
days event shall always be in possession of an appropriate license, and such
license, or a copy thereof, shall be produced upon the request of any city
official or the market days sponsor or coordinator.



   (B)   Any food truck vendor, as defined in this chapter, that is
present at a market days event shall follow the regulatory process in Article
8-10 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1421, passed 11-3-2015)



ARTICLE 8-10:  MOBILE AND TEMPORARY FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDORS



Section



   8-10-1   Definitions



   8-10-2   Permit



   8-10-3   Mobile food and vending operating conditions



   8-10-4   Permit revocation and appeals



   8-10-5   Penalties



§ 8-10-1  DEFINITIONS.



   COUNTY HEALTH PERMIT.  A Pinal or Maricopa County (according to the
location of where business is being conducted in the city) special event
health permit for on-site inspection of temporary food booths, food trucks
and mobile food vendors on the day of the event or an annual food service
permit as outlined in Pinal County Environmental Health Services Substantive
Policy Statements; Maricopa County Environmental Services Department
Substantive Policy Statements; the Pinal County Environmental Health Code; or
the Maricopa County Environmental Health Code.



   FOOD VENDING CART.  Any wheeled device moved by human power.



   MOBILE FOOD VENDING VEHICLE.  A licensed concession trailer or
motorized vehicle suitable for use on a public highway which is equipped and
primarily used for the sale of food and beverage of any kind including
prepared, pre-packaged or unprepared, unpackaged food and nonfood sundries



specifically related to the mobile food vendor’s business.



   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR.  Any person or entity, as defined in this chapter,
who:



      (1)   Owns, controls, manages, operates and/or leases a mobile
food vending vehicle or food vending cart;



      (2)   Contracts or employs any person to drive, operate,
prepare foods, and/or vend from a mobile food vending vehicle or food vending
cart.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who prepares food and/or sells food, beverages
or sundries from a mobile food vending vehicle or food vending cart or any
individual that operates such a vehicle or cart.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-10-2  PERMIT.



   (A)   Required. It is unlawful for any mobile food vendor to conduct
business without first obtaining and maintaining a mobile food vendor pemvit
and all other required licenses, including a privilege or use tax license,
the applicable county environmental health services permit as determined by
Pinal or Maricopa County (according to the location of where business is
being conducted in the city), current food handler’s card and
identification cards as may be required by this chapter. If a mobile food
vendor has more than one food vending vehicle or food vending cart, multiple
permits shall be required. There shall be no application fee for a mobile
food vendor permit.



   (B)   Application. In addition to the requirements set forth in this
chapter and the Apache Junction Tax Code, applicants for a mobile food vendor
permit shall include the following information with the permit application:



      (1)   A description of the goods to be sold;



      (2)   If the applicant is an agent of the business for which
the permit will be issued, the name and address of the agent, if different
from the business address, together with credentials establishing the exact
relationships with the mobile food vendor;



      (3)   A description, license plate number and photograph of
the vehicle or cart;



      (4)   All location(s) from which the applicant intends to
conduct business and a permanent address to which notifications may be sent;



      (5)   A valid driver’s license;



      (6)   A mobile food vendor shall provide proof of vehicle
liability insurance which shall be maintained during the term of the permit
and shall have at least the minimum limits required by law;



      (7)   A mobile food vendor who conducts business on public
property or city right-of-way shall provide: a) a certificate of insurance
naming the “City of Apache Junction” as an additionally insured party;
and b) a signed indemnification and duty to defend and hold harmless
commitment.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 8-10-3  MOBILE FOOD AND VENDING OPERATING CONDITIONS.



   Mobile and temporary food and beverage vendors who have obtained a
permit shall be subject to the following limitations and conditions:



   (A)   Mobile vending shall only be permitted to operate on
developed, commercially zoned property and shall not be authorized to operate
on vacant lots and shall not impede access to adjacent businesses;



   (B)   There shall be an open and operating permanent business on the
site in order to accommodate the sanitary facilities access requirement of
the Building Code (i.e, restrooms, trash, recycling, food waste and grease
disposal). The temporary food and beverage vendor must also be able to use
these facilities;



   (C)   The hours of operation for the vendors shall be limited to the
hours that the on-site, permanent business is open;



   (D)   The vendor shall secure the permission of the sponsoring
business owner;



   (E)   Vendors/operators of food vending vehicles shall arrange for
trash receptacles and will dispose of all trash during operations and shall
keep the area surrounding the mobile food vending vehicles free of debris,
litter and waste;



   (F)   The temporary food and beverage vendors shall not store the
vehicle or cart when the permanent on-site business is not open unless the
operator has the sponsoring business owner’s permission;



   (G)   Mobile food vending vehicles or carts shall not be stored on
the sponsoring business’ property, when not in use, in lieu of placing it
in a storage lot or similar facility regardless of the sponsoring business
owner’s permission;



   (H)   Mobile food and beverage vending shall be limited to 96
consecutive hours maximum at each temporary location;



   (I)   Signage attached to a mobile food vending vehicle shall not
require a sign permit, but must conform to the signage regulations in the
City of Apache Junction Zoning Ordinance. One A-frame sign or menu board per
vehicle or cart is also permitted;



   (J)   A mobile food vendor or operator shall carry at all times
proof of liability insurance, mobile food vendor permit, county health
department permit, food handing card and proof of property owner approval to
be on a given property;



   (K)   A mobile food vendor or operator may operate on city-owned or
leased property, public right-of-way or city park as part of a civic event;



   (L)   Mobile food vending shall not be permitted on any city street
or public right-of-way unless it is part of a civic event;



   (M)   Mobile food vendors shall be permitted to operate on private
property at any location within the city when catering a private function and
shall not stage the vehicle on public property or right-of-way.



   (N)   If the mobile food vendor is charged a fee for the food truck
space, the sponsoring business owner shall comply with city tax code
requirements.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-10-4  PERMIT REVOCATION AND APPEALS.



   (A)   A mobile food vendor permit shall be revoked by the city
clerk’s office for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   The permittee notifies the city in writing with
appropriate signature that the business has been closed, sold or is no longer
operating in the city; or



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
the application for a permit;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or the Apache Junction Tax
Code; or



      (4)   Conducting a business activity in violation of the
Arizona Revised Statutes.



   (B)   Revoked permits may be reinstated only after the cause of such
revocation has been fully corrected;



   (C)   A person whose permit has been revoked shall be issued a
notice to cease mobile food vending operations within the city;



   (D)   Any person aggrieved by the city’s decision to revoke a
permit pursuant to subsection (A) above shall have the right of appeal to a
hearing officer designated by the city manager. The appeal shall be filed
with the city manager within 14 business days after receipt of the city’s
decision. The appeal shall contain a written statement setting forth fully
the grounds for the appeal. The hearing officer shall set a time and place
for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant. The decision and order of the hearing officer shall be final and
conclusive, except any person aggrieved may pursue any appropriate judicial
proceedings;



   (E)   No person may reapply for any permit after revocation unless
the cause for such revocation has been corrected.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 8-10-5  PENALTIES.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
deemed guilty of a class one misdemeanor and, shall upon conviction, be
punished pursuant to the provisions of the Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I,
Chapter 1: General, Article 1-1: General, § 1-1-11 Penalty.



(Ord. 1450, passed 9-19-2017)



ARTICLE 8-11:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS OPERATORS, MANAGERS; ADULT SERVICE
PROVIDERS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



   8-11-1   Legislative purpose



   8-11-2   Definitions



   8-11-3   Permit required: operators; managers; adult services;
providers and employees



   8-11-4   Exemptions



   8-11-5   Applications



   8-11-6   Investigations



   8-11-7   Granting, denial, revocation and suspension; appeal



   8-11-8   Expiration and renewal



   8-11-9   Non-transferability



   8-11-10   Operation requirements



   8-11-11   Other licenses



   8-11-12   Penalty



   8-11-13   Applicability



   8-11-14   Severability



§ 8-11-1  LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this article to establish permitting
procedures and regulations for sexually oriented businesses and their
employees to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the City of Apache Junction, and to avoid and mitigate the
detrimental secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses through content
neutral regulations.



   (B)   It is not the purpose of this article to impose a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials, or to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
to their intended market.



   (C)   This article is not intended to interfere with or suppress
legitimate expression or any speech activities protected by the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution nor is it intended to permit any
use or activity which is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law.



   (D)   In passage of this article, the Mayor and Council considered
testimony and case law, studies and other documents which fully outline that
adult oriented businesses may and do generate secondary effects which have
proven to be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the city
as noted above. The City Clerk has all the documentation on file in his or
her office with the original minutes of the case.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE or PEEP SHOW.  Any place to which the public is permitted
or invited where coin-operated or slug-operated, or for any form of
consideration, electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still
or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to a person in a booth
or a viewing room where the images so displayed depict or describe SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS or SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE or ADULT NOVELTY STORE.  A
commercial establishment which as its principal business purpose offers for
sale or rent 50% or more of its inventory for any form of consideration any 1
or more of the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video
cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations that
depict or describe "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual
activities;" or



      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed
for use in connection with "specified sexual activities," excluding condoms
and other birth control and disease-prevention products.



   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant or other commercial
establishment permitted to serve alcoholic beverages pursuant to A.R.S. §
42-09(B), which regularly features, exhibits or displays as one of its
principal business purposes:



      (1)   Individuals who appear in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity;



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities;" or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which depict or describe "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities."



   ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL.  A hotel or motel or similar commercial
establishment that:



      (1)   Offers public accommodations for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions that depict or describe "specified
anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" as 1 of its principal
business purposes; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of these adult-types of photographic
reproductions;



      (2)   Offers a single sleeping room for rent less than 10
hours in a 24-hour period; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours in a
24-hour period.



   ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.  A commercial establishment
that features either:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
or



      (2)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A means a commercial establishment,
where for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown as 1 of its
principal business purposes that depict or describe "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities."



   ADULT SERVICES.  Dancing, service of food or beverage, modeling,
posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking, sitting or listening, or other
performances or activities conducted for any consideration in a sexually
oriented business by an individual who is nude or is in a state of nudity
during all or part of the time the person is providing the service.



   ADULT SERVICES PROVIDER.  Any individual who provides any adult
services, whether an employee or independent contractor.



   ADULT THEATER.  A commercial establishment which regularly features,
exhibits or displays, as 1 of its principal business purposes, individuals
who appear nude, in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, live or by film, or
plate negative, film or plate positive, film or tape designed to be projected
on a screen for exhibition, or films, glass slides or transparencies, either
in negative or positive form, designed for exhibition by projection on a
screen, or any type of viewing booth or equipment, that expose or depict
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."



   BOOTH.  A partitioned area in which coin or token operated video
machines, projectors or other electronically or mechanically controlled
devices are used in the regular course of business to produce still or moving
picture images that expose or depict "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activities."



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Director of Department of Public Safety, or his
or her designated agent, whose duties are more fully described in Vol. I,
Article 3-6 of the Apache Junction city code.



   CITY MANAGER.  The department director of the office of the City
Manager, or his or her designated agent, whose duties are more fully
described in Vol. I, Article 3-1.



   DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR.  The department director of the Apache
Junction development services department, or his or her designated agent,
whose duties are more fully described in Vol. I, Article 3-9.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any individual who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated as an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not the individual is paid a
salary, wage or other compensation by the operator. Employee does not include
a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for delivery of goods to the premises.



   ESCORT.  An individual who for tips or any other consideration agrees
or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another individual or who
agrees or offers to privately model or otherwise be clothed in lingerie or to
privately perform a striptease for another individual.



   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish
or advertises to furnish escorts as 1 of his or her or its principal business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business; or the conversion of an existing business,
whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented
business; or the addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
sexually oriented business; or the relocation of any sexually oriented
business.



   FIGURE MODEL.  Any individual who for pecuniary compensation,
consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed,
sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed or otherwise depicted.



   INDIVIDUAL.  A human being.



   LICENSE.  Any license or temporary license issued or required by this
chapter as a condition to operate a sexually oriented business, or issued to
a manager, adult services provider or employee of a sexually oriented
business.



   LICENSEE or APPLICANT.  An individual or person in whose name a permit
to operate a sexually oriented business will be or has been issued, or a
manager, adult services provider or employee authorized pursuant to this
article.



   MANAGER'S STATION.  A permanently designated area marked accordingly
within a sexually oriented business where a sexually oriented business
manager is located in the normal course of operations.



   MODELING STUDIO.  A business which provides, for pecuniary
compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models
who, for the purpose of sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified
anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted
or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration.



   NUDE, NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.  The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft/cleavage or buttocks
with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or the showing
of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



   OPERATE A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS; OPERATOR.  Supervising,
managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or being responsible
for or in charge of the conduct of activities of a sexually oriented business.



   PATRON or CUSTOMER.  An individual invited or permitted to enter and
remain upon the premises of a sexually oriented business, whether or not for
consideration.



   SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.  A state of dress in which clothing
covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business that as 1 of its primary purposes
offers for any form of consideration physical contact in the form of
wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or activities
between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when 1 or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
cabaret, adult live entertainment establishment, adult hotel/motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult video
store, escort agency, modeling studio, sexual encounter center and any
combination thereof.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS MANAGER or MANAGER.  An individual on the
premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise
overall operational control of the business.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola;



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered; and



      (3)   Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of
the body parts included in divisions (1) and (2) of this definition as
referenced above.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation or sodomy on the premises of an adult oriented business.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-3  PERMIT REQUIRED: OPERATORS; MANAGERS; ADULT SERVICES; PROVIDERS
AND EMPLOYEES.



   It is unlawful:



   (A)   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without
having secured a valid sexually oriented business operator permit issued
pursuant to this article;



   (B)   For any person to serve as manager for a sexually oriented
business without having secured a valid sexually oriented business manager
permit issued pursuant to this article; and



   (C)   For any person to work as an employee in a sexually oriented
business without having secured a valid sexually oriented business employee
permit issued pursuant to this article.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 8-11-12



§ 8-11-4  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this article do not apply to any person who is
engaging in, conducting or carrying on a lawful business as an owner or
operator of any of the following businesses or activities:



   (A)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, physical
therapists, nurses or any other health care provider, or barbers or
beauticians duly licensed or certified to practice their respective
profession in the State of Arizona;



   (B)   Trainers of any amateur, semi-professional or professional
athlete or athletic team;



   (C)   Any activity conducted or sponsored by any school district or
governmental entity pursuant to any license issued by the State of Arizona or
United States Government;



   (D)   Portions of performances in theater, concert hall, music hall
or auditorium stage wherein the displays are an integral part of a dramatic
or comedic presentation;



   (E)   Private or public schools providing a course of instruction in
photography or photography studios which do not provide for consideration,
photography equipment, models and a studio; or



   (F)   Modeling agencies, schools or services, except those which
provide live modeling services for consideration, in which a patron may
obtain an exclusive modeling exhibition in which he or she is the only
observer.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-5  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a sexually oriented business
operator, manager, adult services provider or employee permit shall make
application to the City Clerk. The application shall be on a form prescribed
by the Chief of Police and made available by the City Clerk.



   (B)   The application shall be signed under oath by each individual
listed as an applicant and notarized, and shall be accompanied by the fee
required under Vol. I, § 8-11-9.



   (C)   The application shall include 2 original duplicates of a
current photograph and the fingerprints of each applicant. Fingerprints shall
be taken at the Apache Junction Police Department, or by any other law
enforcement agency if accompanied by a notarized verification by that agency,
all at the sole expense of the applicant.



   (D)   The application shall be deemed filed with the city when the
City Clerk has received the required fee in full, a completed application
with all information required under division (F) below, and the photograph
and fingerprints of each applicant. In the case of a sexually oriented
business operator permit application, the applicant shall file 4 copies with
the City Clerk, including all addendum or attachments thereto, with 1 copy
being kept on file with the City Clerk, 1 copy being forwarded from the City
Clerk to the Chief of Police, 1 copy being forwarded to the Zoning
Administrator, and 1 copy being forwarded to the Building Official. In the
case of a sexually oriented business manager, adult services provider or
employee permit, the applicant need only file 2 copies with the City Clerk,
who shall retain one for official city records, and shall forward one to the
Chief of Police for a background investigation.



   (E)   If a person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business
is an individual, that individual must be listed as the applicant and also as
the designated permit holder. If a person desiring to operate a sexually
oriented business is a legal entity other than an individual, each officer,
director or general partner of the entity, and any other individual who will
participate directly or indirectly in decisions relating to management of the
business, must be listed in the application as an applicant, and must provide
their photograph and fingerprints as provided in division (C) above, sign the
application under oath witnessed by a notary public, and must provide all of
the information required under division (F) of this section.



   (F)   In addition to other information as may be requested on the
face of the application form, the application shall include the following
information and items:



      (1)   Name, premises address, business mailing address if
different than premises address, phone number of proposed sexually oriented
business and emergency phone number;



      (2)   If the applicant is a corporation, the state and date of
incorporation, and evidence that the corporation is in good standing under
the laws of the State of Arizona, the name of the registered corporate
counsel and agent, and address of the registered office for service of
process;



      (3)   If the applicant is a partnership, names of all partners
and whether the partnership is general or limited, as well as a copy of the
partnership agreement;



      (4)   Each applicant's full true name and any other names,
aliases or stage names used in the preceding 5 years;



      (5)   Each applicant's current residential mailing address and
telephone number;



      (6)   A copy of each applicant's driver's license with picture
or other picture identification issued by a governmental agency within the
last 2 years;



      (7)   The issuing jurisdiction and the effective date of any
license or permit relating to the operation of a sexually oriented business
or relating to the provision of any adult services which is held or has been
held at any time by any applicant or by the designated permit holder, whether
any such license or permit has been revoked or suspended, and the reasons
thereof;



      (8)   Any criminal conviction of any applicant or of the
designated permit holder in the preceding 3 years for a sexual offense
described in A.R.S. §§ 13-1401 through 13-1424, a racketeering offense as
described in A.R.S. § 13-2301(D)(4), a prostitution offense as defined in
A.R.S. §§ 13-3201 through 13-3214, a drug offense described in A.R.S. §§
13-3401 through 13-3424, or a sexual exploitation of children offense
described in A.R.S. §§ 13-3551 through 13-3559;



      (9)   The names of the sexually oriented business managers who
will have actual supervisory authority over the operation of the business;



      (10)   An accurate to scale floor plan or diagram of the
business premises clearly showing the configuration of the interior and
exterior areas, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The location of where the license will be conspicuously posted, as
well as the location of the manager's station and overhead lighting fixtures,
and all areas in which patrons will not be permitted to enter. The diagram
need not be professionally drawn, but should be oriented to the north or to
some designated street and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various interior dimensions;



      (11)   A certificate and straight line drawing prepared within
30 calendar days prior to application depicting the building and the portion
thereof to be occupied by the sexually oriented business, and the property
line of any other sexually oriented business located within 1,000 of the
property line of any other sexually oriented business, as well as the
property lines of any church, school, park, private residences and other
businesses and uses delineated in Vol. II, §§ 1-17-1-12(A), 1-17-2-12(A),
and Chapter 1; and



      (12)   The City Clerk may waive the foregoing diagram and
drawing requirements for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a
diagram and drawing which was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.



   (G)   Divisions (F)(10) and (F)(11) above are not applicable to
applicants desiring a sexually oriented business manager, adult services
provider or employee permit.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-6  INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall forward a copy of the
application to the Chief of Police, as well as to the Building Official and
Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   For sexually oriented business manager, adult services
provider and employee permit applications, the City Clerk need only send the
copies to the Chief of Police for his or her investigation, except for permit
applications relating to an adult bookstore, adult video or novelty store.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall review the application for accuracy
and shall conduct a criminal background investigation of the applicant.



   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the location
of the business is in compliance with Vol. II, §§ 1-17-1-12(A), 1-17-2-12,
and Chapter 1, or development standards as adopted by the city.



   (E)   The Building Official shall inspect the proposed premises and
shall determine whether the proposed premises are in compliance with all
building codes as adopted by the city.



   (F)   The Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator and Building
Official shall each make separate recommendations to the City Clerk for the
approval or denial of the permit.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-7  GRANTING, DENIAL, REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION; APPEAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application for a sexually oriented
business operator, manager, adult services provider or employee permit,
payment of the required fees and completion of photograph and fingerprinting
requirements under this article, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant
a temporary permit. The issuance of a temporary permit does not waive any
right of city to revoke, deny or suspend for any defect, omission or
misrepresentation in the application.



   (B)   Within 30 calendar days after the application for a sexually
oriented business operator, manager, adult services provider or employee
permit is filed with the city, the City Clerk shall, based on the
recommendations of the Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator and Building
Official, notify such applicant by prepaid first class certified mail, return
receipt requested, whether the permit will be granted, denied or renewed.
Failure by the City Clerk to issue such notice upon expiration of this time
period shall be deemed as issuance of the permit.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall grant the permit or renewal application
thereof if all requirements for the application have been completed, unless:



      (1)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (2)   The application contains incomplete information to
justify the issuance of a permit;



      (3)   The required application has not been paid;



      (4)   The applicant has made false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of material fact in the application;



      (5)   The building, structure, equipment or location proposed
by the applicant for the sexually oriented business does not comply with the
requirements pursuant to this article, and other health, fire, building,
safety, development standards and zoning provisions enacted by the city; or



      (6)   The applicant is delinquent in payment to the city of
taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant in relation to sexually oriented businesses



   (D)   In the case of the granting of a sexually oriented business
operator permit, the permit shall state on its face the name of the licensee,
the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The
permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall suspend a permit for a period of 10
working days if a licensee is not in compliance with this article.



   (F)   The City Clerk shall revoke a permit pursuant to this article
if the licensee:



      (1)   Has failed to come within compliance of any provision in
this article within 10 working days from the last day of the suspension as
provided in division (E) above;



      (2)   Is convicted of 3 or more violations of this article in
any 12-month period;



      (3)   Is convicted or pleads guilty or no contest to offenses
stated in Vol. I, § 8-11-5(F)(8); or



      (4)   Is determined to have filed inaccurate information in
the application.



   (G)   If the City Clerk determines that grounds exist for denial,
suspension or revocation of a permit, the City Clerk shall notify the
applicant by prepaid first class certified mail, return receipt requested,
including the grounds for such action. The grounds shall make reference to
the applicable sections and divisions of this article which have not been
complied with or have been violated. The applicant may respond to the City
Clerk within 10 working days in writing setting forth a statement as to why
the permit should not be denied, suspended or revoked. The statement may also
request a hearing. If a response is not received by the City Clerk in the
time stated, the denial, suspension or revocation shall be final and the City
Clerk shall send written notice to the applicant within 5 working days after
expiration of the period for submitting a response by prepaid first class
certified mail, return receipt requested.



   (H)   Within 5 working days after receipt of response, the City
Clerk shall either:



      (1)   Withdraw the denial, suspension or revocation
determination, and will so notify the applicant as in the manner proscribed
above; or



      (2)   Schedule a hearing, a hearing officer designated by the
City Manager and so notify the applicant in the manner noted above, including
the date, time and place of the hearing. If the City Clerk fails to send a
timely notification, the permit shall be deemed to continue as valid until
the annual renewal date. The hearing will be conducted informally. All
parties shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible
evidence bearing on the issues. Each party may also be represented by an
Arizona licensed attorney of their own choosing at their own expense, and
shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Although the
Arizona rules of evidence will not apply at this hearing, any relevant
evidence as determined by the hearing officer may be admitted that is the
sort of evidence persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs. The hearing shall be scheduled not less than 15 nor more than 20
working days after receipt by the City Clerk of the request for a hearing.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
evidence that the denial, suspension or revocation was arbitrary or
capricious and was an abuse of discretion.



   (I)   The hearing officer shall render a written decision within 5
working days after completion of the hearing and shall notify the applicant
of the determination by prepaid first class certified mail, return receipt
requested. The decision shall be final at the end of 5 working days after it
is mailed and shall constitute final administrative review. The applicant may
continue to function under the permit pending receipt of the final decision
of the hearing officer.



   (J)   The hearing officer's decision may be appealed to the Pinal
Superior Court by special action or other appropriate procedure within 35
calendar days after mailing of the written decision to the applicant. If a
licensee pursues a judicial appeal from a final administrative action, the
licensee may continue to function under the permit pending completion of the
judicial review.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-8  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Each permit shall expire 1 year from the date of issuance and
may be renewed only by making application as provided in Vol. I, § 8-11-5.



   (B)   The renewal application must be received 45 calendar days
before the expiration date of the originally issued license.



   (C)   The City Clerk may deny an application for renewal for the
reasons set forth in Vol. I, § 8-11-7.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-9  NON-TRANSFERABILITY.



   (A)   Permits issued pursuant to this article are not transferable.



   (B)   With regard to sexually oriented business operators, any
transfer of ownership or control of the business causes any issued permit to
be void. The new owner shall be responsible for obtaining a permit. Transfer
of ownership and control includes the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; and



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership of control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership interest or control.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-10  OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   With the exception of escort services and modeling studios,
the following operational regulations apply:



      (1)   The business shall maintain a daily log of all persons
providing adult services on the premises, including their city permit
numbers. The log shall cover the preceding 12-month period and shall be
available for inspection upon request by the Chief of Police;



      (2)   A person below the age of 18 years may not observe nor
provide any adult services;



      (3)   An individual may not provide adult services within the
premises of the business except upon a stage elevated at least 18 inches
above the floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated area
thereof with which the adult services are provided, shall be a distance of at
least 3 feet from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons may
be present. The stage or designated area thereof shall be separated from the
area in which patrons may be located by a barrier or railing, the top of
which is at least 3 feet above floor level. An adult services provider or
patron may not extend any part of their body over or beyond the barrier or
railing;



      (4)   An adult services provider, in the course of providing
any adult services, may not perform a specified sexual activity;



      (5)   Adult services may not be provided in any location which
is not visible by direct line of sight at all times from a manager's station
located in a portion of the premises which is not accessible to patrons;



      (6)   A manager shall be on the premises of a sexually
oriented business at all times during which any adult services is provided on
the premises;



      (7)   An adult services provider or employee may not at any
time touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of a patron, nor may a patron
touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of an adult services provider or
employee;



      (8)   No adult services provider or employee, either before,
during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and
no patron shall have physical contact with any adult services provider or
employee before, during and after performances by such adult services
provider or employee. This division shall only apply to physical contact on
the premises of the sexually oriented business;



      (9)   No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any adult
services provider, and no adult services provider shall solicit any pay or
gratuity from any patron;



      (10)   A sign setting forth the regulations in division
(A)(2), (3), (7), (8) and (9) above shall be conspicuously posted visible
from the entrance of the business in such a manner as to be clearly legible
to patrons upon entry;



      (11)   No sexually oriented business shall operate in a manner
that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting,
describing or relating to "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual
activities" from any public way or from any location outside the building or
area of the establishment. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on
the premises shall at any time be propped or left open while the business is
in operation, and any exterior shall be covered with opaque covering at all
times;



      (12)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in
such a manner or with the use of mirrors that there is an unobstructed view
from the manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not
contain video equipment and;



      (13)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than 1 person
at anytime. There shall be no openings of any kind between viewing rooms or
booths. The manager shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
All floor coverings in viewing booths must be nonporous, easily cleanable
surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



   (B)   With respect to an adult cabaret, the requirements of this
section shall apply to the extent that they are not in conflict with specific
statutory or valid regulatory requirements applicable to persons permitted to
dispense alcoholic beverages.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 8-11-12



§ 8-11-11  OTHER LICENSES.



   (A)   A permit required by this article is in addition to any other
license or permit required by the city, Pinal County or the State of Arizona.



   (B)   Persons engaging in activities described in this article shall
comply with all other ordinances and laws, including but not limited to the
Apache Junction Zoning Ordinance, the landscaping and screening regulations
of the city, the Sign Code, as well as privilege and business license
regulations set forth in Vol. I, Article 8-2 above.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-12  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty
and multiple charging provisions set forth in Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



   (B)   A licensee which is an enterprise shall be subject to the fine
provided in A.R.S. § 13-803.



   (C)   In addition to criminal penalties described herein, a sexually
oriented business which operates without having obtained a license or is
operating under an expired license shall constitute a public nuisance which
may be abated by a suit for injunctive relief.



   (D)   It is a defense to prosecution under Vol. I, § 8-11-3 that
each item of descriptive printed, film or video material offered for sale or
rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political,
religious or scientific value.



(Am. Ord. 1296, passed 5-1-2007)



§ 8-11-13  APPLICABILITY.



   This article shall apply to all persons engaged in the activities
described herein, whether or not such activities were commenced before the
effective date of this article. Persons so engaged as of the effective date
of this article, shall be in full compliance with this article, including
receipt of any required license and permit, within 180 calendar days after
the effective date of this article.



(Ord. 1367, passed 10-5-2010)



§ 8-11-14  SEVERABILITY.



   Each section of this article should be deemed severable and the
invalidity of any provision of this article shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of any other provision.



(Ord. 1367, passed 10-5-2010)



ARTICLE 8-12:  NON-PRESCRIPTION PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT SALES



Section



   8-12-1   Purpose



   8-12-2   Definitions



   8-12-3   Access and seizure of unsecured products; hearing and
procedure



   8-12-4   Keeping of sales logs and submittal to law enforcement upon
request



   8-12-5   Prohibited sales to persons under 18 years of age



   8-12-6   Right to refuse to sell



   8-12-7   Penalty



§ 8-12-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to decrease the availability of
ephedrine derived from nonprescription drug products and other cold and
allergy medications commonly used as a precursor in the production of
methamphetamine. The Arizona State Legislature has yet to regulate ephedrine
products which are combined with other active ingredients.  These provisions
are to supplement, not to substitute A.R.S. § 13-3401.01 et seq.



(Am. Ord. 1253, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 8-12-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LICENSED PHARMACY TECHNICIAN.  A person licensed by the state to
assist a pharmacist.



   PHARMACIST.  A person licensed by the state in the art, practice, or
profession of preparing, preserving, compounding,  and dispensing medical
drugs.



   PROPER IDENTIFICATION.  A recognized government-issued photo
identification of a purchaser including, but not limited to, a driver's
license, identification card or passport.



   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT.  A drug product commonly used in
decongestants and can be illegally processed to make methamphetamine;
ephedrine, nonpseudoephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine shall be included in
this definition; in addition, a product containing ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine that contains any detectable quantity of ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine or its salts, optical isomers or salts of optical isomers;
and product packaging that lists ephedrine or pseudoephedrine as an active
ingredient shall constitute prima facie evidence that it is a product
containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.



   RETAIL COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business that offers
any pseudoephedrine product for sale or retail.



(Am. Ord. 1253, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 8-12-3  ACCESS AND SEIZURE OF UNSECURED PRODUCTS; HEARING AND PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Nonprescription pseudoephedrine products, shall only be
available for retail sale at retail establishments with the assistance of a
state licensed pharmacist, or permitted pharmacy technician. The pharmacist,
or pharmacy technician, or other employee of a retail establishment shall
keep all pseudoephedrine products, as defined, behind a store counter or
otherwise in a manner that is inaccessible to customers without the
assistance of a pharmacist or pharmacy technician licensed in this state per
A.R.S. Title 32, Chapter 18.



   (B)   Any pseudoephedrine product found to be displayed in a retail
establishment in violation of this article constitutes a public nuisance and
is subject to seizure and disposal by the city.



   (C)   Products subject to seizure under this article may be seized
by a peace officer pursuant to a search or seizure warrant or upon probable
cause to believe that the products are subject to seizure. Before removing
any products from the establishment, the peace officer shall give the
operator of the establishment a reasonable opportunity to secure the products
pursuant to this article, unless the operator has already been afforded an
opportunity within the preceding consecutive 12-month period to secure such
products.



   (D)   At the time of seizing any products under this section, the
peace officer shall deliver a notice of intent to dispose of the seized
products. This notice shall include the date and location of the seizure, an
inventory of the items seized, a description of how a post-seizure hearing
may be requested, the time limit for requesting that hearing, and a warning
that failure to request the hearing in a timely manner will result in the
disposal and destruction of the seized property. The notice required under
this division shall be served on the managing agent, licensed pharmacist or
pharmacy technician of the retail establishment present at the time of the
seizure, or if that person cannot be identified at the time of the seizure,
on any employee of the establishment.



   (E)   A person receiving a notice of intent to dispose under this
section may request a post-seizure hearing with the Apache Junction Municipal
Court to determine the validity of the seizure within 15 days of receiving
the notice, excluding weekends and holidays. The court shall conduct the
hearing within 10 days of the court's receipt of the request, excluding
weekends and holidays. Failure to request the hearing in a timely manner, or
failure to attend a scheduled hearing, constitutes a waiver of the right to
challenge the validity of the seizure. At the hearing, the city shall have
the burden of establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that the
property was subject to seizure pursuant to this article. At the hearing, the
court may admit any reliable and relevant evidence. If the court finds that
the products were not subject to seizure, it shall order the immediate return
of all seized items. If the court finds that the products were properly
seized pursuant to this section, the court shall order that the products be
forfeited to the city, and shall direct the city to destroy and dispose of
the products.



   (F)   The requirements of this section are in addition to any
requirements under state and federal law.



(Am. Ord. 1253, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 8-12-4  KEEPING OF SALES LOGS AND SUBMITTAL TO LAW ENFORCEMENT UPON
REQUEST.



   (A)   The licensed pharmacist or pharmacy technician that sells
pseudoephedrine products, shall record the name of the purchaser, their
address, date of birth, the date of the transaction, and type of
identification used in a manual or electronic log after verifying the
purchaser's identification as defined herein.



   (B)   The log shall be available to law enforcement upon request for
review and shall be submitted to the Police Chief when requested by the
Police Department. The submission can be made by manual or electronic means
or by any other means the Police Chief approves. The log is confidential and
not subject to disclosure to any non-pharmacy, except law enforcement or by
court order.



(Am. Ord. 1253, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 8-12-5  PROHIBITED SALES TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.



   Sales of nonprescription pseudoephedrine products to persons under 18
years of age are prohibited. Age of each purchaser of pseudoephedrine
products shall be verified by the licensed pharmacist or pharmacy technician
by inspecting proper identification as defined herein.



(Am. Ord. 1253, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 8-12-6  RIGHT TO REFUSE TO SELL.



   Any licensed pharmacist or pharmacy technician at a retail
establishment may refuse to sell any pseudoephedrine product, to any person,
if the licensed pharmacist or pharmacy technician has reason to believe that
the product will be used in the unlawful manufacture of methamphetamine.
Facts that give rise to the belief that the product will be used unlawfully,
include, but are not limited to a suspicious transaction as defined in A.R.S.
§ 13-3401; the attempted purchase of pseudoephedrine products in excess of
the amounts permitted by A.R.S. § 13-3401.01, (no more than 3 packages, not
to exceed 9 grams of pseudoephedrine, without a valid prescription, unless
licensed or permitted by state law); the attempt to purchase pseudoephedrine
products in a series of transactions in an effort to circumvent the
limitations on sales; or the attempt to purchase pseudoephedrine products in
conjunction with other methamphetamine precursor products, such as red
phosphorous or iodine. Any person who refuses to make a retail sale in
accordance with this section is not liable to its customer or any other
person for any loss or damage caused in whole or in part by the refusal to
sell.



(Am. Ord. 1253, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 8-12-7  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of any provisions in this article is a class 2
misdemeanor.



   (B)   Enterprise liability is not applicable to this article.



(Am. Ord. 1253, passed 1-3-2006)



CHAPTER 9: HEALTH AND SANITATION



      Article




         9-1.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS





         9-2.   REFUSE, GARBAGE, DEBRIS, JUNK, TRASH AND LITTER
REMOVAL





         9-3.   CONSTRUCTION SITES





         9-4.   PRIVATE RECYCLING CONTAINERS





         9-5.   COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE





         9-6.   COLLECTION OF COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE




ARTICLE 9-1:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS



Section



   9-1-1   Findings, application and intent



   9-1-2   Definitions



   9-1-3   Public nuisances prohibited



   9-1-4   Enforcement and abatement



   9-1-5   Cargo containers



§ 9-1-1  FINDINGS, APPLICATION AND INTENT.



   (A)   It is hereby found and declared that there are nonresidential
and residential properties within the city which are, or may become in the
future, public nuisances due to deterioration, lack of maintenance and
appearance on exterior surfaces and in yard areas, infestation, lack of
essential storage areas for household items, existence of fire hazards and
unsanitary conditions which constitute a menace to the health, safety,
morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the
city. It is further found and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance
and because of progressive deterioration, certain properties have the further
effect of creating blighting conditions and slums, and that if the same are
not curtailed and removed, such conditions will grow and spread and will
necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to
correct and eliminate, and that by reason of timely regulations and
restrictions as contained herein, the growth of slums and blight and increase
in crime may be prevented and neighborhood property values may be enhanced.



   (B)   The purpose of this article is to protect the public health,
safety, morals, and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and
nonresidential premises; to establish minimum standards governing structures
and other physical components and conditions essential to make structures fit
for human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain responsibilities and
duties upon owners, occupants and operators; to authorize and establish
enforcement and abatement procedures which affords property owners the due
process they are entitled to under the law; to fix penalties for the
violations of this code; and to provide for the repair, demolition, or
vacation of premises unfit for human habitation, or occupancy or use.



   (C)   This article shall apply to all buildings, structures and
lands within the city without regard to the use, date of construction,
improvement or alteration. It shall be fairly, sensibly, consistently and
reasonably applied by enforcement officers.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-1-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.  A vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer that is of a
type subject to registration in the state, whether lost, stolen, abandoned or
otherwise unclaimed and that has been abandoned on a public highway, public
property or elsewhere in the city, including private property. Evidence that
a vehicle was left unattended for a period of 48 hours within the
right-of-way of any highway, road, street or other public thoroughfare or for
a period of 72 hours on public or private property or elsewhere in the city,
is prima facie evidence of abandonment.



   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE.  A litter storage and collection
receptacle including 60-, 90-, 300-, and 440-gallon plastic barrels; 2-, 3-,
4-, 6-, and 8-cubic-yard metal bins; 20-, 30-, and 40- cubic-yard roil-off
containers (approximate sizes); and compactors.



   BLIGHT.  Conditions including accumulation of debris; fences with
holes, breaks, rot, or those that are crumbling, peeling or rusting;
landscaping that is dead, uncontrolled or is not maintained or is damaged;
any other similar conditions of disrepair and deterioration; and the exterior
visible use or display of tarps, plastic sheeting, or other similar materials
as flexible or inflexible screening, fencing, or wall covering upon any
parcels within the city regardless of the condition of other properties in
the neighborhood.



   BUILDING, ENCLOSED.  A building with a perimeter composed of rigid
walls and a roof.



   DEBRIS, JUNK, TRASH, LITTER.  Broken glass, broken concrete, broken
plaster or gypsum board, scrap lumber, siding or roofing material, ceiling
tile or floor covering material, broken asphalt materials, clay, tile or
plastic pipe or any similar discarded scrap building or construction
materials, scrap metal of all types, appliances or parts thereof, parts of
motor vehicles, glass, paper, cardboard, wood or lumber, indoor furniture and
mattresses, bedding, boxes, crates, packing cases, plumbing fixtures
including but not limited to toilets, or any other material with little or no
apparent aesthetic or economic value which is present in a state of disarray,
any solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes,
such as paper, wrappings, weeds, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, metal, wood, glass, bedding, and
construction materials, or any other material in which insects may breed or
multiply or which provides harborage for rodents, reptiles, or vermin or
which would contribute to the spread of fire or prevent its rapid control.



   DETERIORATION or DISREPAIR.  A decline of the general condition or
appearance of a building, structure, or parts thereof characterized by holes,
breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or any other evidence of
physical decay, neglect, or lack of maintenance.



   DEVELOPED PROPERTY.  Property that has been modified purposefully from
its original state and which results in a condition of gainful or productive
use.



   DUMPING.  Unlawful placement of debris, junk, trash, litter or garbage
upon any private or public property.



   FENCE, SCREEN WALL, and/or RETAINING WALL.  Freestanding,
self-supporting structures constructed of durable decay and moisture
resistant wood, chain link, metal, masonry, or other opaque standard fencing
materials, maintained where vertical structural members do not list, lean or
buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of
gravity does not fall through the middle 1/3 of the base designed for
decorative purposes or to provide privacy, security, screening, or bank
retention between grade separations.



   GARBAGE.  An accumulation of spoiled or discarded animal or vegetable
material resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of
food for humans or animals, as well as other organic waste material subject
to rapid decomposition and their waste wrappers or containers.



   GRASS.  Barnyard grass, bermuda grass, bluegrass, brome, crab grass,
foxtail, Johnson grass ragweed, rye grass, wild oats, or hybrids thereof.



   HAZARD.  A condition that may cause personal physical harm.



   IMMINENT HAZARD.  A condition that presents an immediate likelihood
for causing personal physical harm.



   IMPROVED PROPERTY.  Parcels on which buildings or other structures are
located.



   INFESTATION.  The apparent presence of damaging, or unhealthful
insects, rodents, reptiles or pests.



   INOPERABLE VEHICLE.  Any vehicle that is physically incapable of its
intended operation and is partially or wholly dismantled, discarded, wrecked,
on blocks or on similar devices, stripped, or scrapped; or a vehicle with
missing or deflated tires or missing wheels or any vehicle which is
inoperable due to mechanical failure or mechanical disability; or any vehicle
which is missing a legally assigned license plate, or one that has an expired
registration sticker, or one that does not have a current registration
legally issued by any state.



   LAND.  All parcels within the exterior boundaries of the city limits,
whether developed, improved, undeveloped, or unimproved.



   MANAGING AGENT.  A person, corporation, partnership, or limited
liability company that is authorized by the owner to operate and manage the
property.



   OCCUPANT.  A person, persons or legal entity that, through rights of
ownership, tenancy or otherwise, has possession or the use and enjoyment of
the subject real property.



   OWNER.  A current person, persons or legal entity listed as
titleholder for parcels of land in the official records of the Pinal or
Maricopa County Recorder's Office.



   PERSON.  A human being, individual, enterprise, corporation,
association, partnership, firm, or society.



   PLANT GROWTH.  Vegetation of all kinds, whether living or dead.



   POLLUTED.  A condition that exists in water and is characterized by
bacterial growth, algae, insect infestation, the remains of litter, debris,
garbage, or any other foreign matter which, because of its nature or
location, constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe, or unsightly condition.



   PRIVATE PREMISES.  Any parcel of land developed or undeveloped, or any
dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly
or in part for residential or commercial purposes, whether inhabited or
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and any yard, grounds,
walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibules belonging or appurtenant to such
dwelling, house, building or other structures.



   PROPERTY.  Includes buildings, grounds, lots and tracts of land.



   PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, sidewalk, boulevard,
alley, or other public way and any public park, square, space, ground, or
building.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  An owner, tenant, renter, lessor, lessee,
manager, agent, lienholder or any fiduciary or person with power of attorney
or other person who is occupying or having charge, possession or control of
the premises or has the authority and ability to act on behalf of, or in the
interest of, the owner. When property is held in common by more than 1 owner,
each owner is a responsible person, even when a homeowner's association has
been formed to manage and maintain such commonly owned property. Such a
homeowner's association shall also be a responsible person.



   SECURING.  The action deemed necessary by the Building Official or
designee to protect the general safety and welfare of occupants and public.
SECURING shall include the use of materials with sufficient strength and
structural value to restrict or prohibit access.



   STORED.  Parking, leaving, locating, keeping, maintaining, depositing,
remaining, or being physically present on private property.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly owned or maintained when any part thereof is dedicated to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.



   STRUCTURE.  Includes any building, improvement, and other structure
that is constructed or placed on land.



   UTILITY TRAILER.  A vehicle without motor power designed for carrying
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.



   VEHICLE.  Every device by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street or highway, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   WEEDS.  Bull thistle, cocklebur, foxtail, horseweed, lambsquarters,
london rocket, mallow, milkweed, pigweed, mustards, prickly lettuce, ragweed,
russian thistle, shepardspurse, sowthistle, white horsenettle, willow weed,
and those types of plant growth defined as noxious weeds in A.R.S. § 3-201
regardless of whether a particular property owner or occupant who is the
subject of enforcement action under this code regards the growth as desirable.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-1-3  PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   The following acts, omissions, conditions, and things in or upon any
land or structure in the city constitute public nuisances, the existence of
which are hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful, and are enforceable
and punishable as set forth below:



   (A)   Outside storage.



      (1)   (a)   No person shall deposit or cause to be
deposited, store, or maintain any garbage, junk, debris, trash or litter, on
any land within the city unless stored safely within a lawful, enclosed
building or structure, or screened by a lawful fence or screen wall or within
a trash receptacle in such a manner as to not be visible from the public
right-of-way, except as authorized by the city or for collection under this
chapter.



         (b)   It is unlawful for any person to place any
garbage, debris, junk, trash or litter upon any private or public property
not owned or under the control of said person. In addition to any civil
penalty or criminal fine which may be imposed for violation of any provision
of this section, such person shall be liable for all costs which may be
assessed pursuant to this article for the removal of said garbage, debris,
junk, trash or litter.



         (c)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the outside
storage of materials specifically permitted under the Zoning Code and
arranged in accordance with the provisions of and covered under a permit
issued in accordance with the permit requirements of the city code.



      (2)   No person shall deposit in or allow to be deposited, 
sweep upon, or permit to drain into any public right-of-way, natural terrain
feature, river bed or wash, or any public place of the city any garbage,
debris, junk, trash or litter, obstruction, or similar matter or any
hazardous material which is offensive to sight or smell or which impedes
passage or is detrimental to public health, except when authorized by the
city.



      (3)   It is unlawful to store, keep or maintain outside of any
dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, dwelling or other structure under the control of any person and in
a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded
icebox, refrigerator or other appliance or container which has an airtight
door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from
the inside, without first removing the door or lid, snaplock or other locking
device from the icebox, refrigerator or container. This subsection shall not
apply to appliances which are being used for animal or livestock purposes and
have a latch or lock on the outside which requires a key or combination
access.



      (4)   (a)   It is unlawful for any business, corporation,
firm or person to fail to provide approved litter or trash receptacles for
the containment of litter and trash generated within or upon their premises
or to allow litter or trash from approved receptacles to become windblown and
be disbursed about the area.



         (b)   It is unlawful for any property owner, agent, or
contractor to cause, maintain, permit or allow to be caused, maintained or
permitted any accumulation of any litter or debris on any construction or
demolition site before, during, or after completion of the project, to become
windblown and carried or deposited upon any alley, street, public place or
private property from such site.



      (5)   It is unlawful to allow the accumulation of putrid,
unsound or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins or the whole or any part of
any dead animal, fish or fowl, butcher's trimmings and offal, or any waste
vegetable or animal matter in any quantity, garbage, animal or human excreta,
sewage, or other offensive substances; provided that nothing herein contained
shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in the manner
approved by the Pinal or Maricopa County Health Officer or other ordinances
of this city.



   (B)   Vehicles.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the
occupant to cause or allow any abandoned or inoperable vehicle not registered
to the occupant to be parked or stored except in complete conformance with
the terms of this subsection. All abandoned or inoperable vehicles or
vehicles in residential areas being restored or repaired for longer than 10
calendar days shall be stored safely within a lawful enclosed building or
structure or screened by a lawful fence in such a manner as to not be visible
from beyond the lot boundaries or shall be stored on the premises of a
business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner in accordance with
the provisions of the city code where the storage of the vehicle is necessary
to the operation of the nonresidential business enterprise.



      (2)   If a vehicle, awaiting repairs, cannot be stored in
compliance with this section, the registered owner must submit, in writing to
the Code Compliance Division, a request for extension of the 10-day
requirement referenced above. The written notification must include the name
and physical address of the registered owner of the vehicle, the date the
current registration expires, the license plate number, what repairs are
required and when the repairs will be completed. In no case shall the
extension be longer than 30 calendar days including the time the vehicle has
already been parked. After the 30-calendar day extension has expired, the
vehicle must be stored in accordance with this section.



      (3)   Any vehicle stored at a condominium, townhome or
apartment complex that is awaiting repairs is subject to the time limits of
this section and if no such structure for storing a vehicle is granted by the
Code Compliance Division, the vehicle must be covered by a tarp or covering
that is in good repair and secured to the vehicle in a manner that will
prevent it from being blown off the vehicle thereby exposing the vehicle to
public view.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display any
vehicle or boat for sale, rent, or lease on vacant or undeveloped property,
and no owner or occupant of vacant or undeveloped property shall allow or
permit such displays.



      (5)   The display of 1 vehicle or boat for sale is permitted
at a residence when the vehicle is titled to the owner or occupant of the
property and is not being sold in connection with an automobile sales
business. No more than 3 vehicles or boats may be displayed for sale at the
same residence within a 12-month period and only 1 vehicle or boat shall be
displayed for sale at 1 time.



      (6)   (a)   For all developments other than residential
buildings with 4 or fewer units,  affected surfaces subject to the
dustproofing requirement include any areas utilized for parking, maneuvering
or ingress and egress of on- or off-road vehicles.  Access lanes and working
surfaces for vehicles shall qualify as affected surfaces.  No later than
October 1,  2008, all parking, maneuvering, ingress and egress areas at
developments other than residential buildings with 4 or fewer units must be
maintained with 1 or more of the following permanent dustproof paving methods:



            1.   Paving with asphaltic concrete;



            2.   Paving with Portland cement based concrete;



            3.   Surfacing with a penetrating asphalt and a
gravel surface known as chip sealing;



            4.   Surfacing with and uniformly maintaining a
2-inch deep layer of rock having a nominal size of 1/4-inch or larger;



            5.   Surfacing with a 2-inch deep layer of
recycled asphalt;



            6.   Surfacing with any other dustproof paving
treatment method that has been approved by the Development Services Director
or his or her designee; or



            7.   Demonstrating to the satisfaction of the
Development Services Director or his or her designee on at least an annual
basis, on a form as required by the Development Services Director and
pursuant to a test method approved by the Development Services Director, that
the average threshold friction velocity of the native soil surface, corrected
for non-erodible elements, is at least 100 centimeters per second.  For
purposes of administering this subsection, the Development Services Director
may designate the Air Quality Control Department of Pinal County as an entity
authorized to approve such applications.



         (b)   For non-dustproofed surface areas that are
utilized intermittently at developments other than residential buildings with
4 or fewer units, for a period of 30 calendar days or less during the
calendar year, for surfaces that are used for parking, maneuvering,  ingress
and egress on an intermittent, short-term basis, the owner and/or operator
may, as an alternative,  effect dustproofing by effecting 1 or more of the
following pursuant to a plan approved in writing by the Development Services
Director:



            1.   Installation of a temporary or permanent
dustproof surface;



            2.   Application of a dust suppressant; or



            3.   Routine watering of traveled surface as a
dust suppressant and for the creation of an encrusted dustproof native
surface after the activity ends.



         (c)   Undisturbed surfaces at developments other than
residential buildings with 4 or fewer units shall be exempt from the
dustproofing requirements of this section, but only if those undisturbed
surfaces are fenced or otherwise clearly delineated from affected surfaces by
means of a fence or other physical barrier.  Delineated long-term storage
stalls, where a vehicle, trailer or other item is stored and not normally
removed and replaced more than once in a 60-day period shall also be
considered undisturbed surfaces.



         (d)   Any dust-proofing shall be maintained in a manner
that prevents visible track-out.



      (7)   (a)   For any residential property with 4 or fewer
units, affected surfaces subject to the stabilization requirement include any
areas in a front yard utilized for parking, maneuvering or ingress of on- and
off-road vehicles.  No later than October 1, 2009, all parking, maneuvering,
ingress and egress areas that are 3,000 square feet or more in size at
residential buildings with 4 or fewer units must be stabilized with 1 or more
of the following methods:



            1.   Paving with asphaltic concrete;



            2.   Paving with Portland cement based concrete;



            3.   Surfacing with a penetrating asphalt and a
gravel surface commonly known as chip sealing;



            4.   Surfacing with and uniformly maintaining a
2-inch deep layer of rock having a nominal size of 1/4-inch or larger;



            5.   Surfacing with a 2-inch deep layer of
recycled asphalt; or



            6.   Surfacing with any other surface treatment
that has approved by the Development Services Director or his or her designee.



         (b)   Any stabilization shall be maintained in a manner
that prevents visible track-out over 10 feet in length.



         (c)   For non-stabilized surface areas that are utilized
intermittently at a residential property with 4 or fewer units, for a period
of 30 calendar days or less during the calendar year, for surfaces that are
used for parking, maneuvering, ingress and egress on an intermittent,
short-term basis, the owner and/or operator may, as an alternative, effect
stabilization by effecting 1 or more of the following pursuant to a plan
approved in writing by the Development Services Director:



            1.   Installation of a temporary or permanent
surface stabilization;



            2.   Application of a dust suppressant; or



            3.   Routine watering of traveled surface as a
dust suppressant and for the creation of an encrusted dustproof native
surface after the activity ends.



         (d)   Undisturbed surfaces at a residential property
with 4 or fewer units shall be  exempt from the stabilization requirements
of this section, but only if those undisturbed surfaces are fenced or
otherwise clearly delineated from affected surfaces by means of a fence or
other physical barrier.  Even if not physically delineated, long-term
storage stalls where a vehicle, trailer or other item is stored and not
normally removed and replaced more than once in a 30-calendar day period
shall also be considered undisturbed surfaces.  Access lanes to such
long-term storage stalls shall similarly qualify as undisturbed surfaces.



      (8)   Vehicle parking shall not be allowed on unpaved or
unstabilized vacant lots.  A vacant lot means any undeveloped lot.  For
purposes of this limitation, adjoining commonly owned parcels shall be deemed
a single lot.



   (C)   Land maintenance and weeds.



      (1)   (a)   All persons owning or occupying land or places
of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk or public places fronting
or bordering their property free of weeds or grass in excess of 10 inches or
when such conditions create a blighting condition or may harbor infestations;
however, this section shall not prohibit the temporary storage of such
material in authorized receptacles for collection.



         (b)   Any landscaping, visible from public property or
from beyond the lot boundaries, that is dead, damaged, or characterized by
uncontrolled growth, or presents a deteriorated or slumlike appearance is
uncared for and any weeds, tall grass, shrubs or growth (whether growing or
otherwise) higher than 10 inches, or any dead trees, bushes, shrubs or
portions thereof, including stumps, or any palm or similar type tree having
dead or dry fronds descending downward from the base of the lowest living
frond more than 8 feet or dry fronds longer than 5 feet and closer than 8
feet to the ground, shall be removed and disposed of in a lawful manner.



      (2)   No owner or occupant of land shall allow or permit
trees, shrubs, or plant growth on that land to impede, obstruct, or interfere
with vehicular or pedestrian passage on any street, sidewalk, or alley within
the city or allow such overgrowth to interfere with the visibility of passing
traffic or obstruct traffic control devices or signals.



      (3)   No owner or occupant of land within the city shall allow
plant growth which is dead, or so dry as to be readily flammable or
combustible on such land that may constitute a fire hazard or other threat to
the public health or safety.



      (4)   No owner or occupant of a parcel of land within the city
shall allow thereon weeds or grass which reach a height of 10 inches or more.
This provision shall not apply to single residence rear yards not visible
from the adjacent right-of-way or to crops supporting bona fide livestock
grazing where lawful or on lots where the dwelling is at least 100 feet from
the public place or public right-of-way except that the first 50 feet
viewable from the public place shall be governed by this section, unless
otherwise determined to be a fire or health hazard. All structures shall have
a 30-foot buffer zone.



      (5)   No person shall offer to sell, sell, or plant any male
mulberry tree (morus alba) or olive tree (olea europea) in the city unless it
is one of the nonpollinating varieties of such trees.



   (D)   Exterior building, structures and signage.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or occupant to fail to
properly maintain, repair, or replace the exposed exterior surfaces of a
building or structure, including exterior windows, doors, canopies, metal
awnings, roofs, exhaust ducts, chimneys, painted surfaces, window screening,
fences, screen walls, retaining walls, foundations, cooling devices, outdoor
stairs, porches, and railings as visible from the adjacent public place or
public right-of-way(s). In addition, all premises shall be structurally sound
and impervious to moisture and weather elements.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain
within the city any fence which is, or may be, dangerous to persons, children
or animals due to design, construction, materials, maintenance or placement.



      (3)   Fences with strands of barbed wire shall not be
constructed or allowed to remain if heretofore constructed, except as follows:



         (a)   Barbed wire fencing less than 6 feet above the
ground shall be permitted only in those zoning districts which permit the
keeping of livestock and shall be erected and maintained only for the keeping
of livestock.



         (b)   Barbed wire fencing less than 6 feet above the
ground shall not be erected or maintained within 10 feet of any public place
or public right-of-way, public easement, or reservation for roadway purposes.



         (c)   Barbed wire fencing less than 6 feet above the
ground shall be secured to posts or stays not more than 8 feet from each
other.



         (d)   Fences containing strands of barbed wire, razor
wire or concertina wire over 6 feet above the ground shall be permitted only
in industrial and commercial zoning districts, and strands of barbed wire,
razor wire or concertina wire shall be permitted only when over 6 feet above
the ground and erected at the top of any fence. If the fence is inclined, it
shall project over private property.



      (4)   Electrically charged fences shall not be erected or
allowed to remain except as follows:



         (a)   Electrically charged fences shall be permitted
only in zoning districts which permit the keeping of livestock and shall be
erected and maintained only for the keeping of livestock.



         (b)   No electrically charged fence other than one which
has an unmodified Underwriter's Laboratory ("UL") approved charger, shall be
permitted.



         (c)   All electrically charged fences shall be
completely enclosed within another fence.



      (5)   It shall be unlawful to allow any swimming pool or
similar body of water to stagnate and thereby become eutrophic, polluted, or
offensive to the senses and unsafe for its intended use. No person shall
allow any swimming pool, architectural pool, pond or spa to remain or be
maintained in a condition that may breed insects or result in insect or other
infestations; become polluted or stagnant; or create a blighting condition.



      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or
display any sign that is damaged or deteriorated to a condition constituting
a visual blight. Visual blight shall include conditions detectable from
beyond the lot boundaries such as chipping, peeling, fading, or rusting
surfaces; the presence of cracks, holes, buckles, warps, or splinters in any
sign component; and defective bulbs, fluorescent tubes, or neon or other
inert gas light segments.



      (7)   No person shall attach any sign to any public utility
structure, traffic control device, streetlight standard, or similar structure
in the public right-of-way excepting those signs erected by a public utility
or government agency.



   (E)   Vacant buildings and land.



      (1)   All vacant or abandoned buildings, structures or
portions thereof, shall be secured at all points of ingress and egress and
maintained against unauthorized entry at all times. Any dangerous,
deteriorated, abandoned, partially destroyed or unfinished building,
addition, appendage or other structure, or any building in violation of this
chapter and in any provision under Vol. I, Chapter 7, and any vacated or
abandoned building not securely closed at all times, shall be secured. Any
wood, metal or other material used for securing a vacated or abandoned
building must be similar to the color of the building.



      (2)   Any vacant lot or land, which has been used for dumping
on more than 2 occasions within a 24-month consecutive period, shall be
secured to prevent future occurrences of dumping. Methods of securing vacant
lots or lands may include any of the following: permanent fencing; ditch and
berm; placement of 4-foot high barrier posts at 4-foot intervals; and other
equally effective methods. Signs stating, "No Dumping" shall be erected in
accordance with the same state laws relating to "No Trespassing" signage. The
required signage must be a minimum of 12 by 18 inches in size with two 3-inch
lettering mounted on durable grade vinyl, aluminum, fiberglass or similar
substrate. The signage must be mounted on a steel support post a minimum of
1½-inch diameter and the support must be placed a minimum of 18 inches in
the ground. Metal fasteners must be used to anchor the signage to the support
post.



      (3)   It is unlawful to maintain any privy, vault, cesspool,
septic system, sump, pit, private drain or like place or thing which is not
securely protected from insects or rodents or which are foul, malodorous,
nauseous, or offensive to the senses.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006; Am. Ord. 1316, passed 2-19-2008)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 9-1-4



§ 9-1-4  ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Introduction.  The goal of this section is to seek voluntary
compliance. Code compliance officers are empowered to use their discretion in
working with residents to become compliant. Identification of violations may
arise through citizen complaints, anonymous complaints or proactive
observations, all of which will be handled fairly, consistently and
indiscriminately with all the due process that property owners and
responsible parties are entitled to under the law. Verbal warnings are
strongly encouraged before any formal warnings are issued. The city has the
option to pursue compliance administratively by civil/criminal citation or
complaints resulting in mandatory fines and other consequences, through court
intervention, and may collect any administrative costs associated with
abatement procedures through liens and possible foreclosure, and civil
collection actions.



   (B)   Pre-civil/criminal citation/complaint; notice of violation.



      (1)   If, after an inspection and after informal attempts have
failed to encourage compliance with this article, the city shall serve the
owner, owner's statutory or authorized agent, occupant, lessee or person in
control of the property with a Notice of Violation. Such notice shall contain
the following:



         (a)   Legal identification of property;



         (b)   Statement of violations in sufficient detail to
allow an owner or responsible party to identify and correct the problem;



         (c)   The expected compliance deadline of at least 14
calendar days from the date of the notice;



         (d)   A reinspection date;



         (e)   Address and telephone number of a city
representative to contact;



         (f)   A warning that failure to comply may result in the
filing of a civil or criminal misdemeanor case, depending on whether this
violation is the first, second, third or fourth violation over a 24-month
consecutive period; and



         (g)   A warning that failure to comply may also result
in an administrative or court abatement action by the city, which the owner
or responsible person will be financially liable through a lien process which
may include foreclosure of the property.



      (2)   Any notice issued under this article shall be deemed
effective on the date when written notice is hand-delivered or mailed
certified, return receipt requested, to the individuals referenced above. Any
recorded notice shall run with the land and shall constitute legal notice for
all purposes of this article to all parties and entities thereafter acquiring
an interest in the property. Officers may use their discretion in granting
extensions for compliance with the code, depending on the violators' efforts
to date and financial ability to comply.



   (C)   Civil/criminal citations and complaints. 



      (1)   If the owner or other responsible party fails to comply
with the notice of violation, a civil/criminal action to enforce the
provision of this article may be commenced and a summons shall be issued in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the Arizona Revised Statutes and
applicable city ordinances. Jurisdiction of proceedings in this article shall
be in the municipal court of the city.



      (2)   The City Manager and his or her designee shall be
responsible for filing civil and criminal citations with the Apache Junction
Municipal Court with the following minimum penalties:



         (a)   First offense during 24-consecutive month period:
civil penalty of $250;



         (b)   Second offense during 24-consecutive month period:
civil penalty of $500;



         (c)   Third offense during 24-consecutive month period:
civil penalty of $750;



         (d)   Fourth offense and subsequent offenses within 24
months of first offense: criminal fine of $1,000, and other criminal
penalties as a result of a class 1 misdemeanor conviction.



      (3)   The 24-month period shall be calculated from the dates
the violations are committed. The owner or responsible party shall receive
the progressively higher civil penalty upon a finding of responsibility for
any violation of this article which was committed within 24 months of the
commission of another violation for which the owner or responsible party was
found responsible or was convicted. In no event shall the court reduce the
minimum dollar penalties referenced above. A criminal case shall only be
filed only after 3 successive civil violations have been committed within a
consecutive 24 month period.



      (4)   Every day any violation of any provision of this article
continues shall constitute a separate violation or offense. The owner of
record, as reflected in the Pinal or Maricopa County Recorder's Office, may
be presumed to be a person having lawful control over the building, structure
or parcel of land which is the subject of the violation. If more than 1
person is recorded as the owner of the property, the persons may be jointly
and severally presumed to be the persons having lawful control over the
building, structure or parcel of land.



   (D)   Civil and criminal hearing procedure.  A person lawfully
served with a civil citation or complaint shall appear at the time and place
stated in the citation or summons, or may appear prior to the time and admit
or deny the allegations of the complaint. Allegations not denied at the time
of appearance are deemed admitted. If the allegations are admitted, the court
shall enter judgment for the city and impose the minimum dollar sanction as
noted above. If the defendant denies the allegations, the court shall set the
matter for hearing. Civil hearings are to be held informally and held without
a jury, and the city is required to prove the allegations by a preponderance
of the evidence. Technical rules of evidence do not apply, except for
statutory provisions relating to privileged communications. If the defendant
elects to be represented by counsel, the defendant shall so notify the court
at least 10 court days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be recorded
by technological devices, including tape recording or by stenographer. If the
court finds in favor of the defendant, the court shall enter an order
dismissing the citation or complaint. If the court finds in favor of the
city, the court shall enter judgment for the city and impose the minimum
dollar sanction noted above, or in the case of a criminal matter, shall order
in addition to the mandatory minimum dollar amount as referenced above up to
$2,500, other terms such as up to 3 years probation, compliance deadlines,
community service, up to 6 months jail time, and other reasonable terms as a
consequence of a class 1 misdemeanor conviction.



   (E)   Appeal of civil/criminal court hearing.  Any party may appeal
the judgment of the Municipal Court to the Superior Court under A.R.S. §
12-124. Appeals from civil proceedings shall be in accordance with the
Superior Court Rules of Appellate Procedure - Civil. Appeals from criminal
proceedings shall be in accordance with the Superior Court Rules of Appellate
Procedure - Criminal.



   (F)   Court-ordered abatement. 



      (1)   In addition to any other options available to encourage
compliance set forth in this article, the City Attorney may apply to the
municipal court for an order permitting the city to abate any condition that
constitutes a violation of this article.



      (2)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.21, after notice has been
provided to the owner and/or responsible party of the application and hearing
date, the Municipal Court Judge shall conduct a hearing on the City
Attorney's application with prior notice to the owner or responsible party as
required under the Code of Civil Procedure Service of Process rules. The
hearing shall be informal, open to the public and be recorded by
technological devices, including tape recording or stenographic devices.
Evidence may be taken from any interested party and considered in determining
whether a condition in violation of this article exists and what, if any
abatement action should be permitted. Any person who fails to appear after
notice of the hearing may be deemed to have waived any right to introduce
evidence. The court's determination shall be based on the preponderance of
evidence standard. Upon finding the abatement is appropriate, the court may
order an administrative search warrant and/or a demolition, board-up, or
clean-up abatement warrant.



      (3)   The reasonable costs of any abatement plus a 5%
administrative fee as permitted by the court's order, as well as 10% interest
per annum, shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or responsible party
and it may be collected as a lien on the property or other lawful method by
the city contained within this article or other applicable law.



   (G)   Administrative abatement/lien procedure. 



      (1)   The city may, as another option, administratively abate
the illegal conditions by first serving a notice to abate, which shall
include the following:



         (a)   Legal identification of property;



         (b)   Statement of violations in sufficient detail to
allow an owner or responsible party to identify and correct the problem;



         (c)   The expected compliance deadline of at least 30
calendar days from the date of the notice;



         (d)   Reinspection date;



         (e)   Address and telephone number of a city
representative to contact;



         (f)   Cost estimate to correct the violation, including
labor and benefits of officers;



         (g)   A warning that if the violation is not corrected
within the 30-calendar day deadline, the city may abate the nuisance and
assess the owner, his or her statutory or authorized agent, lessee, occupant,
or person in control of the property the cost of such abatement plus a 5%
administrative charge and record a lien against the property for payment of
the assessments which may result in foreclosure of the property;



         (h)   A warning that failure to comply may also result
in the filing of a civil or criminal misdemeanor case, depending on whether
this violation is the first, second, third or fourth violation over a
24-month consecutive period; and



         (i)   Reminder that the notice may be appealed by filing
a notice of appeal at the Development Services Department within 20-calendar
days after the notice was served; the Board of Adjustment and Appeals will
hear and decide the appeal within 60 calendar days of filing the notice of
appeal.



      (2)   If a property owner or responsible party fails to comply
with the notice within the 30-calendar day deadline, code compliance officers
may work with the property owner or responsible party and grant an extension.
However, if compliance is not forthcoming, the city may correct or abate the
conditions as described in the notice. The city shall pay the cost and
expense of such abatement from any appropriation made available for that
purpose.



      (3)   Upon commencement of action on the property, the city
shall assess the property for the cost of work performed including but not
limited to all additional inspections and other incidental connected costs,
and for associated legal costs plus a 5% administrative fee. If the
assessment is paid in full, including 10% interest annually calculated, the
city shall release the assessment.



      (4)   In the event it is necessary to enforce the assessment
by sale, the sale shall be made from a judgment of foreclosure and order of
sale. The city shall have the right to enforce the assessment in the Superior
Court of Pinal or Maricopa County at any time after recording, but failure to
enforce the assessment shall not affect its validity. The recorded assessment
shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein,
and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording. Prior
assessments or liens for the purposes provided for in this article shall not
be a bar to a subsequent assessment or lien and any number of liens or
assessments on the same parcel may be enforced in the same action.



      (5)   The assessment is prior and superior to all other liens,
obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances except liens for general taxes.
The city may dispose of any property or material removed from real property
as a result of abatement in any manner, including but not limited to
destruction or donation.



   (H)   Boarding, securing, vacating and demolition.



      (1)   If it is determined that a structure constitutes a
public nuisance as defined in this article, the City Manager or his or her
duly appointed agent may declare such structure a hazard with great potential
for actual and serious physical harm. After notice is communicated to any
owner of record in a notice to secure the structure and the owner does not
secure the structure to city specifications, the hazard may be summarily
abated by the city through boarding and fencing. The notice to secure shall
be in the same format and shall be served in the same manner as a notice to
abate as referenced above and all associated costs to board and fence may be
collected pursuant to a lien in the same manner as a notice to abate. If
however, the conditions pose an imminent hazard, the City Manager or his or
her designee may order immediate abatement without notice. Such abatement
shall be limited to the minimum work necessary to remove the hazard.



      (2)   Whenever the City Manager or his or her designee finds
that a structure contains an imminent hazard or health hazard, he or she may
declare it unfit for human occupancy and order it to be vacated or to remain
vacant. A structure declared unfit for occupancy shall not be leased, rented
or occupied until it has been reinspected and deemed fit for occupancy by the
city. City code compliance officers shall post a legible notice on the
principal entrance stating "do not enter, unsafe to occupy". Entry will be
considered a trespass under A.R.S. § 13-1504, a class 1 misdemeanor.



      (3)   Prior to demolishing a structure, the city shall issue a
notice of intent to demolish structure to the owner or responsible party with
any legal interest in the property and may record such notice in the Pinal or
Maricopa County Recorder's office. This notice and abatement and all
associated demolition costs shall be enforced in the same manner as a notice
to abate.



      (4)   Any structure which has been declared to be an imminent
hazard by the City Manager or his or her designee, shall immediately be
vacated and shall not be re-occupied until the City Manager or his or her
designee has issued a certificate of compliance which indicates that imminent
hazards do not exist and that incipient hazards and health hazards are
acknowledged and minimized by the persons responsible for the property. A
legible notice as referenced above shall be posted on the principal entrance
prohibiting entry. No person occupying a structure after the city has posted
on the structure a notice of its hazardous condition, shall be eligible for
relocation assistance or be considered a displaced person.



   (I)   Appeal of notice to abate, notice to secure, and notice of
intent to demolish.  An appeal of a notice to abate, notice to secure and
notice of intent to demolish shall be filed in writing with the Development
Services Department Director or his or her designee within 20 calendar days
after the notice was served. An appellate hearing shall be scheduled by the
Development Services Department Director or his or her designee before the
Board of Adjustment and Appeals no later than 60 calendar days after the
notice of appeal has been filed and such hearing must have been held and be
concluded within the same time period.



   (J)   Grounds for appeal.



      (1)   The following are appropriate grounds for an appeal:



         (a)   The claim that the property or building subject to
the notice is not in violation under the code.



         (b)   A claim that the true intent of the code has been
incorrectly interpreted.



         (c)   A claim that the statement for costs for
correcting or abating the violation is excessive.



      (2)   The Board may affirm, reverse or modify the notice. The
Board shall conduct the hearing as it does other board matters in its
quasi-judicial role. There shall be no fee for filing an appeal with the
Board.



      (3)   The filing of the notice of appeal shall act as an
automatic stay of enforcement of any compliance deadlines until the Board
makes its final determination. Upon making its final determination and after
it has been served on the appellant, the stay terminates and the violator has
the balance of the time left set forth in the notice. Failure to comply
within this time period may result in the issuance of a civil or criminal
citation or the filing of a complaint and abatement procedures subjecting the
property owner and/or responsible party to liens and possible foreclosure.



      (4)   Failure of a person to file an appeal shall constitute a
waiver of the right to a hearing of the appeal before the Board and such
person shall be estopped to deny the validity of any order or action of the
city which could have been timely appealed.



      (5)   Once the Board has rendered its decision, a party may
apply to the Superior Court within 30 calendar days for further appellate
relief in accordance with the Arizona Rules of Procedure for Special Actions.
The filing of a special action will not stay enforcement of any notice unless
ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-1-5  CARGO CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   It is the purpose and intent of this section to amend
the strict prohibition set forth in Ordinance 630 relating to cargo
containers by allowing cargo containers through issuance of an administrative
permit process which strikes a balance between such use and aesthetics.



      (2)   Because of what appears to be a number of illegally
placed and illegally used cargo containers since the 1988 passage of
Ordinance 630, it is the Mayor and Council’ s desire to allow individuals
the ability to use cargo containers provided they meet  the mandates set
forth  in this section.



   (B)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CARGO CONTAINER, (also known as CARGO POD, SHIPPING CONTAINER,
MOBILE-MINI, STORAGE CONTAINER).  A portable, reusable and prefabricated
vessel no larger than 9 feet tall, 10 feet wide, and 40 feet long, without an
axle or wheels, which was: 1) originally designed for or used in the packing,
shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods, or
commodities; and/or 2) designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a
rail car or being mounted on a chassis or bogie for movement by truck trailer
or loaded on a ship. This definition does not include, and therefore does not
allow, a semi- truck trailer in any form (intact, dissected, with or without
wheels), railroad car (with or without wheels), mobile or manufactured home,
park model, recreational vehicle, or bus, to be used as a CARGO CONTAINER.



   (C)   Cargo containers placed on residential properties.  A single
40-foot long cargo container, or two 20-foot long cargo containers, may be
placed on residential property designated General Rural (“GR”) or Single-
Family Residential or Single-Family Manufactured Home (“R1-43" or
“R1-43MH”) with minimum lot sizes of 1.25 gross acres, subject to the
following restrictions:



      (1)   They are used as an emergency accommodation, for no more
than 60 calendar days, in conjunction with required home repairs as a result
of damage caused by flood, fire, wind, or termites. Should such repair period
extend beyond 60 calendar days, the homeowner may apply for a 30-calendar day
extension.



      (2)   They are used for temporary storage of equipment and
materials during general construction provided such activity is authorized by
a valid building permit issued to a duly licensed and bonded contractor who
has obtained a city privilege license or a property owner acting as an owner
or owner/builder of a single-family residence.



      (3)   They are used for permanent storage as long as they are
located to the side or rear of the principal residential structure when
physically and practically possible, and must be set back from a neighboring
property line in accordance with the zoning district’s minimum accessory
building setback.  Containers shall not be located between the principal
residential structure and the public street.



      (4)   They are not connected with utilities.



      (5)   Permanent cargo containers shall be uniformly painted
with an earth tone color and free from surface rust and advertising signage.
If the container is publicly visible to adjacent neighboring properties
and/or from the public street, the unit user shall install and maintain
landscaping that will, within 5 years of planting, effectively screen at
least 75% of the container from public view. A suggested plant list and
planting guide is available at the Department of Development Services.



      (6)   A building permit may be required if the property owner
chooses to install structural screening around the container and/or apply
building  materials to the container, including awnings. Additionally, if
the property owner wishes to custom paint the container with a color scheme
different than the required uniform earth tone color, the unit user shall
first receive approval from the Development Services Director or his/her
designee. EARTH TONE shall be de fined as a color scheme that draws from a
color palette of browns, tans, and greens natural to the Sonoran Desert
environment. The colors in an earth tone scheme are muted and flat in an
emulation of the natural colors found in dirt, moss or trees,  and rocks.



   (D)   Cargo containers placed on commercial, industrial, public and
quasi-public properties. Any number of cargo containers may be placed on
commercial, industrial, public and quasi-public properties, subject to the
following restrictions:



      (1)   They are not located in or on a setback, off-street
parking space, utility/drainage/roadway easement, landscape setback, open
space, fire lane, or otherwise are not placed in such a location as to
compromise emergency, pedestrian, or customer egress and ingress circulation.



      (2)   They are used for storage of materials for the primary
business.



      (3)   They are used for temporary storage of equipment and
materials during general construction provided such activity is authorized by
a valid building permit issued to a duly licensed and bonded contractor who
has obtained a city privilege license or a property owner acting as an owner
or owner/builder of a single family residence.



      (4)   There is already a legally established primary
commercial, industrial, or public and quasi-public use on the property.



      (5)   They are not connected with utilities.



      (6)   Permanent cargo containers shall be uniformly painted
with an earth tone color as defined in this section and free from surface
rust and advertising signage. If the cargo container is publicly  visible to
adjacent neighboring properties and/or from the public street, the unit user
shall apply for approval from the Department of Development Services to
install and maintain a minimum 9-foot high structural screening that is
compatible with the design and architecture of the principal building. Visual
examples  of acceptable structural screening devices (such as a masonry wall
or completely opaque wooden fence) are available at the Department of
Development Services.



      (7)   Permanent cargo containers shall be located to the rear
or side of the principal building  so that their presence is minimized from
public view and from neighboring properties. The unit user shall obtain
approval from the Development Services Director or his/her designee to
properly locate the container.



   (E)   Administrative permit required.



      (1)   Placement and use of all cargo containers in the city
must be approved by the Development Services Director or his or her designee
upon review of an administrative permit application, site plan, exterior
building elevations and receipt of a nonrefundable $100 processing fee .



      (2)   The Development Services Director or his or her designee
shall notify the applicant of his or her decision to deny or grant the permit
with any noted conditions within 10 business days  from the date of the
applicant’s submittal.



   (F)   Appeal, enforcement and abatement. Any aggrieved applicant
shall have the right to appeal the Development Services Director’s denial
or conditional approval to the City Manager or his or her appointed designee
thereof (hereinafter the “Appellate Hearing Officer”) within 10 business
days after receiving written notice of a denial/conditional approval . Appeal
requests shall be limited only to the application of the criteria under which
the Director has discretion, including: type and/or size of container(s),
set-up, location on property, purpose of container, establishment of a
primary use on property, color selection, screening criteria, plant selection
and additional permits required. The required minimum lot size of 1.25 acres
for residential property placements is not an issue the Director has
discretion to act upon and therefore failure to meet this standard lot size
requirement as required by the Council is not appealable. Failure to appeal
to the City Manager or appointed designee waives all administrative rights
and remedies. The Appellate Hearing Officer must hold a hearing within 10
business days and shall decide such matter and notify the applicant of such
decision within 10 business days thereafter. This decision shall be final and
binding, subject only to the judicial appeal process pursuant to A.R.S. §
12-901 et seq. Furthermore, if the applicant fails to comply with the
conditions of the permit and/or those set by the Appellate Hearing Officer
and maintains, uses or stores a cargo container in violation of such
conditions and/or in violation of this section, the applicant is subject to
the property maintenance standards civil and criminal penalties and abatement
provisions under Vol. I, § 9-1-4.



   (G)   No superseding actions. Nothing in this section supersedes any
other restrictions or requirements that may exist in present or future
leases, rental agreements, development agreements, and planned development
stipulations or special/ conditional use permit stipulations. In addition,
this section shall not be construed to authorize any cargo container that was
illegally placed, maintained, stored or used before the effective date of
this section.



   (H)   Exemptions.



      (1)   The only cargo containers that are completely exempt
from the provisions of this section are the 3 located at 936 W. Apache Trail,
57 E. 20th Avenue, and 2296 S. Cactus Road. These 3 cargo containers were
originally exempted by Ordinance 630 and are in the same locations and
condition as originally placed. Should they be replaced or removed, they lose
their exempt status and all of the provisions of this section shall apply.



      (2)   The screening and permitting provisions of this section
do not apply to those cargo containers used on residential properties in an
emergency situation, as described in subsection (C)(1), within the initial
60-calendar day or 30-calendar day extension periods, or to those used for
temporary storage during general construction as described in subsections
(C)(2) and (3).



   (I)   Building  permit  applicability.  The building permit
exemption provisions under Vol. I, § 7 -1-2 Uniform Administrative Code
(1997 Edition), Section 301.2.1(1) Building Permits, apply to cargo
containers with square footage up to the maximum square feet for the cargo
container dimensions set forth in division (B) of this section. However, a
building permit shall be required if any such units are structurally combined
with or affixed to a regulated building structure as determined by the
Building Official.



(Ord. 1302, passed 2-19-2008; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 9-7-2010)



ARTICLE 9-2:  REFUSE, GARBAGE, DEBRIS, JUNK, TRASH, AND LITTER REMOVAL



Section



   9-2-1   Hauling refuse, garbage, debris, junk, trash and litter



   9-2-2   Vehicles and receptacles to be spillproof



   9-2-3   Spilled refuse, garbage, debris, junk, trash and litter



   9-2-4   Dumping refuse, garbage, debris, junk, trash and litter



§ 9-2-1  HAULING REFUSE, GARBAGE, DEBRIS, JUNK, TRASH AND LITTER.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled any refuse
on or along any public street, avenue or alley in the city in violation of
any of the provisions in this chapter.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006) Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 9-2-2  VEHICLES AND RECEPTACLES TO BE SPILLPROOF.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on or along
any public street in the city any refuse, garbage, junk, debris, trash,
litter, unless such material is contained in watertight vehicles or vehicles
with watertight receptacles constructed to prevent any such material from
falling, leaking or spilling and any odor from escaping.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006) Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 9-2-3  SPILLED REFUSE, GARBAGE, DEBRIS, JUNK, TRASH AND LITTER.



   Any person hauling any refuse, garbage, junk, debris, trash and litter
along the streets of the city shall immediately replace in the conveyance
used for such hauling any such material which may fall upon any street.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-2-4  DUMPING REFUSE, GARBAGE, DEBRIS, JUNK, TRASH AND LITTER.



   It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any
refuse, debris, garbage, junk, trash or litter upon any public or private
property within the city, except as specifically permitted in this chapter.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006) Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



ARTICLE 9-3:  CONSTRUCTION SITES



Section



   9-3-1   Truckloads causing litter



   9-3-2   Construction sites



   9-3-3   Inspection approval



§ 9-3-1  TRUCKLOADS CAUSING LITTER.



   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006) Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 9-3-2  CONSTRUCTION SITES.



   (A)   In addition to all other requirements of this code, it shall
be a condition for the continuation of a building permit that a litter
receptacle be provided, on site, for all buildings or structures for which
such permit is issued. The litter receptacle shall be of such design as to
insure that all materials deposited therein will not be blown out during
heavy winds, shall have a minimum capacity of 3 cubic yards per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area of the building or structure under construction and
shall be of a type approved by the Building Official.



   (B)   The Building Official shall issue a stop work order for any
building or structure if the litter receptacle, when required, is not
provided at the inception of the framing stage of construction.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006) Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 9-3-3  INSPECTION APPROVAL.



   (A)   In addition to all other requirements of this code, it shall
be a condition of inspection approval for all buildings or structures under
construction that the construction site be free of all litter.



   (B)   The Building Official may issue a stop work order when
inspection reveals that any construction site is not being maintained free of
litter.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



ARTICLE 9-4:  PRIVATE RECYCLING CONTAINERS



Section



   9-4-1   Definitions



   9-4-2   Registration required



   9-4-3   Application



   9-4-4   Containers



   9-4-5   Litter and trash prohibited



   9-4-6   Enforcement



   9-4-7   Impoundment



§ 9-4-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICE.  The Building Inspection and Zoning
Compliance Division of the Development Services Department.



   RECYCLING CONTAINER.  Any private container, whether attended or
unattended, and whether operating for profit or not, where the public is
asked to bring materials to be donated or left to be recycled, reclaimed,
processed or reused, including but not limited to newspapers, bottles or cans.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-4-2  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or
keep a recycling container within the city limits without complying with all
of the provisions of this article and without first having registered the
recycling containers as required by this article.



   (B)   All recycling containers not registered as required by this
article shall be subject to immediate removal by the city.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 9-4-3  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Applications for recycling container registration shall be
made to the code enforcement office on a form provided by that office. The
application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the owner or operator and a
telephone number where the owner or operator, or the agent of the owner or
operator, can be reached.



      (2)   The location, size and type of proposed recycling
container.



      (3)   The type of materials to be collected.



   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by a written and signed
statement:



      (1)   From the owner of the property where the container is to
be placed, granting his or her permission for the placement of the container;
and



      (2)   Where applicable, a statement from the religious or
non-profit corporation as required by Vol. I, § 9-4-4(D).



   (C)   The term of registration for each recycling container shall be
for a period not to exceed 1 year and shall expire on January 1 of each
calendar year.



   (D)   A separate registration shall be obtained for each recycling
container location.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006) 



§ 9-4-4  CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Each recycling container shall have a firmly closing lid and
have a capacity of not less than 3 cubic yards and not greater than 6 cubic
yards except for reverse recycling bins. The container shall be constructed
of painted metal, rubber, wood or plastic and shall be properly maintained in
a safe and good condition. The use of shipping or cargo containers for this
purpose is prohibited.



   (B)   Reverse recycling bins shall comply with all requirements of
this article except that they shall have a capacity of not less than 3 cubic
yards and not greater than 35 cubic yards.



   (C)   Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the materials
requested to be left for recycling, the name of the operator or owner of the
recycling container and a telephone number where the owner, operator or agent
of the owner or operator may be reached at any time. The size for the sign or
markings on any side of the container shall not exceed 25% of the total area
of the same side of the container. All markings required by this section
shall be neatly lettered or stenciled in a professional manner.



   (D)   No container shall identify a religious or non-profit
corporation without the written permission of such religious or non-profit
corporation; the permission must be submitted at the time that the
application is made for a recycling container permit. The city reserves the
right to make further inquiries and require proof of the religious or non
profit status that is being claimed.



   (E)   Containers may be located only within the parking lot of
private property lawfully zoned, developed and used for commercial or
industrial purposes, manufactured home parks, manufactured home subdivisions
and recreational vehicle parks, or at schools, churches or charitable
organizations which have similar parking facilities.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 9-4-5  LITTER AND TRASH PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall place any litter, garbage or trash at any
recycling container, and no person shall place any material in any recycling
container except the materials named on the outside of the container. No
person shall leave any materials outside of a container.



   (B)   Each recycling container owner or operator shall provide
adequate enough pickups and clean up of the general area to prevent any
materials from accumulating outside the containers.



   (C)   The owner or operator of the recycling container and the
property owner shall jointly or severally maintain all exterior areas within
25 feet of the container free from litter.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 9-4-6  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The code enforcement office is assigned the responsibility of
enforcing this article and is granted the authority expressly granted or
implied as needed and necessary for enforcement.



   (B)   For a violation of this article or issued registration, the
code enforcement office or a designee may revoke a registration, which has
been issued under this article, upon 10 days written notice to the permit
holder who may request a hearing with the code enforcement office prior to
the expiration of the 10-day notice; and/or



   (C)   The code enforcement office or a designee may commence an
action in Municipal Court against the operator or owner, or agent of the
operator or owner, of a recycling container which is in violation of this
article or issued registration.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 9-4-7  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   In addition to the penalties provided for in this code, any
recycling container which is in violation of this article or issued
registration may be removed at the operator's or owner's expense. The
container shall be impounded until the operator or owner reimburses the city
for the cost of removal and storage. In the event the operator or owner of an
impounded recycling container has not reimbursed the city within 60 days of
its removal, the city may dispose of the container or use it for some
city-related purpose.



   (B)   Prior to the removal and impoundment of a recycling container,
the city shall conspicuously attach a notice to the container allowing the
owner or operator 24 hours to bring the container into compliance. The code
enforcement office shall also attempt to contact the owner or operator at the
phone number listed on the registration application or container and advise
as to the posting of the notice. If the container has not been brought into
compliance by the time established by the notice, the container will be
removed and impounded.



   (C)   In the event any recycling container creates a hazard to the
health, welfare and safety of the public, the container shall be immediately
removed and impounded without the notice as outlined in division (B) of this
section.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



ARTICLE 9-5:  COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE



Section



   9-5-1   Legislative purpose



   9-5-2   Definitions



   9-5-3   Residential solid waste collection agency



   9-5-4   Permitted days and hours of collection



   9-5-5   Container standards; placement for and removal after
collection; application to mobile/manufactured home/recreational vehicle and
trailer parks and subdivisions



   9-5-6   Vehicle maintenance



   9-5-7   Appeals



   9-5-8   Penalties



§ 9-5-1  LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this article to regulate the collection of
residential solid waste to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city, and to avoid and mitigate the
detrimental effects of random trash collection, insufficient solid waste
containers and substandard collection vehicles and equipment through
reasonable regulation. It is not the purpose of this article to prohibit or
unreasonably restrain private enterprise from delivering solid waste
collection services within or to the residents of the city. In addition, this
article is not intended to favor local enterprise by prohibiting out-of-town
or out-of-state competition.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-5-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.  The head of the Public Works Department or
designee thereof.



   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE.  Any garbage, trash, rubbish or refuse,
including solid, liquid, semi-solid liquid, or semi-solid or contained
gaseous material, and any recyclable material, collected from any structure
or premises used as a domicile, dwelling or habitation, including single and
multi-family dwellings, duplexes, patio homes, trailers, mobile/ manufactured
homes, mobile/manufactured home/recreational vehicle and trailer parks and
subdivisions, rooming houses, group homes, boarding houses, apartments,
condominiums or townhouses.



   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AGENCY VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle
suitable for collection of residential solid waste that is in compliance with
this chapter.



   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINER. Any container used for storage of
residential solid waste and meets the container standards of this article.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-5-3  RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AGENCY.



   The city or any other person, individual, partnership, association,
company or corporation may collect residential solid waste within the city
limits provided they comply with the provisions of this article, and other
applicable city regulations including but not limited to possessing a current
valid city business license and current valid sales tax license and paying
all applicable transaction privilege taxes pursuant to Vol. I, Chapter 8.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-5-4  PERMITTED DAYS AND HOURS OF COLLECTION.



   (A)   Residential solid waste shall be collected twice a week, on
Mondays and Thursdays. Where such collection day falls on a Monday that is
also a federal or state holiday, and due to the holiday residential solid
waste is not collected by the residential solid waste collection agency, such
waste must be collected on the immediate Tuesday thereafter. In the case such
holiday falls on a Thursday, the waste must be collected on the immediate
Friday thereafter. The collection agency may collect residential solid waste
once a week if it also collects recyclable materials from the same customer
at the same time as the residential solid waste and obtains a variance from
the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality based on an acceptable plan
approved by the Pinal County Department of Environmental Services
demonstrating that no public health hazards or nuisances will exist and that
fly breeding will be controlled by either biological, chemical or mechanical
means.



   (B)   Residential solid waste shall be collected between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. mountain standard time, on authorized collection
days referenced in division (A) of this section. In the case of an emergency,
residential solid waste collection agencies may request extended hours. Such
request must be submitted to the Public Works Director telephonically, and,
if subsequently approved, residential solid waste collection agencies must
within 24 hours thereafter submit a written request to the Director
substantiating the need for the extended hours.



   (C)   Nothing in this article restricts the city from allowing
special collection days in connection with community cleanup programs.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006; Am. Ord. 1329, passed 4-7-2009)



§ 9-5-5  CONTAINER STANDARDS; PLACEMENT FOR AND REMOVAL AFTER COLLECTION;
APPLICATION TO MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME/RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND TRAILER
PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Container standards. All containers used by a single-family
dwelling unit to store residential solid waste and for collection thereof
shall be constructed out of plastic or galvanized metal, and shall have a
minimum capacity of 65 gallons and a maximum capacity of 90 gallons. In the
case of containers which serve multi-family dwelling units, such containers
must be made of suitable material with a minimum capacity to contain 1 yard
of residential solid waste per unit per week. On all containers there shall
be identifying marks with the name and telephone number of the residential
solid waste collection agency in letters with a height of no less than 3
inches but no greater than 6 inches. It is unlawful to place residential
solid waste outside of the appropriate containers awaiting collection, even
if contained in plastic bags, paper boxes or other receptacles.



   (B)   Placement for and removal after collection. Residential solid
waste containers shall be placed for collection as follows:



      (1)   All residential solid waste containers shall be located,
positioned and placed for collection in a manner as to facilitate the safe
handling of containers by residential solid waste collection agency vehicles.



      (2)   Residential solid waste containers may be located in
alleyways that are sufficiently passable in a safe manner by residential
solid waste collection vehicles.



      (3)   Residential solid waste containers for single-family
dwelling units may be placed at the curb in front of the premises, except
that at any corner lot, such containers may be placed at the curb of the side
street. Containers placed may be positioned curbside beginning at 4:00 p.m.
the day before collection, but must be removed no later than 6:00 a.m. after
the day of collection. Single-family dwelling unit containers may not be
placed on sidewalks or curbs in any manner so as to interfere with or be
hazardous to pedestrians or vehicles.



      (4)   Multi-family dwelling unit residential solid waste
containers may not be placed on sidewalks, curbs or anywhere within the
public right-of-way, in a manner so as to interfere with or be hazardous to
pedestrians, vehicles or other residences or other structures.



   (C)   Application to mobile/manufactured home/recreational vehicle
and trailer parks and subdivisions. With the exception of division(B)(1)
under this section, the provisions of this section do not apply to
mobile/manufactured home/recreational vehicle and trailer parks and
subdivisions in which a common container is placed, maintained or is
otherwise controlled or provided by the operator, manager or homeowner's
association of the park or subdivision, provided such container is located
within the boundaries of the park or subdivision and is not located within
the city's right-of-way.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 9-5-8



§ 9-5-6  VEHICLE MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All vehicles used for solid waste collection from single- and
multi-family dwelling units within the city limits shall be maintained in
good condition and repair, readily cleanable construction and be watertight,
and shall comply with all applicable state regulations. In addition, all
drivers of residential solid waste collection vehicles shall be licensed in
accordance with all applicable laws.



   (B)   The outside of each vehicle must be clearly identified with
the name and phone number of the residential solid waste collection agency.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-5-7  APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by any action or decision made by the Public Works
Director may appeal such action or decision by filing a written notice of
appeal and request for a hearing in the office of the City Manager. Upon
receipt of such notice, the City Manager or designee thereof, shall notify
the appellant within 5 working days of the scheduled hearing time, date and
place, which shall in no case take place more than 10 working days from the
date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The hearing shall be conducted
informally. The appellant and Public Works Director may present any relevant
evidence. Hearsay evidence may be considered and witnesses need not be sworn
nor cross-examined. The City Manager or designee thereof shall sustain,
overrule or otherwise modify the Public Works Director's action or
determination and shall send such notification to appellant within 3 working
days after completion of the hearing. The decision shall be final and
conclusive, except that appellant may pursue any proper judicial proceeding.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-5-8  PENALTIES.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, shall be
guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty and
multiple charging provisions set forth in Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



ARTICLE 9-6:  COLLECTION OF COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE



Section



   9-6-1   Compliance with city business and sales tax licensing
provisions



   9-6-2   Permitted days and hours of collection



§ 9-6-1  COMPLIANCE WITH CITY BUSINESS AND SALES TAX LICENSING PROVISIONS.



   The city or any other person, individual, partnership, association,
company or corporation may collect commercial solid waste within the city
limits provided they comply with the provisions of this article, and other
applicable city regulations including but not limited to possessing a current
valid city business license and current valid sales tax license and paying
all applicable transaction privilege taxes pursuant to Vol. I, Chapter 8.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006)



§ 9-6-2  PERMITTED DAYS AND HOURS OF COLLECTION.



   Commercial solid waste shall be collected between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Mountain Standard Time, Mondays through Fridays. In the
case of an emergency, commercial solid waste collection agencies may
request  extended hours. Such request must be submitted to the Public Works
Director telephonically, and if subsequently approved, commercial solid waste
collection agencies must, within 24 hours thereafter, submit a written
request to the Director substantiating the need for the extended hours. The
collection agency may collect commercial solid waste once a week if it also
collects recyclable materials from the same customer at the same time as the
commercial solid waste, and obtains a variance from the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality based on an acceptable plan approved by the Pinal
County Department of Environmental Services demonstrating that no public
health hazards or nuisances will exist and that fly breeding will be
controlled by either biological, chemical or mechanical means.



(Ord. 1255, passed 1-3-2006; Am. Ord. 1329, passed 4-7-2009)



CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES



      Article




         10-1.   OFFENSES; GENERAL





         10-2.   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS IN VEHICLES





         10-3.   UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS BY MINOR





         10-4.   BAD CHECKS





         10-5.   PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES





         10-6.   GRAFFITI





         10-7.   MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS




ARTICLE 10-1:  OFFENSES; GENERAL



Section



   10-1-1   [Reserved]



   10-1-2   Dangerous construction



   10-1-3   Damage to property



   10-1-4   Deposits of injurious material on thoroughfares



   10-1-5   Excavations to be covered



   10-1-6   Explosives



   10-1-7   False or misleading reports to police



   10-1-8   [Reserved]



   10-1-9   Furnishing weapons and other articles to prisoners



   10-1-10   [Reserved]



   10-1-11   Curfew



   10-1-12   Noise



   10-1-13   Obstruction of streets



   10-1-14   Obstruction of view



   10-1-15   Offensive business



   10-1-16   Offensive premises



   10-1-17   Prostitution and related offenses



   10-1-18   Searchlights



   10-1-19   Signs and banners



   10-1-20   Spitting



   10-1-21   Water flow upon streets



   10-1-22   Public places of entertainment



   10-1-23   Misuse of 911 emergency telephone number system



   10-1-24   Public urination and defecation



   10-1-25   Offensive use of motor vehicles



   10-1-26   Parking near public thoroughfares



   10-1-27   Skateboarding on specified municipal property



   10-1-28   Steel-jaw traps



   10-1-29   Truancy



   10-1-30   Leaf blower use



   10-1-31   Off-highway vehicles on unpaved surfaces



   10-1-32   Dust control for haul trucks



§ 10-1-1  [RESERVED]



§ 10-1-2  DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTION.



   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs,
billboards, awnings or other similar structures over or near streets,
sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or
constructed as to endanger the public safety.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-2)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-3  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to damage or attempt to damage
in any manner or tamper with any pipe, line, water hydrant, street lamp or
light, or the fixtures and appliances thereunto belonging upon any of the
poles or other objects for use in connection with the lighting of the streets
of the city or any water pipes, hydrants or any appliances pertaining to the
water or sewer works, or any other property of any and every character
belonging to the city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to deface, walk, ride or drive
upon or over any sidewalk or street crossing composed of or containing
cement, during the construction thereof, or before the same is open to public
use.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to damage in any manner any
road, street or bridge in the city limits by using the same, by heavy
vehicles, malicious destruction or by any act that will result in damage to
any such road, street or bridge.



   (D)   It is unlawful to break or destroy any window, door or part of
any dwelling owned or occupied by another or to break or sever from any
premises owned or occupied by another any gate, fence, railing, tree, brush
or vine or any property whatsoever, or to deface, mutilate or injure the same.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-3)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-4  DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES.



   It is unlawful for any person, either willfully and maliciously or
carelessly and negligently, to drop, throw, place or scatter upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public place in the city any nails, tacks, broken glass,
glass bottles or any instrument or thing whatsoever of such nature as to be
capable of injuring persons or property.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-4)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-5  EXCAVATIONS TO BE COVERED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig
any hole, drain or ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the city without
providing a sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable
obstruction around or in front of such excavation during the day.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit
or other excavation of more than 2 feet in depth on any unenclosed lot
without providing substantial curbing, covering or protection of the
excavation.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-5)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-6  EXPLOSIVES.



   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to blast or
use powder, fireworks or other explosives without a permit in writing from
the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-6)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-7  FALSE OR MISLEADING REPORTS TO POLICE.



   It is unlawful for any person willfully to make to the Police
Department of the city any false, fraudulent, misleading or unfounded report
or statement, or willfully to misrepresent any fact for the purpose of
interfering with the operation of the Police Department or with the intention
of misleading any police officer.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-7)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-8  [RESERVED]



§ 10-1-9  FURNISHING WEAPONS AND OTHER ARTICLES TO PRISONERS.



   It is unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take
into jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to any prisoner therein
confined, or in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating
liquors, drug or other article.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-9)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-10  [RESERVED]



§ 10-1-11  CURFEW.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person 14 years of age and under 18
years of age to remain upon, go or be upon any public street, alley or other
public place of the city between 10:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. on Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m. on Friday and Saturday, unless that person is accompanied by a parent,
guardian or some other person above the age of 18 years having legal custody
of the minor or is en route directly home from the minor's place of
employment or an authorized function sponsored by a church, educational
institution, civic or social organization or any other legal activity whether
it be conducted on private, commercial or public property.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 14 years to
remain upon, go or be upon any public street, alley or other public place of
the city between 10:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. on any day, unless that person is
accompanied by a parent, guardian or some other person above the age of 18
years having legal custody of the minor or is en route directly home from a
minor's place of employment or an authorized function sponsored by a church,
educational institution, civic or social organization or any other legal
activity whether it be conducted on private, commercial or public property.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person above
the age of 18 years having legal custody of the minor to allow or permit such
minor to remain upon, go or be upon any public street, alley or other public
place of the city between the hours set forth in this section unless
accompanied by that parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of
the minor or is en route directly home from the minor's place of employment
or an authorized function sponsored by a church, educational institution,
civic or social organization or any other legal activity whether it be
conducted on private, commercial or public property.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply when the minor
child is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or
other person having legal custody of the minor.



   (E)   All parents, guardians or other persons above the age of 18
years having legal custody of any minor child have an affirmative duty to
prevent the minor child from remaining upon, going or being upon any public
street, alley or other public place of the city between the hours set forth
in this section unless accompanied by such parent, guardian or other person
having legal custody of the minor, unless the minor is en route directly home
from the minor's place of employment or an authorized function sponsored by a
church, educational institution, civic or social organization or any other
legal activity whether it be conducted on private, commercial or public
property.



   (F)   Any peace officer having jurisdiction within the city may
detain any such minor for the limited purpose of immediately notifying the
parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of the minor that they
have been detained for violation of the provisions of this section.



   (G)   Any person under the age of 18 years who is convicted of a
violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
pursuant to Vol. I, § 1-1-11(A). The court may additionally require such
persons to perform community service or successfully complete counseling or
other education programs as a condition of sentence.



   (H)   Any person over the age of 18 years who is convicted of a
violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
pursuant to Vol. I, § 1-1-11(A). The court may additionally require such
persons to be placed on probation, perform community service, to successfully
complete counseling or other educational programs, and order restitution for
the costs of prosecution and court costs as a condition of sentence.



   (I)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:



      (1)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (2)   Involved in an emergency;



      (3)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the police department  about the minor's presence;



      (4)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



      (5)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with state law.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-11)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-12  NOISE.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it is
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or operating or in
control of any restaurant, hotel, dance hall, show, store or any place of
public amusement, entertainment or accommodation, to play or permit to be
played any music or musical instrument or instruments whether played by
individuals, orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box or other mechanical
device or means in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the
senses, or so as to disturb the slumber, peace and quiet or otherwise
interfere with or annoy the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any
considerable number of persons in the neighborhood and is no less a nuisance
because the extent of the annoyance inflicted is unequal.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which
shall not at all times be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in
good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise, and it is unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to use a
cut-out, by-pass or similar muffler elimination appliance.



   (C)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation to engage in construction activities as
delineated below, within the corporate limits of the city, during the
prohibited times set forth in division (D) below, when those activities
result in the generation of mechanically or electrically created noise that
can be heard by a person with normal hearing within a residential building,
the windows of which are closed, if the building is located within 500 feet
of the construction site. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES include, but are not
limited to, the following:



      (1)   The making of an excavation, clearing of surface land
and loading or unloading material, equipment or supplies; and



      (2)   The operation of mechanically powered tools, including
but not limited to, a cement mixer, pole driver, power shovel, pneumatic
hammer, derrick or power hoist.



   (D)   The prohibited time periods for construction activity are as
follows:



      (1)   Before 5:00 a.m. Arizona State Time and after 6:30 p.m.
Arizona State Time, Monday through Friday from April 15 to October 15;



      (2)   Before 6:00 a.m. Arizona State Time and after 6:30 p.m.
Arizona State Time, Monday through Friday during the remainder of the year;
and



      (3)   Before 7:00 a.m. Arizona State Time and after 5:00 p.m.
Arizona State Time on Saturdays and Sundays throughout the year and holidays
recognized by the city.



   (E)   The following activities shall be excluded from such
prohibition:



      (1)   Noise generated by work being performed by a resident of
a building or structure, which may continue until 9:00 p.m., but may not
begin earlier than the times set forth in division (D) above; and



      (2)   Noise resulting from an emergency, including but not
limited to, repair of roofs, windows, doors and electrical, plumbing and
mechanical equipment. An EMERGENCY means any situation where work must be
performed in order to prevent serious physical injury to persons or property.



   (F)   The construction activities noted in division (E)(2) above may
be conducted at prohibited times, if upon written application, a permit is
obtained before the activities commence, from the City Manager or a designee.
The written application must contain information which demonstrated that the
need to engage in the activity is an urgent necessity, and barring the
activity would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant.



      (1)   If the City Manager or a designee determines that
granting of the permit would impair the public health, safety and welfare,
the permit shall be denied. If determined otherwise, the permit shall be
granted and the construction activity allowed to take place during any or all
of the prohibited hours.



      (2)   In determining whether to grant the permit, the City
Manager or a designee shall balance the hardship to the applicant against the
adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of the persons most likely
affected, the adverse impact on the property affected and any other adverse
effects of granting the permit.



      (3)   Permits shall be granted by giving written notice to the
applicant with any necessary conditions, including a time limit on the
permitted activity, which in no case shall exceed 30 days. The permit shall
not become effective until all conditions are communicated in writing,
understood and agreed upon by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition
in the permit shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. An applicant may
appeal the refusal to issue a permit or the revocation of a permit to the
Council, who has the final authority to grant, refuse or revoke a permit.



   (G)   Violation of any provision of divisions (C) through (F) above
is a misdemeanor and is punishable pursuant to Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-12)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-13  OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS.



   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any public street, alley,
sidewalk or park or other public grounds within the city by committing any
act or doing anything which is injurious to the health or indecent or
offensive to the senses, or to do in or upon any such streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parks or other public grounds, any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free use of property or with any business
lawfully conducted by anyone, in or upon, or facing or fronting on any of
such streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other public grounds in the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-13)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-14  OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.



   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge,
billboard or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on
public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic
when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-14)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-15  OFFENSIVE BUSINESS.



   It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any
slaughterhouse or make a practice of slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep or any
other kind of animal, or establish or maintain any soap factory, render
tallow, or pursue, maintain or carry on any other business or occupation
offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health within the limits
of the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-15)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-16  OFFENSIVE PREMISES.



   It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any premises
belonging to or occupied by him or her, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool,
sewer or private drain therein to become nauseous, foul or offensive to the
senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-16)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-17  PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PROSTITUTION.  The act of performing sexual activity for hire by
a male or female person.



      SEXUAL ACTIVITY.  Vaginal or anal intercourse, fellatio,
cunnilingus, analingus, masturbation, sodomy or bestiality.



   (B)   It is unlawful to offer, agree, attempt to commit or commit an
act of prostitution.



   (C)   It is unlawful to solicit or hire another person to commit an
act of prostitution.



   (D)   It is unlawful to manifest an intent by word, sign or action
to commit an act of prostitution.



   (E)   It is unlawful for the owner or person having charge or
control of any house, building, apartment, room or premises to rent or lease
any such house, building, apartment, room or premises to any person to be
used as a place of prostitution or to knowingly permit any such house,
building, apartment, room or premises to be used for prostitution or for
immoral purposes or practices. The owner or person having charge or control
of any house, building, apartment, room or premises shall be and is hereby
authorized to summarily remove and eject from such house, building,
apartment, room or premises any tenant, subtenant, lessee or sublessee or any
person who shall commit any act of prostitution or immoral act or practice or
who shall knowingly suffer or permit to be committed any act of prostitution
or any immoral act or practice in or about such house, building, apartment,
room or premises.



   (F)   It is unlawful for any person to use any house, building,
apartment, room or premises for prostitution or for any immoral purposes or
practices.



   (G)   It is unlawful for any person to frequent, loiter in or
continue in any house, building, apartment, room or premises used for
purposes of prostitution or for any immoral purposes or practices.



   (H)   It is unlawful to aid or abet the commission of any of the
acts prohibited by this section.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-17)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-18  SEARCHLIGHTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate within the city any
incandescent or arc type searchlight, beacon light or similar lighting device
designed to and capable of projecting a beam of light into the sky for a
distance in excess of ½ mile unless permission is obtained from the Council.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
searchlights or beacons operated pursuant to public authority.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-18)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-19  SIGNS AND BANNERS.



   It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any
street light pole, traffic signal pole or utility pole within the city
without first obtaining authorization from the Council.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-19)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-20  SPITTING.



   It is unlawful for any person to spit upon any of the public sidewalks
or crosswalks in the city or upon any public path, by-way or highway or in or
on any public ground or park in the city, or upon the floor or interior of
any public building in the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-20)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-21  WATER FLOW UPON STREETS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause
flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the
city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to
cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a
hazardous condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets
of the city through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain
any irrigation structure, delivery ditch or waste ditch in which that person
has a vested right or interest or through the willful or negligent failure of
that person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him or
her.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-21)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-22  PUBLIC PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it is
unlawful as follows:



      (1)   Any female entertaining or performing any dance or in
any play, exhibition, show or other entertainment, or any female serving food
or spirituous liquors as defined by A.R.S. § 4-101, in a restaurant,
nightclub, bar, tavern, taproom, theater or in a private, fraternal, social,
golf or country club, as defined by A.R.S. § 4-101, or in any public place
who appears clothed, costumed, unclothed or uncostumed in such a manner that
the bare female breast or breasts are not firmly covered below the top of the
nipple by a brassiere consisting of a fully opaque material, is guilty of a
misdemeanor;



      (2)   Any person entertaining or performing any dance or in
any play, exhibition, show or other entertainment, or any person serving food
or spirituous liquors as defined by A.R.S. § 4-101, in a restaurant,
nightclub, bar, tavern, taproom, theater or in a private, fraternal, social,
golf or country club, as defined in A.R.S. § 4-101, or in any public place,
who appears clothed, costumed, unclothed or uncostumed in such a manner that
the lower part of his or her torso, consisting of the private parts or anal
cleft or cleavage of the buttocks, is not covered by a fully opaque material
or is so thinly covered as to appear uncovered, is guilty of a misdemeanor;



      (3)   Any person who employs any female entertaining or
performing any dance or in any play, exhibition, show or other entertainment,
or any female serving food or spirituous liquors as defined by A.R.S. §
4-101, in a restaurant, nightclub, bar, tavern, taproom, theater or in a
private, fraternal, social, golf or country club, as defined by A.R.S. §
4-101, or in any public place, who appears clothed, costumed, unclothed or
uncostumed in such a manner that the bare female breast or breasts are not
firmly covered below the top of the nipple by a brassiere consisting of a
fully opaque material, is guilty of a misdemeanor;



      (4)   Any person who employs any person entertaining or
performing any dance or in any play, exhibition, show or other entertainment,
or any person serving food or spirituous liquors as defined in A.R.S. §
4-101 in a restaurant, nightclub, bar, tavern, taproom, theater or in a
private, fraternal, social, golf or country club, as defined in § 4-101, or
in any public place, who appears clothed, costumed, unclothed or uncostumed
in such a manner that the lower part of his or her torso, consisting of the
private parts or anal cleft or cleavage of the buttocks, is not covered by a
fully opaque material or is so thinly covered as to appear uncovered, is
guilty of a misdemeanor;



      (5)   Any person who aids and abets in any commission of any
of the offenses defined by divisions (A)(1), (2), (3) and (4) above is guilty
of a misdemeanor; and



      (6)   Any person who touches, caresses or fondles the breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitals of another who is entertaining or performing any
dance is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall upon request furnish to the owner or
operator of each cabaret a copy of this article. The owner or operator shall
post the copy of this article in a place conspicuous to the entertainers, but
not necessarily in view of the general public. The owner or operator of the
cabaret shall acquaint his or her entertainers with the terms of this article.



   (C)   All dances, including go go and strip tease performances,
shall be conducted upon a stage, platform or portion of the floor raised at
least 36 inches above the main portion of the floor.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-22)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-23  MISUSE OF 911 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE NUMBER SYSTEM.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      911.  The City of Apache Junction 911 Emergency Telephone Number
System.



      EMERGENCY.  Any situation in which a human life or property is
in jeopardy and the prompt summoning of aid is essential.



      PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or
unincorporated association.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally and willfully
dial the 911 emergency telephone number and falsely report a nonexisting
emergency or to dial the 911 emergency telephone number with the intention to
harass, annoy or otherwise interfere with the intended operations of the 911
emergency telephone number system.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-23)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-24  PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION.



   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public or
private place open to the public view.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-24)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-25  OFFENSIVE USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful and a public nuisance to operate or drive any motor
vehicle, motorcycle, mini-bike, trail bike, dune buggy, motorscooter or other
form of motorized transportation on or across any real property situated in
the city, other than on a street or highway, if the operation of such motor
vehicle, motorcycle, mini-bike, trail bike, dune buggy, motorscooter or other
form of motorized transportation causes dust to become offensive or noxious
to the residents of the immediate neighborhood or causes the residents of the
immediate neighborhood to be subjected to offensive, excessive, unusual or
unreasonable noise.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-25)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-26  PARKING NEAR PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES.



   It is unlawful and a public nuisance to park or leave any motor
vehicle, motorcycle, mini-bike, trail bike, dune buggy, motorscooter, motor
home, mobile home, travel trailer, camper, boat or other form of recreational
vehicle or form of transportation having signs, placards or other forms of
written communication placed thereon upon any public or private property
within a distance of 200 feet from the edge of the roadway, unless the motor
vehicle, motorcycle, mini-bike, trail bike, dune buggy, motorscooter, motor
home, mobile home, travel trailer, camper, boat or other form of recreational
vehicle or other form of transportation is placed in a designated parking
area of a residence or established business.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-26)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-27  SKATEBOARDING ON SPECIFIED MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, a SKATEBOARD shall be defined as
a platform mounted on wheels and propelled by human power; skateboarding
shall be defined as the use of a skateboard.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to ride or to propel a
skateboard upon specific municipal property to include the grounds and
sidewalks of the city hall complex and the public library/community center.



   (C)   Skateboarding shall only be permitted on those municipal
properties where permitted under city parks regulations.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-27)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-28  STEEL-JAW TRAPS.



   It is unlawful for any person, either willfully and maliciously, or
carelessly and negligently, to use or set a steel jaw trap on any private or
public property located within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-28)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-29  TRUANCY.



   (A)   TRUANCY means the unexcused absence of any child age 6 to 16
from any school. The occurrence of 5 unexcused absences of any child age 6 to
16 during a school year shall raise a presumption that the child was truant
and in violation of this section.



   (B)   TRUANT is an unexcused absence for at least 1 class period
during the day.



   (C)   UNEXCUSED ABSENCE is an absence that within 24 hours after it
has occurred has not been authorized by the parents, guardian or any person
having legal custody of any pupil age 6 to 16 enrolled in a school. It shall
be presumed that an absence is an unexcused absence for purposes of this
section upon the failure of the parents, guardian or any person having legal
custody of any pupil age 6 to 16 enrolled in a school to contact the school
and authorize the absence within 24 hours after the absence.



   (D)   Every parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of
a minor child between the ages of 6 and 16 years shall send the child to
school for the full time that school is in session within the school district
in which the minor resides, except that if a school is operated on a
year-round basis the minor shall attend school sessions which total not less
than 175 days, or the equivalent as approved by the Arizona Superintendent of
Public Instruction during the school year.



   (E)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to
fail to attend school during regularly scheduled school sessions unless
authorized not to attend school by their parent, guardian or other person
having legal custody of the minor. This division shall not apply to any minor
who has been excused by either the Pinal County School Superintendent or the
Maricopa County School Superintendent pursuant to A.R.S. § 15-802(D)(1)
through (7) or as hereafter may be amended.



   (F)   A person is excused from the duty imposed by division (A)
above if any of the requirements of A.R.S. § 15-802(D)(1) through (7), or as
hereafter may be amended, are met.



   (G)   The school attendance officer or school district employees who
have knowledge of a child between the ages of 6 and 16 years and/or a parent
and/or guardian and/or other person having legal custody of a minor child who
is in violation of this section or A.R.S. § 15-802 by having 5 unexcused
absences during a semester or a cumulative of 7 or more unexcused absences
during the school year have a duty to report the violation to the local law
enforcement agency or prosecutor and request that it investigate and/or
prosecute the violation. The local law enforcement agency or prosecutor shall
annually notify the School Superintendent of each school district within the
city of the school district under this section.



   (H)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty
and multiple charging provisions set forth in Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-29)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-30  LEAF BLOWER USE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a leaf blower in such
a manner that blows landscape debris,  dirt or other debris into a public
roadway.



   (B)   No person may operate a leaf blower except on surfaces that
have been stabilized with asphaltic concrete, cement concrete, hardscape,
penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal coat of bituminous
binder and a mineral aggregate,  decomposed granite cover,  crushed granite
or rock cover, aggregate cover, gravel cover, or grass or other continuous
vegetative cover or any combination of these stabilizers, except as provided
in a permit issued by Pinal or Maricopa County or the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality Control.



   (C)   Violations of this section shall be punishable by a civil
penalty of not less than $150.



(Ord. 1316, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 10-1-31  OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES ON UNPAVED SURFACES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motor scooter, mini-bike,  trail bike, dune buggy,  jeep, all
terrain vehicle, Rhino or other form of transportation propelled by an
internal combustion engine upon the vacant unimproved private property of
another unless the property has been improved or treated in such a manner as
to prevent the release of fugitive dust. It shall be presumed that all vacant
unimproved land owned by any political subdivision of the State of Arizona or
any agency of the United States is closed for operation of any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motor scooter, mini-bike, trail bike, dune buggy, jeep, all
terrain vehicle, Rhino or other form of transportation propelled by an
internal combustion engine, except those of the holder of the title to the
property, any political subdivision of the State of Arizona, public service
corporations regulated by the Arizona Corporation Commission,  and the state
or the agency of the United States or of a law enforcement agency of this
state or an emergency vehicle, unless designated for such purpose on the
official maps issued by the State of Arizona or an agency of the United
States and posted as open to the public for this purpose. It shall be the
burden of the defendant/respondent in any violation of this section to rebut
the presumption.



   (B)   A person shall have a written license issued by the owner of
the property or the person entitled to immediate possession thereof or their
authorized agent.



   (C)   A person who operates a vehicle in the manner for which a
license is required shall immediately display such license to any law
enforcement officer upon request.



   (D)   Each license shall:



      (1)   Specify the period of time for which permission is
granted.



      (2)   Set forth the name of the licensee.



      (3)   Be signed by the licensor.



      (4)   State the licensor's interest in the property.



      (5)   If the licensor is not the owner of the property, state
the owner's name.



   (E)   The city may expend such funds as appropriate to post signage
adjacent to such private and public property indicating this section and the
criminal trespassing statutes contained in A.R.S. Title 13, and the minimum
fines.



(Ord. 1316, passed 2-19-2008)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-1-32  DUST CONTROL FOR HAUL TRUCKS.



   (A)   It is unlawful to drive a haul truck without a tarp or other
suitable cover or closure when traveling on a paved public street hauling
bulk material.



   (B)   It is unlawful to drive a haul truck on a public street
without first cleaning or covering the interior of the cargo compartment
after emptying its contents.



   (C)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor with a minimum fine of $100.



   (D)   For purposes of this section a haul truck is any fully or
partially open-bodied, self-propelled vehicle including any non-motorized
attachments,  such as, but not limited to, trailers or other conveyances
that are connected to or propelled by the actual motorized portion of the
vehicle used for transporting materials.



   (E)   For purposes of this section bulk material is any material
including but not limited to earth, rock, silt, sediment, sand, gravel, soil,
fill, aggregate less than 2 inches in length or diameter, dirt, mud,
construction or demolition debris, trash, cinders, pumice, saw dust, dry
concrete, feeds or fertilizers which are capable of producing fugitive dust.



   (F)   For purposes of this section fugitive dust is the particulate
matter not collected by a capture system, which is entrained in the ambient
air, and is caused from human and/or natural activities, such as, but not
limited to, movement of soil, vehicles,  equipment, blasting and wind.  For
the purpose of this section, fugitive dust does not include particulate
matter emitted directly from the exhaust of motor vehicles and other internal
combustion engines, from portable brazing, soldering, or welding equipment
and from piledrivers.



(Ord. 1316, passed 2-19-2008)



ARTICLE 10-2:  SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS IN VEHICLES



Section



   10-2-1   Definition



   10-2-2   Limitations on use



   10-2-3   Exceptions



   10-2-4   Purpose



   10-2-5   Penalty



§ 10-2-1  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM.  Any device, instrument or system, whether
electrical or mechanical or otherwise, for amplifying sound or for producing
or reproducing sound, including but not limited to any radio stereo, musical
instrument, phonograph or sound or musical recorder or player.



(Prior Code, § 10-2-1)



§ 10-2-2  LIMITATIONS ON USE.



   Except as authorized by law, no person shall operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system in or on a vehicle which can be
heard outside the vehicle from 50 or more feet or which annoys or disturbs
the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; unless the system
is being operated to request assistance of an emergency nature or to warn of
a hazardous situation.



(Prior Code, § 10-2-2)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 10-2-5



§ 10-2-3  EXCEPTIONS.



   In addition to other specific exemptions authorized by Vol. I, §
10-2-2 shall not apply to an authorized emergency vehicle; a vehicle operated
by a gas, electric, communications or water utility company; a vehicle
operated by a governmental entity; or a vehicle used in a parade or in a
political or other special event permitted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-2-3)



§ 10-2-4  PURPOSE.



   This article is enacted for the purpose of protecting the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens; to avoid distractions of drivers on the
streets and to avoid traffic congestion; and to prohibit artificial sound
noises from interfering with the lawful rights of other persons and from
constituting a hazard to motorists and pedestrians.



(Prior Code, § 10-2-4)



§ 10-2-5  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, shall be
guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty and
multiple charging provisions set forth in Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Prior Code, § 10-2-5)



ARTICLE 10-3:  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS BY MINOR



Section



   10-3-1   Definitions



   10-3-2   Unlawful possession of firearm



   10-3-3   Possession of consent form; keeping of records



   10-3-4   Forfeiture of firearms



§ 10-3-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIREARM.  Any loaded or unloaded pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun or
other weapon which will or is designed to or may readily be converted to
expel a projectile by the action of an explosive, or expanding gases, except
that it does not include an air rifle, air pistol, B.B. gun or firearm in
permanently inoperable condition.



   MINOR.  A person who is under the age of 18 years.



   WRITTEN CONSENT.  Written approval or permission to possess a firearm,
which is on a form prescribed by the Police Department, signed by the child's
parent or legal guardian, and notarized, and which specifically describes the
firearm as follows:



      (1)   Type;



      (2)   Manufacturer;



      (3)   Caliber; and



      (4)   Serial number.



(Prior Code, § 10-3-1)



§ 10-3-2  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARM.



   It is unlawful for a minor to possess any firearm within the city
limits without the written consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian.



(Prior Code, § 10-3-2)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-3-3  POSSESSION OF CONSENT FORM; KEEPING OF RECORDS.



   (A)   The original written consent form shall be carried by the
minor any time the minor is in possession of a firearm outside the minor's
residence.



   (B)   The Police Department shall not maintain a file or register of
executed written consent forms.



(Prior Code, § 10-3-3)



§ 10-3-4  FORFEITURE OF FIREARMS.



   Any firearm possessed by a minor in violation of this article may be
subject to forfeiture in the same manner as authorized by A.R.S. Title 13,
Chapter 39.



(Prior Code, § 10-3-4)



ARTICLE 10-4:  BAD CHECKS



Section



   10-4-1   Issuing of bad checks



   10-4-2   Presumptions relating to issuing a bad check; proof of
presentation; nonpayment; protest; notice



   10-4-3   Jurisdiction; restitution; fees; diversion program



   10-4-4   Deferred prosecution of bad check cases



§ 10-4-1  ISSUING OF BAD CHECKS.



   (A)   A person commits issuing a bad check if he or she issues or
passes a check knowing he or she does not have sufficient funds in or on
deposit with the bank or other drawee for the payment in full of the check as
well as all other checks outstanding at the time of issuance.



   (B)   Any of the following is a defense to prosecution under this
section:



      (1)   The payee or holder knows or has been expressly notified
before the drawing of the check or has reason to believe that the drawer did
not have on deposit or to his or her credit with the drawee sufficient funds
to insure payment on its presentation;



      (2)   The check is postdated and sufficient funds are on
deposit with the drawee on such later date for the payment in full of the
check; and



      (3)   Insufficiency of funds results from an adjustment to the
person's account by the credit institution without notice to the person.



(Prior Code, § 10-4-1)



§ 10-4-2  PRESUMPTIONS RELATING TO ISSUING A BAD CHECK; PROOF OF
PRESENTATION; NONPAYMENT; PROTEST; NOTICE.



   (A)   For purposes of this article, the issuer's knowledge of
insufficient funds may be presumed if either:



      (1)   The issuer had no account with the bank or other drawee
at the time he issued the check; or



      (2)   Payment was refused by the bank or other drawee for lack
of funds upon presentation within 30 days after issue and the issuer failed
to pay the holder the full amount due on the check, together with reasonable
costs, within 12 days after receiving notice of that refusal.



   (B)   Nothing in this section prevents the prosecution from
establishing the requisite intent by direct evidence.



   (C)   Notice may be actual notice or notice in writing, sent by
registered or certified mail return-receipt requested and addressed to the
issuer at his or her address shown on any of the following:



      (1)   The check;



      (2)   The records of the bank or other drawee; or



      (3)   The records of the person to whom the check is issued or
passed.



   (D)   The form of notice shall be substantially as follows:



NOTICE OF DISHONORED CHECK



Date:  ___________________________



Name of ISSUER: 
_________________________________________________________________



Street Address: 
_____________________________________________________________________



City and State: 
_____________________________________________________________________



   You are, according to law, hereby notified that a check or instrument
numbered________________, dated _____________________, 19_____, drawn on
______________________________(Bank or other Drawee) in the amount of
$_______________ and payable to _________________________________________,
has been dishonored. Pursuant to Arizona law, you have twelve days from
receipt of this notice to pay or tender to _______________________________
(Holder) the full amount of the check or instrument, together with all
reasonable costs and protest fees of $_______, the total amount due being
$__________. Unless this amount is paid in full, within the specified time
above, the holder of the check or instrument may turn over the dishonored
check or instrument and all other available information relating to this
incident to the office of the City Attorney for criminal prosecution.



   (E)   If written notice is given in accordance with this section, it
is presumed that the notice was received no later than 5 days after it was
sent.



(Prior Code, § 10-4-2)



§ 10-4-3  JURISDICTION; RESTITUTION; FEES; DIVERSION PROGRAM.



   (A)   Any violation of Vol. I, § 10-4-2 may be prosecuted by the
office of the City Attorney.



   (B)   A person charged with an offense under this article may make
restitution for the bad checks. Restitution may be made through the office of
the City Attorney if collection and processing were initiated through that
office. Restitution shall include at a minimum the face amount of the check.
The fact that restitution to the party injured is made and that any costs of
filing with the City Attorney are paid is a mitigating factor in any
imposition of punishment for any violation of this article. On sentencing,
the court may require any persons convicted under this article to make
restitution in an amount not to exceed twice the amount of the dishonored
check or $50, whichever is greater, together with all applicable costs and
fees. This is in addition to any other punishment imposed.



   (C)   The City Attorney may establish a program wherein a notice of
dishonored check is issued and an opportunity is presented to the person who
issued a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds, or where the
issuer had no account with the bank or other drawer at time of issuance to
pay to the holder in full the amount due on the check, together with
reasonable costs and fees. If the issuer of the check pays the full amount
due on the check, together with reasonable costs and fees as charged by the
City Attorney within 12 days from receiving notice, the City Attorney may
elect to not prosecute the violation of Vol. I, § 10-4-2.



   (D)   The City Attorney may collect a fee if his or her office
collects and processes a check, either through the diversion program as
heretofore provided, or otherwise, if the check is issued or passed in a
manner which makes the issuing or passing a misdemeanor offense under A.R.S.
§§ 13-1802 or 13-1807, or under Vol. I, § 10-4-2.



   (E)   The City Attorney may collect a fee from any person who is a
party to an offense described in this article.



   (F)   The amount of the fee shall not exceed:



      (1)   Twenty-five dollars if the face amount of the check does
not exceed $100;



      (2)   Fifty dollars if the face amount of the check is greater
than $100, but does not exceed $300; and



      (3)   Seventy-five dollars if the face amount of the check is
greater than $300.



(Prior Code, § 10-4-3)



§ 10-4-4  DEFERRED PROSECUTION OF BAD CHECK CASES.



   (A)   The City Attorney may create within his or her office a
deferred prosecution program for bad check cases.



   (B)   The City Attorney may refer a bad check case to the bad check
deferred prosecution program. This article does not limit the power of the
office of the City Attorney to prosecute bad check complaints.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a bad check case, the City Attorney shall
determine if the case is one which is appropriate to be referred to the bad
check prosecution program. To determine whether to refer a check to the bad
check deferred prosecution program, the City Attorney shall consider the
following guidelines:



      (1)   The amount of the bad check;



      (2)   If there is a prior criminal record of the defendant;



      (3)   The number of bad check complaints by the defendant
previously received by the City Attorney;



      (4)   Whether or not there are other bad check complaints
currently pending against the defendant; and



      (5)   The strength of evidence of intent to defraud the victim.



   (D)   On referral of a complaint to the bad check deferred
prosecution program, a notice of the complaint shall be forwarded by mail to
the defendant. The notice shall contain all of the following:



      (1)   The date and amount of the check;



      (2)   The name of the payee;



      (3)   The date before which the defendant must contact the
office of the City Attorney concerning the complaint; and



      (4)   A statement of the penalty for issuance of a bad check.



   (E)   The City Attorney may enter into a written agreement with the
defendant to defer prosecution on the bad check for a period to be determined
by the City Attorney, not to exceed 6 months pending on all of the following:



      (1)   Completion of the bad check deferred prosecution school
program conducted by the office of the City Attorney, Police Department or a
private entity under contract with the City Attorney;



      (2)   Full restitution being made to the victim of the bad
check, as specified in this article; and



      (3)   Full payment of fees due pursuant to this article.



(Prior Code, § 10-4-4)



ARTICLE 10-5:  PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES



Section



   10-5-1   Definitions



   10-5-2   Public property; restrictions



   10-5-3   Other restrictions



   10-5-4   Trees and shrubs in public places



   10-5-5   Birds and animals; protection



   10-5-6   Buildings prohibited



   10-5-7   Camping prohibited



§ 10-5-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMPSITE.  Any place where any bedding, sleeping bag or other sleeping
matter is placed, established or maintained, whether or not such place
incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack or other structure, or any
vehicle or part thereof.



   PUBLICLY OWNED PROPERTY.  Any property owned by the city or owned by
any county, municipal corporation, district, political subdivision or agency
of the State of Arizona, the State of Arizona, the United States or any
subdivision or agency of the United States.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Works of the city or
any employee authorized by the Director of Public Works to take action under
this article.



   TO CAMP.  To set up or to remain in or at a campsite.



(Prior Code, § 10-5-1)



§ 10-5-2  PUBLIC PROPERTY; RESTRICTIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts upon any
public street, highway, alley, public place or any other publicly owned
property regardless of the purpose for which the property was dedicated,
acquired or purchased, without consent of the Council:



   (A)   Take possession of any said property in any manner;



   (B)   Occupy and remain upon the property;



   (C)   Continue to live upon any of the aforementioned property after
having been notified by any police officer or employee of the city to vacate
the premises;



   (D)   Build any structure of any kind upon any of the property;



   (E)   Fence in or cultivate any of the property. This division shall
not be interpreted to prohibit any person who owns or is lawfully maintaining
any land fronting on a street from maintaining a lawn, garden, trees or other
foliage on the part of the street right-of-way that is not paved. The land is
customarily maintained by the owner of, or person maintaining, the lot
fronting on the land;



   (F)   Dump boxes, trash, litter, paper, refuse matter, tin cans or
garbage on any of the property; and



   (G)   Drive any vehicle of any kind upon or cross any of the
property, except where the streets, highways, alleys, roadways or driveways
have been properly laid out and open to the public.



(Prior Code, § 10-5-2)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-5-3  OTHER RESTRICTIONS.



   No person shall maliciously or willfully deface, injure, destroy,
besmear or bedaub any publicly owned building, sidewalk, street, pavement,
curbing, water or sewer line or other publicly owned property.



(Prior Code, § 10-5-3)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-5-4  TREES AND SHRUBS IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall maliciously or willfully cut down, injure or
destroy, in any manner, any tree, shrubbery or flower, planted or growing in
or on any street, park, alley or public grounds. This section shall not be
interpreted to prohibit any person who owns or is lawfully maintaining any
land fronting on a street from maintaining a lawn, garden, trees or other
foliage on the part of the street right-of-way that is not paved. The land is
customarily maintained by the owner of, or person maintaining, the lot
fronting on the land.



   (B)   No person shall cut down any tree in any street right-of-way
or parkway without permission of the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 10-5-4)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-5-5  BIRDS AND ANIMALS; PROTECTION.



   No person shall kill, wound, maim, injure or harm in any manner any
bird or animal; or throw, fire or shoot any gun, pistol or other deadly
weapon, or any stone, arrow or other missile at a bird or animal; or break,
tear down or destroy any bird's nest or eggs or other contents of their nests
on any publicly owned property.



(Prior Code, § 10-5-5)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-5-6  BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain, erect or permit the
erection of any building, hut, hotel, shanty, tent or other structure under
his or her control on any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way or other
publicly owned property.



   (B)   This section shall not prohibit the erection or installation
of any tent or temporary structure where authorized by a permit issued by the
city.



(Prior Code, § 10-5-6)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-5-7  CAMPING PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to camp in or upon any city sidewalk,
street, alley, lane, park, public right-of-way or other place to which the
general public has access, or under an bridge way or viaduct, unless
otherwise specifically authorized by Vol. I or by declaration by the mayor in
emergency circumstances. This shall not be deemed to prohibit camping at
designated campsites. No person shall be convicted of violating this section
unless that person shall continue to camp after receiving a warning to leave
and given a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 24 hours, to leave. The
warning shall be given by a peace officer or by any city employee or officer.



(Prior Code, § 10-5-7)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



ARTICLE 10-6:  GRAFFITI



Section



   10-6-1   Definitions



   10-6-2   Purpose and intent



   10-6-3   Graffiti prohibited



   10-6-4   Possession of graffiti implements prohibited



   10-6-5   Furnishing graffiti implements or paraphernalia



   10-6-6   Notice to remove



   10-6-7   Service of notice



   10-6-8   Appeal to City Manager



   10-6-9   Removal by city



   10-6-10   Lien for removal



§ 10-6-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AEROSOL PAINTS CONTAINER.  Any aerosol container that is adapted or
made for the purpose of spraying paint.



   BROAD TIP MARKER.  Any marker or similar implement that has a writing
surface that is ½ of an inch or greater and containing anything other then a
solution that can be removed with water after the solution dries.



   GRAFFITI.  Any drawing or inscribing a message, slogan, sign or symbol
or mark of any type that is made on any public or private building, structure
or surface, and that is made without the permission of the owner.



   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT.  An aerosol paint container, broad tip marker,
paint stick, graffiti stick or bleeder.



   PAINT STICK, GRAFFITI STICK OR BLEEDER.  Any implement containing
paint, wax, epoxy or other similar substance.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  An owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager,
licensee or other person having the right to control the property.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-1)



§ 10-6-2  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose and intent of this article to help prevent the spread
of graffiti and to establish a program for its removal from public and
private property. The spread of graffiti on public and private buildings,
walls, signs and other structures or places or other surfaces causes blight
within the city, resulting in a genuine threat to life, economic losses to
businesses in terms of physical property, profits and goodwill, and the
general deterioration of property and business values, for adjacent and
surrounding properties. Not only is graffiti a property crime, but it is also
a social crime on the quality of life and freedom from intimidation that
citizens desire within their neighborhoods.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-2)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-6-3  GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to paint, spray, chalk, etch or
otherwise apply graffiti on public or privately owned sidewalks, walls,
buildings, fences, signs and other structures or surfaces.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning or otherwise in control
of any real property within the city to permit or allow any graffiti to be
placed upon or to remain on any permanent structure located on property when
the graffiti is visible from the street or from the public or private
property.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-3)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-6-4  POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any graffiti
implement with the intent to use the implement for the purpose of committing
criminal damage to any of the following places or things, including but not
limited to public or privately owned buildings, signs, walls, permanent
structures, places or other surfaces within the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-4)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-6-5  FURNISHING GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS OR PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal
guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or
permit to be exchanged, given, lent or otherwise furnished any graffiti
implement to any person under the age of 18.



   (B)   Evidence that a person, his or her employee, or agent demanded
and was shown acceptable evidence of majority and acted upon such evidence in
a transaction or sale shall be a defense to any prosecution under this
section. Acceptable evidence of majority shall include, but is not limited
to, drivers license, state-issued identification or military identification.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the transfer of graffiti
implements from parents to child, guardian to ward, employer to employee,
teacher to student, or any other similar relationship when the transfer is
for a lawful purpose.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-5)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 10-6-6  NOTICE TO REMOVE.



   (A)   If a person owning any property fails to remove graffiti
located on property owned by such person, notice shall be given by the city
to remove the graffiti within 15 calendar days from the date the notice was
served pursuant to Vol. I, § 10-6-7, as set forth below.



   (B)   The notice shall contain:



      (1)   An estimate of the cost of removal by the city; and



      (2)   A statement explaining:



         (a)   That unless the person owning the property
complies within 15 calendar days from the date the written notice is served,
that the city will, at the expense of the person owning the property, remove
the graffiti at a cost not to exceed the estimate given in the notice; and



         (b)   The person may appeal in writing to the Manager or
designee ("City Manager") within 15 calendar days from the date the notice is
served.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-6)



§ 10-6-7  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   Notice shall be personally served on the owner or person controlling
such property by a police officer of the city in the manner provided in Rule
4(d) of the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, or sent to the owner of the
property at the last known address by certified or registered first class
U.S. mail or at the address to which the tax bill for the property was last
mailed. If the owner does not reside on the property, a duplicate notice
shall also be sent by certified or registered first class U.S. mail at the
owner's last known address.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-7)



§ 10-6-8  APPEAL TO CITY MANAGER.



   The owner may within 15 calendar days from the date the notice is
served appeal the notice to remove the graffiti to the City Manager, by
filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The City Manager may
extend the deadline or may reduce the estimated cost of abatement. The
decision of the City Manager shall be final. During the appellate period,
enforcement of these provisions shall be stayed.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-8)



§ 10-6-9  REMOVAL BY CITY.



   (A)   When any such person to whom notice, as provided in this
article, has been given, and on or before the date of compliance on the
notice, or within such further time as may have been granted by the City
Manager on appeal, fails to remove from the property any or all graffiti, the
City Manager is authorized and directed to cause the same to be removed at
the expense of the owner.



   (B)   Upon completion of the work, the City Manager shall prepare a
verified statement, accounting for:



      (1)   The actual cost of the removal or abatement; and



      (2)   The date the work was completed and the street address
and legal description of the property on which the work was completed.



   (C)   The notice shall include 5% for additional inspection and
other incidental costs in connection therewith.



   (D)   The City Manager shall serve a duplicate copy of the verified
statement upon the person owning the property in the manner prescribed in
Vol. I, § 10-6-7.



   (E)   The owner of the property shall have thirty days from the date
of service to appeal in writing to the Council from the amount of the
assessment as contained in the verified statement.



   (F)   If an appeal is not filed with the City Clerk within a
30-calendar day period, then the amount of the assessment as determined by
the City Manager shall become final.



   (G)   If an appeal is taken, the Council shall, at its next regular
meeting, or as soon as practicable, hear and determine the assessment appeal
and may affirm the amount of the assessment, modify the amount thereof, or
determine that no assessment at all shall be made. The decision of the
Council shall be final.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-9)



§ 10-6-10  LIEN FOR REMOVAL.



   (A)   If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if
an appeal is taken and the Council has affirmed or modified the amount of the
assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder of Pinal or Maricopa County,
Arizona, depending on which county the affected property is located, and from
the date of its recording, shall be a lien on the lot or tract of land until
paid.



   (B)   The liens shall be subject and inferior to the lien for
general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record.



   (C)   A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the
provisions of this article shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure or
order of sale.



   (D)   The city shall have the right to bring an action to enforce
the lien in the Superior Court of Pinal or Maricopa County at any time after
the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the lien by such
action shall not affect its validity.



   (E)   The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the
truth of all matters recited therein, and of the regularity of all
proceedings prior to the recording thereof.



   (F)   A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this section
shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment for such purposes, and any
number of liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same
action.



(Prior Code, § 10-6-10)



ARTICLE 10-7:  MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS



Section



   10-7-1   Purpose and intent



   10-7-2   Definitions



   10-7-3   Prohibited operation locations



   10-7-4   General operating restrictions



   10-7-5   Responsibility of parents, guardians and custodians



   10-7-6   Required safety equipment



   10-7-7   Penalty



§ 10-7-1  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate the
safest possible use of motorized skateboards.



   (B)   The unregulated use of motorized skateboards threatens the
health and welfare of not only the riders, but also the general public.



   (C)   The impact of accidents involving motorized skateboards is
widespread because of the nature of their construction, the relatively young
age of operators and failure of many operators to use any type of safety
equipment.



   (D)   Regulating motorized skateboards is of utmost importance to
enhance the safety of the entire community.



(Prior Code, § 10-7-1)



§ 10-7-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD.  A self-propelled device which has an affixed
motor connected to a deck upon which a person may ride and has at least 2
wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in
A.R.S. Title 28, as amended, as a "motor vehicle," "motorcycle,"
"motor-driven cycle" or "motorized wheelchair."



   OPERATOR.  A person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
motorized skateboard upon a public roadway, sidewalk, right-of-way, park,
bicycle path or any other public property used for the operation of motor
vehicles.



   OWNER.  A person who holds the legal title to a motorized skateboard
or any person who is a lessee, conditional vendee or mortgagor of a motorized
skateboard with a right to immediate possession.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  An owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager,
licensee or other person having the right to control such property.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  All the property used as a public thoroughfare and
lying between the exterior boundary lines of any area granted to or received
by the city by grant, gift, easement, deed, dedication or operation of law
for street, alley, walkway or utility purposes.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use
by pedestrians.



(Prior Code, § 10-7-2)



§ 10-7-3  PROHIBITED OPERATION LOCATIONS.



   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard in the following
locations:



   (A)   On any public sidewalk except when crossing a sidewalk to gain
access to any public or private road or driveway;



   (B)   On any city property except on public roadways where the
posted speed limit is 30 mph or less;



   (C)   On any public property that has been posted as an area in
which the operation of motorized skateboards is prohibited;



   (D)   On any private property without the written permission of the
owner or the owner's authorized agent, nor on public property that is not
held open to the public for vehicular use; or



   (E)   On any city right-of-way, including city streets, roadways and
alleyways, except during daylight hours and in no event before 7:00 a.m.
Mountain Standard Time or after 8:00 p.m. Mountain Standard Time.



(Prior Code, § 10-7-3)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 10-7-7



§ 10-7-4  GENERAL OPERATING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person under the age of 12 shall operate a motorized
skateboard.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances or in excess
of the posted speed limit.



   (C)   In order to cross a sidewalk, bicycle path, bicycle lane or
multi-use path, a person operating a motorized skateboard shall yield the
right-of-way to all other users.



   (D)   No person operating a motorized skateboard shall allow
passengers to ride on the motorized skateboard when the motorized skateboard
is in operation or in motion.



   (E)   No person operating or riding upon a motorized skateboard
shall attach themselves or the motorized skateboard in any manner to any
other vehicle.



   (F)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard while carrying
any package, bundle or article if carrying the object prevents the operator
from keeping both hands upon the steering mechanism at all times.



   (G)   No person operating a motorized skateboard shall: transport
extra fuel in a separate container on the motorized skateboard; or attach a
separate container with fuel to the operator's person; or alter the fuel
reservoir on the motorized skateboard from the original manufacturer's design.



   (H)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard in a manner
causing excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise that disturbs the peace and
quiet of any neighborhood or that would annoy a reasonable person.



   (I)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard that has been
structurally altered from the original manufacturer's design.



(Prior Code, § 10-7-4)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 10-7-7



§ 10-7-5  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS, GUARDIANS AND CUSTODIANS.



   The parent, guardian or legal custodian of any minor or ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit a minor or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this article.



(Prior Code, § 10-7-5)



§ 10-7-6  REQUIRED SAFETY EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard at any time
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and
vehicles at a distance of 500 feet ahead.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard unless the
motorized skateboard is equipped with a brake that enables the operator to
make a braked wheel skid on pavement.



   (C)   A person under the age of 18 years operating a motorized
skateboard on a roadway shall at all times wear a protective helmet on his or
her head in an appropriate and safely secured manner.



   (D)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard without wearing
footwear. The footwear must have a sole and completely cover the feet and
toes.



   (E)   When operating a motorized skateboard, a person shall wear
protective glasses or goggles or a transparent face shield of a type approved
for motorcycle or motor-driven cycle use.



(Prior Code, § 10-7-6)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 10-7-7



§ 10-7-7  PENALTY.



   Violations of any of the sections of this article concerning motorized
skateboards are designated as civil traffic violations and are subject to the
same monetary penalties as civil traffic violations.



(Prior Code, § 10-7-7)



CHAPTER 11: RESERVED



CHAPTER 12: TRAFFIC



      Article



         12-1.   ADMINISTRATION



         12-2.   TRAFFIC CONTROL



         12-3.   PARKING



         12-4.   VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ON PUBLIC STREETS



         12-5.   PARKING VIOLATIONS, LIABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT



ARTICLE 12-1:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



   12-1-1   Duty of Police Department



   12-1-2   Records of traffic violations



   12-1-3   Traffic accident investigations



   12-1-4   Traffic accident studies



   12-1-5   Traffic accident reports



§ 12-1-1  DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department under the
direction of the Public Safety Director (hereinafter the “Chief of
Police”) to provide for the enforcement of the street traffic regulations
of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in
the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents
and to assist in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and
to carry out all duties specially imposed upon the Police Department by this
article.



   (B)   Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the city may
stop and detain a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual
or suspected violation of any chapter of this code, and to serve a copy of
the traffic complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation of this
article.



(Prior Code, § 12-1-1)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-1-2  RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of
the traffic laws of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person
has been charged consistent with federal and state law.



   (B)   All forms for records of violations and notices shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept
available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.



   (C)   All records and reports shall be open to the public, subject
to privacy and confidential considerations set forth in federal and state
statutes as interpreted under common law.



(Prior Code, § 12-1-2)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-1-3  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT INVESTIGATIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to investigate traffic
accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.



(Prior Code, § 12-1-3)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-1-4  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.



   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
City Engineer or Traffic Engineer shall conduct studies of the accidents and
determine remedial measures.



(Prior Code, § 12-1-4)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-1-5  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of
filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports shall be filed by case
number.



   (B)   The Police Department shall receive and properly file all
accident reports made to it under applicable law.



(Prior Code, § 12-1-5)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



ARTICLE 12-2:  TRAFFIC CONTROL



Section



   12-2-1   Directing traffic



   12-2-2   Obedience to traffic regulations



   12-2-3   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices
restricted



   12-2-4   Traffic control devices



   12-2-5   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones
and mark traffic lanes



   12-2-6   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers



   12-2-7   Authority to place and obedience to restricted turn signs



   12-2-8   Limitations on turning around



   12-2-9   One-way streets and alleys



   12-2-10   Regulation of traffic at intersections



   12-2-11   Drivers to obey signs



   12-2-12   Processions



   12-2-13   Speed in alleys



   12-2-14   Vehicle door as traffic obstruction



   12-2-15   Unnecessary vehicle noise



§ 12-2-1  DIRECTING TRAFFIC.



   Officers and/or auxiliary patrol of the Police Department are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-1)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-2-2  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   No person shall do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act
required by this article. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of a police officer.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-2)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-2-3  USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.



   No person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk and, when crossing, the person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-3)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-2-4  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The Public Works Department, at the direction of the City
Engineer or Traffic Engineer, shall place and maintain traffic control
devices, signs and signals when, and as required, under the traffic
regulations of the city, (and the most current version of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices), to make effective the provisions of the
regulations, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control
devices as may be deemed necessary to regulate, guide or warn traffic under
the traffic laws of the city or under state law. In public rights-of-way or
public easements, the Police Department will provide enforcement services of
these devices.



   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with
the traffic regulations of the city unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted in this article or by state law.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-4)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-2-5  AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES AND
MARK TRAFFIC LANES.



   The City Engineer or Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to:



   (A)   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is
particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other
places as may be deemed necessary;



   (B)   Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as may be deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and



   (C)   Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as
may be deemed advisable consistent with the traffic laws of the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-5)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-2-6  AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS.



   (A)   The City Engineer or Traffic Engineer is authorized to place
markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such
course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law.



   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by turning
vehicles, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of those
indications.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-6)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-2-7  AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.



   (A)   (1)   The City Engineer or Traffic Engineer is hereby
authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right, left or u-turn and shall place proper signs at such
intersections.



      (2)   The making of such turns may be prohibited between
certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the
same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or such signs may be removed
when such turns are permitted.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or u-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-7)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-2-8  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall
not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless the movement can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-8)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-2-9  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   The City Engineer or Traffic Engineer shall designate any
streets or alleys which are to be limited to 1-way traffic.



   (B)   (1)   The City Engineer or Traffic Engineer shall place and
maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless the signs are in place.



      (2)   Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in
the opposite direction is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-9)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-2-10  REGULATION OF TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The City Engineer or Traffic Engineer shall designate through
streets, intersections where stops are required and intersections where
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way.



   (B)   The City Engineer or Traffic Engineer shall designate any
through street or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the
right-of-way.



   (C)   The City Engineer or Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain
the appropriate signs at every location where a vehicle must stop or yield
the right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-10)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-2-11  DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS.



   Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this article, every
driver of a vehicle shall obey those signs unless directed to proceed by a
police officer or a traffic control signal. No driver shall drive upon or
through any private property such as an oil station, corner or vacant lot or
similar property to avoid obedience to any regulation included in this
article.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-11)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-2-12  PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be
held without first securing a permit from the Police Chief, and all such
requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line
of march, destination and other information as the Police Chief may request.



   (B)   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles
shall be identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by
the Police Chief.



   (C)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when the vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals
or a police officer.



   (D)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as
near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-12)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-2-13  SPEED IN ALLEYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon or
through a public alley or any part thereof at a speed greater than 10 miles
per hour.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-13)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-2-14  VEHICLE DOOR AS TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side adjacent
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle adjacent to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-14)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-2-15  UNNECESSARY VEHICLE NOISE.



   (A)   No person shall intentionally operate any vehicle at such a
speed on a curve, straight-of-way or turn, or accelerate or decelerate such
vehicle in such a manner as to create loud and unreasonable noise through the
squealing of tires upon the pavement, or to cause damage to the roadway, or
to cause the surface of the roadway to be displaced in any manner including
throwing dirt, gravel, stone or other roadway surface or material upon the
surface into the air.



   (B)   No person shall violate any of the provisions of division (A)
above while upon the surface of any parking lot or parking space of any
public place.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-15)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



ARTICLE 12-3:  PARKING



Section



   12-3-1   Method of parking



   12-3-2   Blocking traffic



   12-3-3   Parking adjacent to schools



   12-3-4   Authority to erect signs restricting parking



   12-3-5   Parking vehicles on sidewalks



   12-3-6   Abandoned vehicles



   12-3-7   Fire lanes



   12-3-8   Disabled person parking



   12-3-9   Parking trucks, trailers and similar vehicles in
residential areas



   12-3-10   Unattended motor vehicles



   12-3-11   Authority to place parking restriction signage



§ 12-3-1  METHOD OF PARKING.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, every vehicle stopped or parked
upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked
with the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of
the right hand curb. The vehicle must be positioned such that it is not in
opposite to the direction of travel.



(Prior Code, § 12-3-1)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-3-2  BLOCKING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street
in the city in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than 20 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of
vehicular traffic, except that a person may stop temporarily, in the actual
loading or unloading of passengers or, when necessary, in the observance of
traffic signs or signals of a police officer.



   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle within an alley or entrance
to a private driveway except for the loading or unloading of materials which
must be accomplished without blocking the alley or entrance to the private
driveway to the free movement of vehicular traffic.



   (C)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or city
right-of-way where signs prohibiting parking of vehicles are posted.



(Prior Code, § 12-3-2)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-3-3  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place for 1 hour before school opens until 1 hour after school
closes on any school day.



(Prior Code, § 12-3-3)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-3-4  AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING.



   When signs have been erected requiring parking at an angle to the curb,
allowing parking on the left hand curb on 1-way streets, notifying drivers
that parking is prohibited and restricting parking in any way that may be
necessary, it is unlawful for any person to stop or stand a vehicle in
disobedience of such parking restrictions.



(Prior Code, § 12-3-4)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-3-5  PARKING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not,
upon any sidewalk in the city nor shall a vehicle owner permit his or her
vehicle to be parked upon any sidewalk in the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-3-5)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-3-6  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall abandon any vehicle on public or private
property.



   (B)   Evidence that a vehicle was left unattended for a period of 48
hours shall be prima facie evidence of abandonment.



   (C)   Members of the Police Department so authorized by the Chief of
Police may remove or cause to be removed any abandoned vehicle.



   (D)   Upon removal, the abandoned vehicle shall be appraised by a
Police Officer designated by the Chief of Police and certified to the Arizona
Department of Transportation.



   (E)   After the vehicle is appraised, it shall be disposed of
pursuant to A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 8,  Article 5, and as amended.



(Prior Code, § 12-3-6)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-3-7  FIRE LANES.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within or upon
a designated fire lane,  whether on public or private property.



   (B)   Any vehicle stopped, parked or standing within a fire lane may
be removed at the expense of the vehicle owner. Removal of a vehicle so in
violation may be authorized by a police officer, the Apache Junction Fire
District Chief or his or her representative or the lawful owner or manager of
the adjoining property.



   (C)   A fire lane is an area, parking lot, driveway, roadway or
portion thereof that shall be:



      (1)   Designated or approved by the Apache Junction Fire
District Chief;



      (2)   Marked with standard signs or other markings as approved
or designated by the Apache Junction Fire District Chief; and



      (3)   Maintained clear of obstructions its entire length and
width for fire equipment and access.



(Prior Code, § 12-3-7)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-3-8  DISABLED PERSON PARKING.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a parking
space set aside and identified for use by persons with physical disabilities
only unless the vehicle has a license plate which depicts an international
wheel-chair symbol issued by the Arizona Department of Motor Vehicles
pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-2409, as amended, or has a removable windshield
placard displayed on the front rearview mirror which depicts the
international wheelchair symbol as issued by the Arizona Department of Motor
Vehicles pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-2409, as amended.



   (B)   Division (A) above shall apply only to those parking spaces
that are identified with standard signs and/or markings as approved by the
City Engineer located on public or private property.



   (C)   Division (A) above shall apply whether such parking space is
on public or private property.



(Prior Code, § 12-3-8)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010; Am. Ord. 1380,
passed 4-3-2012)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-3-9  PARKING TRUCKS, TRAILERS AND SIMILAR VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL
AREAS.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
rating (“GVWR”) in excess of 10,000 pounds, or a tractor, semi-trailer,
trailer or bus on a local or collector street in a residential area,  with
the following exceptions:



   (A)   The active loading or unloading of such vehicles while in the
process of delivering goods or services to or within the residential area;



   (B)   The active loading or unloading of personal baggage within the
residential area for a period of time no greater than 1/2 hour;



   (C)   A temporary stop for a reasonable period of time no greater
than 1-1/2 hour by a vehicle owner who is stopping at his or her residence; or



   (D)   The occupants of the home have engaged a professional moving
company that is moving personal household items into or out of the home,
which activity does exceed 4 hours.



(Prior Code, § 12-3-9)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-3-10  UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the
ignition and removing the key or when standing upon any perceptible grade
without effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to
the curb side of the roadway.



   (B)   Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle
standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the police officer
is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle, secure the vehicle by
locking the doors and closing the windows, and to deliver the key to the
Apache Junction Police Department, along with an incident report setting
forth where the vehicle was located, the plate and VIN number and other
critical information.



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-3-11  AUTHORITY TO PLACE PARKING RESTRICTION SIGNAGE.



   The Public Works Department shall erect parking restriction signage
placing drivers on notice of the types of parking restrictions referred to in
this code.



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



ARTICLE 12-4:  VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ON PUBLIC STREETS



Section



   12-4-1   Weight restrictions within residential areas and other roads



   12-4-2   Weight restrictions on mile grid roadways, U.S. highways
and state routes



   12-4-3   Exemptions



   12-4-4   Weighing of vehicles



   12-4-5   Unlawful weight



   12-4-6   Damage to the street



   12-4-7   Overweight permits



   12-4-8   Penalties



   12-4-9   Designated truck routes



§ 12-4-1  WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS WITHIN RESIDENTIAL AREAS AND OTHER ROADS.



   It is unlawful for any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation to:



   (A)   Operate a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating
(“GVWR”) in excess of 10,000 pounds on the public streets in any
residential area and other roads within the corporate limits of the city,
except roads as indicated in Vol. I, § 12-4-2; or



   (B)   Use the vehicles on the public streets in any residential area
to access private property except for the purpose of parking within the
restrictions of Vol. I, § 12-3-9.



(Prior Code, § 12-4-1)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 12-4-8



§ 12-4-2  WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ON MILE GRID ROADWAYS, U.S. HIGHWAYS AND
STATE ROUTES.



   (A)   The total gross vehicle weight and total gross axle weight of
any motor vehicle truck or trailer, including the load thereon, driven only
on designated truck routes as shown in Vol. I, § 12-4-9, shall not exceed
the gross weight given for the respective distance between the first and last
axles of the group of axles measured longitudinally to the nearest foot as
set forth in the appropriate table at weights applicable  to highways under
the jurisdiction of the state by A.R.S. §§ 28-1099 and 28-1100 in effect on
the date this article becomes effective or as from time to time subsequently
amended.



   (B)   (1)   The state statutory tables and provisions are hereby
made a part of this article in their entirety as though fully set forth
herein.



      (2)   This article shall not apply to fire apparatus, urban
mass transit transportation vehicles, implements of husbandry, including farm
tractors temporarily moved upon a highway, or to vehicles operated under the
terms of a special permit as provided in this article.







 



Click here to view the above map in a PDF document.



(Prior Code, § 12-4-2)  (Ord. 869, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1356, passed
4-6-2010)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 12-4-8



§ 12-4-3  EXEMPTIONS.



   Vehicles involved in the pickup or delivery of goods or services, or
vehicles receiving services, vehicles owned by a public or private utility
while necessarily in use in the construction or repair of any public utility
or cable television, so long as they use the most direct route to accomplish
the purpose, emergency vehicles and school buses, pickups and recreational
vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of Vol. I, § 12-4-1 unless
otherwise specified.



(Prior Code, § 12-4-3)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-4-4  WEIGHING OF VEHICLES.



   Any police or peace officer employed in the State of Arizona, having
reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load does not conform to
the provisions of this code, is authorized to require the driver to stop and
submit to a weighing of the same by means of either portable or stationary
scales and may require that the vehicle be driven to the nearest public
scales in the event the scales are within 2 miles.



(Prior Code, § 12-4-4)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 12-4-8



§ 12-4-5  UNLAWFUL WEIGHT.



   (A)   When an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load as provided
in Vol. I, § 12-4-4, determines that the weight does not conform to the
provisions of this article, the officer may require the driver to stop the
vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the
load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the gross weight of the vehicle
to the limit as permitted under this article.



   (B)   All material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or
operator of the vehicle at the risk of the owner or operator.



(Prior Code, § 12-4-5)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)  Penalty, see
Vol. I, § 12-4-8



§ 12-4-6  DAMAGE TO THE STREET.



   (A)   Any person driving any vehicle, object or contrivance upon any
street, highway or highway structure shall be liable for all damage which the
street, highway or structure may sustain as a result of any illegal
operation, driving or moving of the vehicle, object or contrivance, or as a
result of operating, driving or moving any vehicle, object or contrivance
weighing in excess of the maximum weight in this article, even if authorized
by a special permit issued as provided in A.R.S. §§ 28-1103 or 28-1144.



   (B)   When the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, object or
contrivance, but is so operating, driving or moving the same with the express
or implied permission of the owner, then the owner and driver shall be
jointly and severally liable for any damage.



(Prior Code, § 12-4-6)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-4-7  OVERWEIGHT PERMITS.



   The Public Works Director or his or her designee, upon application in
writing and good cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing
authorizing the applicant to operate a vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in this article on any street under the jurisdiction of the city.
Appeals shall be directed to the City Manager within 5 calendar days and the
City Manager shall have 3 business days to decide the appeal, with such
decision being final and binding.



(Prior Code, § 12-4-7)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-4-8  PENALTIES.



   (A)   In addition to any other penalties provided herein, any person
convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a
fine set forth in the following table:



 


1,001 to 1,250 pounds in excess

 

$100



1,251 to 1,500 pounds in excess
 

$200



1,501 to 2,000 pounds in excess
 

$300



2,001 to 2,500 pounds in excess
 

$400




 

2,501 to 3,000 pounds in excess
 

$500



3,001 to 3,500 pounds in excess
 

$840



3,501 to 4,000 pounds in excess
 

$980



4,001 to 4,500 pounds in excess
 

$1,120



4,501 to 4,750 pounds in excess
 

$1,260



4,751 to 5,000 pounds in excess
 

$1,400



Over 5,001 pounds in excess
 

$1,400 plus an additional $100 for each 1,000 pounds of excess weight




 



   (B)   If any arresting officer finds that the person has violated
only the axle weight limitation and not the total weight limitation, the
officer shall request the driver to reload the vehicle to comply with the
axle weight limitations, and if the driver so complies, he or she shall not
be subject to arrest or fine. If the driver does not comply with the request
of the officer to reload, the driver shall be subject to arrest and fine as
provided by this section.



(Prior Code, § 12-4-8)  (Am. Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Progressive Class 2 and Class 3 misdemeanor penalty, see A.R.S. §
28-1101



§ 12-4-9  DESIGNED TRUCK ROUTES.



   Set forth below is the City of Apache Junction’s designated Truck
Route map referred to and included in Vol. I, § 12-4-2.



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



ARTICLE 12-5:  PARKING VIOLATIONS, LIABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT



Section



   12-5-1   Definitions



   12-5-2   Parking violations and persons liable



   12-5-3   Unarmed police aides



   12-5-4   Volunteer parking enforcement



   12-5-5   Parking notice insurance



   12-5-6   Response to parking notice



   12-5-7   Schedule of sanctions



§ 12-5-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL TRAFFIC VIOLATION.  Any violation of any city ordinance or
provision of this code which regulates the time, place or method of parking.
Parking violations are civil traffic violations of this code.



   PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.



   VEHICLE.  Either:



      (1)   A self-propelled vehicle; or



      (2)   For the purposes of the laws relating to the imposition
of a tax on motor vehicle fuel, a vehicle that is operated on the highways of
this state and that is propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel, including,
but not limited to, motor vehicles, trucks with semi-trailers (i.e. big
rigs), RVs, campers and golf carts but does not include a motorized
wheelchair, an electric personal assistive mobility device or a motorized
skateboard.



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-5-2  PARKING VIOLATIONS AND PERSONS LIABLE.



   (A)   Stopping, standing or parking at all times on any street is
prohibited if official signs are erected and in place giving notice thereof
that stopping, standing or parking is prohibited.



   (B)   It is unlawful for a vehicle to be parked in violation of any
city ordinance or provision of this code regulating the time, place or method
of parking. Violations of any city ordinance or provision of this code
regulating the time, place or method of parking which are continuous in
nature shall constitute a separate and distinct violation for each full hour
thereof.



   (C)   Whenever a vehicle is parked in violation of a city ordinance
or provision of this code regulating the time, place or method of parking,
the owner or owners of the vehicle, the registered owner or owners of the
vehicle and the person who parked or placed the vehicle where the violation
occurred shall be jointly and individually liable for the violation and for
the civil sanction prescribed herein.



   (D)   A vehicle parked contrary to or inconsistent with any city
ordinance or provision of this code  regulating the time, place or method of
parking which provides that “no person” may stop, stand or park a vehicle
at a designated location or contrary to any limitations, restrictions or
other provision regulating the time, place or method of parking, is deemed to
be parked in violation of the ordinance or provision of this code.



   (E)   Whenever a vehicle is parked upon the public right-of-way or
other property in violation of this code and the vehicle has previously been
the subject of 5 or more violations of the same parking provision of this
code within a 12 month period but the civil sanctions prescribed under the
Apache Junction City Code for those violations have not been satisfied, then
the vehicle shall be deemed to constitute a public nuisance and the owner of
the vehicle consents to immobilization, towing and impoundment of the
vehicle. A possessory lien is hereby created and attached to such vehicle for
the payment, in cash or its equivalent, of all current and accumulated
parking tickets and for reasonable costs associated with immobilization,
towing and impoundment.



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010) Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 12-5-3  UNARMED POLICE AIDES.



   As authorized by A.R.S. § 28-627(E), the Police Chief is authorized to
appoint, and when necessary remove, unarmed police aides who shall be
employed by the Police Department and shall be empowered to commence an
action or proceeding before a court or judge for any violation of the
ordinances of the city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. The
authority of unarmed police aides is strictly limited to the enforcement of
ordinances of the city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles, and in
no way shall be construed to grant other powers or benefits to which peace
officers of this state are entitled.



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-5-4  VOLUNTEER PARKING ENFORCEMENT.



   As authorized by A.R.S. § 28-886, the Police Chief may establish a
volunteer parking enforcement program for parking for persons with physical
disabilities. The Police Chief or his or her designated representative is
authorized to appoint volunteers to issue citations for violations of Vol. I,
§ 12-3-8, regulating parking in parking spaces for persons with physical
disabilities.



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-5-5  PARKING NOTICE INSURANCE.



   (A)   In an action involving unlawful parking, a copy of the notice
need not be personally served upon the owner or operator of the vehicle but
may be served by attaching a copy to the vehicle.



   (B)   The notice shall include the date, time and location of the
violation, the state license number of the vehicle unlawfully parked,
reference to the city code provision violated and notice that within 7
calendar days from the day on which the notice was issued the sanction for
the violation must be paid and received by the Apache Junction Municipal
Court or a request made and received by the Apache Junction Municipal Court
for a hearing to contest the alleged violation. The notice shall also list
the additional sanctions applied (from 8 to 30 days and after 30 days) in
which the citation remains unpaid.



   (C)   The notice, or copy thereof, shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the parking infraction.



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-5-6  RESPONSE TO PARKING NOTICE.



   Within 7 calendar days from the day on which the notice was issued, the
person or persons liable for the parking violation shall respond to the
notice by 1 of  the following methods:



   (A)   By appearing in person, by representation or by mail to the
Apache Junction Municipal Court within the 7 calendar day period, admitting
responsibility for the violation and paying the civil sanction prescribed for
the violation. The phrase “by representation” noted in this article and
in division (B) below means a person who is actively licensed in the State of
Arizona as an attorney in good standing with the Arizona State Bar and who
has agreed to advocate for the person or persons liable for the parking
violation;



   (B)   By contacting the Apache Junction Municipal Court in person,
by representation, by telephone, by mail within the 7 calendar day period and
requesting a hearing to contest the alleged violation. The hearing officer at
this hearing may accept the defendant’s explanation and dismiss the notice
of violation or shall inform the defendant that the civil sanction must be
paid or a request must be made for a civil traffic hearing to contest the
alleged violation; and/or



   (C)   A request for a hearing or payment of the civil sanction will
be considered received by the city if it is actually delivered to the Apache
Junction Municipal Court or postmarked within 7 calendar days after the date
the notice of violation was issued. A request for a hearing made by telephone
will be considered received the day it is made if it is received by an Apache
Junction Municipal Court employee between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. of any day, except on Saturday, Sunday or a city holiday.



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010)



§ 12-5-7  SCHEDULE OF SANCTIONS.



   (A)   The sanctions listed in the following schedule are the minimum
sanctions that may be imposed by the Apache Junction Municipal Court or other
court, should the case be transferred thereto, for violations of the articles
of the city code listed below, except that in cases involving violations of
Apache Junction City Code, Volume I, § 12-3-8, the court may, on the first
issuance of a citation, reduce the minimum sanction to $50 upon being shown
proof or otherwise reasonably believing that the violator had a removable
windshield placard but either forgot to place it or it fell out of sight of
the enforcing officer.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this code other
than those specified in the following schedule shall be liable for the
imposition of a civil sanction not to exceed $250.



 




City Ordinance

 

Description

 

Initial Sanction When Paid Within 7 Calendar Days

 

Sanction When Paid Within 8 - 30 Calendar Days

 

Sanction When Unpaid After 30 Calendar Days



12-3-1
 
Parking more than 18 inches from curb.
 

$30.00

 

$60.00

 

$120.00



12-3-2(A)
 
Blocking traffic.
 

$30.00

 

$60.00

 

$120.00



12-3-2(B)
 
Blocking a public or private driveway or entrance to an alley.
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00



12-3-2(C)
 
Parking where prohibited or restricted by official signs.
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00



12-3-3
 
Parking adjacent to schools where prohibited by signs.
 

$30.00

 

$60.00

 

$120.00



12-3-4
 
Parking contrary to posted angle, 1-way or prohibited/restricted parking
signs.
 

$30.00

 

$60.00

 

$120.00



12-3-5
 
Parking on a sidewalk, or in the area between the curb and the sidewalk.
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00



12-3-6(A)
 
Parking an abandoned vehicle on a street or other public property.
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00



12-3-7(A)
 
Stopping, standing or parking in a fire lane.
 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$300.00



12-3-8
 
Parking in places reserved for the physically disabled.
 

$300.00

 

$400.00

 

$500.00



12-3-9
 
Parking over-sized vehicles in residential areas.
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00



12-3-10
 
Parking an unattended vehicle on a roadway.
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00





 



(Ord. 1356, passed 4-6-2010; Am. Ord. 1380, passed 4-3-2012)



CHAPTER 13: PUBLIC WORKS



      Article




         13-1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         13-2.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         13-3.   ENCROACHMENT PERMITS





         13-4.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES LOCATED IN PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY




ARTICLE 13-1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS




[RESERVED]




ARTICLE 13-2:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   13-2-1   Reserved



   13-2-2   Definitions



   13-2-3   Street improvements



   13-2-4   Roadway abandonments and right-of-way easement



   13-2-5   Assignment of street names and parcel addresses



   13-2-6   Improvement of streets prior to development of adjacent
property



   13-2-7   Street financing policy for improvement districts



§ 13-2-1  RESERVED.



   This section has been reserved for future legislation.



(Ord. 1424, passed 6-19-2016)



§ 13-2-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDON, ABANDONING, ABANDONMENT.  Any one of the methods as set forth
in this article whereby the Council may dispose of streets or portions of
streets no longer necessary for public use as streets.



   ABUTTING.  Two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common
boundary line.



   CITY.  City of Apache Junction, a municipal corporation.



   COST.  The actual cost of:



      (1)   Right-of-way acquisition;



      (2)   Construction of the public street improvements as
determined by the construction contract price or by actual costs if work was
not performed under contract;



      (3)   Inspection, testing and permit fees;



      (4)   Engineering fees required for the preparation of plans
and specifications; or



      (5)   Other incidental fees required to complete the
improvements.



   COUNCIL.  The Council of the City of Apache Junction.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Construction of residential, commercial or industrial
projects or major additions or alterations to existing structures and
includes new buildings or structures on property having existing buildings or
structures situated thereon. When such property is zoned for agricultural or
single-family residential use at the time of assessment, subsequent
DEVELOPMENT shall require a change of use or purpose (construction of
buildings or structures on vacant, undeveloped property is considered a
change of use of purpose).



   EASEMENT.  An interest in a defined area of land granted to or owned
by another that entitles its holder to specific limited uses or purposes,
such as, but not limited to, ingress and egress.



   EXTINGUISHMENT.  The term in which the roadway portion of a federally
patented easement, or a private easement, is relinquished to the owner of the
underlying property resulting in elimination of the public’s right to use
in perpetuity.



   GRANTEE.  Recipient of the interest conveyed by the grantor.



   OWNER.  The person who has the right to possess and use real property
to the exclusion of others.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, company, firm,
association and any other form of organization who may carry on business,
foreign or domestic, or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of
the aforesaid.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  The individual, corporation, partnership, trust or
other legal entity that owns property.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY,  Land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement,
dedication or process of law is reserved for or dedicated to the general
public for street, highway, alley, public utility, pedestrian walkway,
bikeway, drainage or other purposes.



   ROADWAY.  All or part of any platted or designed public street,
highway, alley, lane, parkway, avenue, road, sidewalk, public utility
easement or other public way, whether or not it has been used as such.



   STREETS.  The full width of the right-of-way, easements or federally
patented easements and any road, street, highway, alley, land or pedestrian
walkway used by or for the general public, whether or not the road, street,
highway, alley, land or pedestrian right-of-way has been improved or accepted
for maintenance by the city.



(Ord. 1424, passed 6-19-2016)



§ 13-2-3  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The “street classification plan” is hereby adopted and
amended in a manner and form affixed hereto and made a part of this article
by reference. A copy of the most recent version of, the plan shall be kept on
file in the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   It shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a
building permit for new construction within the city that the required street
improvements be made as set forth in the A.J.C.C., Vol. II, Article 10-3,
Street Design and Construction. This provision, however, shall not be
applicable to the construction or installation of individual, single family
construction on individual lots which are in existence at the time of passage
of this division and subsection (C) below, or which are subsequently created
without the necessity of an applicant to comply with city and state
subdivision requirements.



   (C)   (1)   The public works director may postpone the
installation of required off-site improvements provided the applicant enters
into an agreement to install improvements by a specific date and/or in
conjunction with projects being constructed by the city, state, county or
other developers in the vicinity.



      (2)   In granting the postponement, the public works director
may require other interim improvements as deemed necessary for public safety,
drainage, or maintenance.



      (3)   Factors which the public works director shall consider
in determining whether or not improvements shall be postponed include:



         (a)   Inability to establish grade or center at the time
of application;



         (b)   The subject improvement would be less than ½
block or 150 feet in length; and



         (c)   Other pending improvements as a street improvement
district or major utility work which would make the subject improvement
impractical at the time of application for building permit.



      (4)   Should the Public Works Director deny a request for
postponement of off-site improvements, the applicant may appeal the denial as
follows:



         (a)   Applicant shall file an appeal to the city manager.



         (b)   City Manager’s office shall schedule an
appellate hearing within 15 days.



         (c)   City Manager’s office shall provide, a written,
final decision within five days after the , appellate hearing.



         (d)   Applicant may appeal the final decision within 10
days to a civil hearing officer.



         (e)   The civil hearing officer’s decision shall be
final and binding subject to a further appeal with the superior court under
Title 12 (A.R.S. § 12-901 et seq.).



   (D)   All street improvements shall be constructed in accordance
with the current edition of the Maricopa Association of Governments standard
details and specifications, which standard details and specifications shall
be the standards of design and construction for the city, provided however,
that the public works director may revise, delete or add standard details and
specifications by supplement and addendum as may be required and acceptable
under the metro Phoenix development industry.



(Ord. 1424, passed 6-19-2016)



§ 13-2-4  ROADWAY ABANDONMENTS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY EASEMENT.



   (A)   Disposition of unnecessary public roadway. Upon recommendation
from the public works director, the Council may dispose of unnecessary public
roadway either by trade, sale, vacation, exchange, abandonment or
extinguishment in accordance with state law;



   (B)   Allocation of vacated roadway. The following shall be the
order and method for determining allocation of vacated property.



      (1)   In the event that the width of a roadway is to be
vacated, the order of obtaining the right to title shall be:



         (a)   First, the owner of the land abutting the vacated
roadway to the same extent that the land included within the roadway, at the
time the roadway was acquired for public use, was a part of the subdivided
land or was part of the adjacent land;



         (b)   Second, owners on the opposite side of the roadway
from the owner in subsection (l)(a) above, for any or all the portion not
desired by the subsection (l)(a) owner; and



         (c)   Third, the person making to the council the best
offer, provided that the offer meets at least the minimum requirements as
established by the council.



      (2)   In the event that less than the entire width is vacated,
title to the vacated portion shall vest in the owners of the land where and
to the degree the land is abutting the vacated portion.



      (3)   In the event that a roadway bounded by straight lines is
vacated, title to the vacated roadway shall vest in the owners of the
abutting land, each abutting owner taking to the center of the roadway,
except as provided in subsection (B)(1) and (2) above. In the event that the
boundary lines of abutting lands do not intersect the roadways at a right
angle, the land included within the roadway shall vest as provided in
subsection (B)(4) below,



      (4)   In all instances not specifically provided for, title to
the vacated roadway shall vest in the owners of the abutting land, each
abutting owner taking that portion of the vacated roadway to which his land,
or any part thereof, is nearest in proximity.



   (C)   Access to public road. No roadway shall be vacated so as to
leave any land adjoining the roadway without an established public road
connecting the lands with another public roadway.



   (D)   Reservation of easements. Right-of-way easements for any one
or all of existing sewer, gas, water or similar pipelines and appurtenances
and for canals, laterals or ditches and appurtenances and for electric,
telephone and similar lines and appurtenances shall continue as they existed
prior to the disposal or abandonment of the public roadway.



   (E)   Resolution of disposition; effective when recorded.



      (1)   A council resolution disposing of a roadway or portion
thereof or applying such roadway to another public use shall describe the
roadway and set forth its disposition or use.



      (2)   The resolution shall take effect when it is recorded in
the office of the county recorder of the county within Which the roadway or
portion thereof is located.



   (F)   Extinguishment of easements. If the city owns no title to a
roadway but holds right-of-way easements, only the easements may be
extinguished by resolution of the council.



   (G)   Abandonment of roadways or right-of-way easements; application
and filing; generally. Any person desiring to have any roadway abandoned or
right-of-way easement extinguished, shall make application for the same on
forms approved by and filed with the department of public works. In addition
to the application and associated fees, the applicant shall submit a
complete, current title report showing the nature of the easement or
right-of-way interest or other ownership interest, including but not limited
to any and all existing liens, mortgages or other encumbrances. If deemed
essential by the city engineer, an appraisal to determine the value of the
targeted property, or the estimated value of the property proposed for
exchange, shall be obtained by the city engineer at the applicant’s sole
expense.



   (H)   Roadway abandonment and right-of-way easement extinguishments;
application and filing processing fee. A non-refundable application fee, as
established in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Chapter 4, Fees, must be submitted with any
application for abandonment of roadways or right-of-way easement
extinguishments. A nonrefundable application fee will be assessed to the
benefiting property owner to provide for city administrative costs except
that the fee shall be lower where the benefiting property consists solely of
developed residential property. However, no fee shall be charged when the
application for abandonment is initiated by the city.



   (I)   Abandonment of roadways and extinguishment of right-of-way
easements; required reports,



      (1)   Upon application for abandonment of roadways or
right-of-way easements to the public works director, the Director shall
submit copies of the application, and all appropriate attachments thereto, to
the director of development services, the director of public safety and the
city engineer.



      (2)   The public works director shall also submit copies of
the application and all attachments to all public utility providers, who
shall have up to 60 calendar days to comment on the roadway abandonment or
right-of-way extinguishment.



      (3)   No abandonment or extinguishment may be finalized by
council unless recommendations from all utility providers have been solicited
and such providers either had no objection or otherwise failed to respond
after at least two documented attempts to contact were ignored.



(Ord. 1424, passed 6-19-2016)



§ 13-2-5  ASSIGNMENTS OF STREET NAMES AND PARCEL ADDRESSES.



   (A)   The streets and alignments of streets appearing on the map
entitled “official street naming map of Apache Junction, Arizona,”
incorporated herein, shall be the official street names for streets within
the City Of Apache Junction, either as existing on February 4, 1981 or upon
becoming public streets of Apache Junction.



   (B)   When there is a change in part or all of a street name,
property owners shall be given 12 months from the effective date of the
change to correct their mailing address.



   (C)   (1)   Future requests for street names shall be initially
reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Apache
Junction, Arizona, and the Apache Junction, Arizona; United States Post
Office, who shall submit their recommendations to the council for action.



      (2)   No future streets shall be named except by ordinance of
the council.



   (D)   The zoning administrator shall maintain an address map, and
assign addresses to various parcels of land within the city according to
rules and regulations of the department of public works, as may from time to
time be amended.



(Ord. 1424, passed 6-19-2016)



§ 13-2-6  IMPROVEMENT OF STREETS PRIOR TO DEVELOPMENT OF ADJACENT PROPERTY.



   (A)   Street improvements; assessment policy.



      (1)   The council may determine that certain streets within
the city shall be constructed or improved prior to development of the
property adjacent to the streets in accordance with state law or as hereafter
provided by this article,



      (2)   If deemed necessary, the council may order the streets
constructed or improved at city expense. The expense shall be assessed
against the adjoining property subject to the following:



         (a)   The assessment of adjoining property for streets
shall not exceed the cost of improving more than ½ of the street width;



         (b)   Any parcel of land, which at the time of
assessment is used for single-family residential use, shall not be assessed
greater than ½ the costs of a residential street; and



         (c)   The assessment of property for all related work
shall not exceed the actual costs incurred by the city prior to and at the
time of construction.



   (B)   Street improvements; assessment procedure.



      (1)   The council, at a public hearing, shall determine the
necessity of street improvements if the cost thereof is to be assessed
against adjacent property. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the
property owners who would be assessed for the costs of the improvements by
regular mail no less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of
hearing shall contain:



         (a)   A description of the proposed street improvements;



         (b)   The estimated cost for each affected parcel of
property; and



         (c)   The date, time and place that the council shall
consider the necessity of improvements and adoption of a resolution of
intention. Notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general,
circulation, published or circulated in the city and, in addition, shall
conspicuously be posted along the line of the proposed improvements at least
10 days prior to the hearing.



      (2)   The property owners and any other persons directly
interested in the work or in the assessment may, prior to the time fixed for
the hearing, file in the office of the city clerk a written objection briefly
specifying the grounds for objection.



      (3)   At the public hearing, the governing body shall hear and
pass upon any objections to the proposed improvements and its decision shall
be final and conclusive. It may modify the extent of the proposed
improvements and proceed without the necessity for republishing, reposting
and remailing new notices.



      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the council may pass
its resolution of intention directing that plans, specifications and
estimates of the cost and expenses of the proposed improvements be prepared.



      (5)   Upon completion of construction and finalization of the
project, the council shall by resolution at a public hearing determine the
final cost of the improvements and assess against the properties adjacent to
the street improvement the total amount of the costs and expenses for the
work. Notice of this public hearing shall be given to the property owners who
would be assessed for the costs of improvements, by regular mail at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing. This notice shall contain:



         (a)   A description of the street improvements; and



         (b)   The amount of the proposed assessment for each
affected parcel of property.



      (6)   The property owners and any other persons directly
interested in the work or in the assessment who have any objection to the
legality of the assessment or to any of the previous proceedings connected
therewith, or who claim that the work has not been performed according to the
contract, may, prior to the time fixed for the hearing, file in the office of
the city clerk a written notice briefly specifying the grounds for objection.
At the time fixed for the hearing or at any time thereafter to which the
hearing may be postponed, the council shall hear and rule upon the
objections. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive as to
all errors, informalities and irregularities which the council might have
remedied or avoided at any time during the progress of the proceedings.



      (7)   The council’s resolution shall provide that any
assessments remaining unpaid shall be paid prior to or at the time of
rezoning or development of the assessed property.



      (8)   The resolution declaring the assessment and describing
the properties against which the assessments are imposed shall be recorded in
the office of the Pinal County Recorder. When so recorded the amount so
assessed shall be a lien upon the properties until the assessments are paid.



      (9)   When it is necessary to improve a full-street and
sufficient right-of-way is not available, the city may obtain necessary
right-of-way. by rezoning, building permit, street abandonment, donation,
acquisition or condemnation. Any costs incurred by the city to obtain
right-of-way shall be assessed to that respective parcel.



   (C)   Manner of collecting unpaid assessments at time of rezoning or
development. At the time of rezoning or development of the property, the
applicant shall pay the assessment as previously determined by the city prior
to the city’s processing of a rezoning application or issuance of a
building permit. Should the rezoning application or building permit not be
approved or issued, the payment shall be returned to the applicant whereupon
the process may be repeated until the property is rezoned or developed and
the assessment paid.



(Ord. 1424, passed 6-19-2016)



§ 13-2-7  STREET FINANCING POLICY FOR IMPROVEMENTS DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Improvements in general.



      (1)   The cost of all street and related improvements
including but not limited to paving, storm drains, utility installations,
landscaping, signalization and lighting located in or adjacent to new
projects or areas to be developed or redeveloped, shall be the full
responsibility of the owner of such an area to be developed or redeveloped.
Construction of such improvements shall meet applicable standards of the city.



      (2)   If approved by the city, the improvements may be
constructed as part of an improvement district in accordance with subsection
(B) below.



   (B)   Improvement districts. If the improvements required by
subsection (A) above are constructed as part of an improvement district, the
provisions of this section shall apply.



      (1)   Except as provided in subsections (B)(2), (3) and (4)
below, property in an improvement district shall be assessed for all the
street and related improvements constructed pursuant to the improvement
district and shall be assessed in accordance with the method of assessment
adopted by the council for the cost of the improvements.



      (2)   Except in an improvement district created primarily to
benefit existing single-family residential uses, an existing single-family
residential use may receive a credit for the street and related improvements
equal to its assessment as determined by the assessment method for the
improvement district. If the existing single-family residential use changes
to use other than single-family residential use, then upon rezoning or upon
development (defined as issuance of a. building permit for a use other than a
single-family residential Use on the property) the credit shall be
extinguished and any amount credited for the construction of the improvements
by the improvement district shall be paid to the city. No zoning change shall
be approved nor building permit be issued for the property related to a
change of use from a single-family residential use until the amount of the
credit is paid.



      (3)   A single-family residential use existing at the time of
the adoption of a resolution of intention to create the improvement district
maybe included in the improvement district. If included in the district and
if the district is not created primarily to benefit existing single-family
residential uses, the owner of the property shall either:



         (a)   Pay the assessments associated with that property;
or



         (b)   Enter into an agreement with the city which
provides the terms and conditions under which the city will pay the cost
(assessments) of the improvements and property owner repays those costs
(assessments) upon a zoning change, development of the property (defined as
issuance of a building permit for a use other than a single-family
residential use), or sale of any of the property.



      (4)   The assessments for street and related improvements in a
subdivision may be paid by the subdivider of the subdivision rather than the
purchaser of the lots from the subdivider if the subdivider enters into a
contract with the city for the payment of the assessments. The contract shall
be recorded in the office of the Pinal County recorder.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



ARTICLE 13-3:  ENCROACHMENT PERMITS



Section



   13-3-1   Permits



   13-3-2   Inspections



   13-3-3   Fee schedule



   13-3-4   Unauthorized work



   13-3-5   Control of work



   13-3-6   Emergency repair



   13-3-7   Construction standards



   13-3-8   Assurance of construction



   13-3-9   Liability and property insurance



   13-3-10   Exemptions



   13-3-11   Suspension and revocation



   13-3-12   Notice of hearing and appeal



   13-3-13   Penalties



§ 13-3-1  PERMITS.



   (A)   All applications for permits shall be in writing on a form as
provided by the city. Applications shall be submitted at least 3 working days
prior to start of construction and shall, unless waived by the public works
director, hereinafter throughout this article referred to as “public works
director” collectively, be accompanied by three copies of a drawing, map,
diagram or similar exhibit of a size and sufficient to clearly illustrate the
location, dimension, motive, method and purpose of the proposed work.
Applicants for the permits may be either an owner or contractor; however, the
work may be performed only by:



      (1)   A contractor;



      (2)   Utility company;



      (3)   Governmental agency; or



      (4)   Resident owner of residential property where the
property owner proposes to do the work. If the improvement to be constructed
under the permit is not to become the property of the city and if the
applicant is someone other than the owner, the owner shall also sign the
permit form indicating agreement to the conditions of the permit.



   (B)   Permits shall be issued only to the person, corporation,
political subdivision or other entity making application, and therefore may
not be assigned to another person, corporation, political subdivision or
entity by the permittee. If the permittee assigns the permit to another, the
permit shall become void.



   (C)   If the public works director finds the following, he or she
may issue a permit:



      (1)   That a proposed encroachment will hot be detrimental to
the health, safety or welfare of the community or the surrounding property;
and



      (2)   The proposed encroachment will not be detrimental to the
condition of any public road, street, alley, federally patented easement or
right-of-way of any public street, alley or way not a state highway located
within the municipality; and



      (3)   When completed, the proposed encroachment will not
interfere with access to any public place.



      (4)   If the proposed encroachment does not meet each of the
requirements of the preceding sentences, the director may impose such special
conditions to the permit. Any decision of the public works director hereunder
may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of A.J.C.C., Vol. I, §
13-3-12(B). In the event of any appeal, no permit will be issued while the
appeal is pending.



   (D)   Conditions to a permit shall include those contained in the
current edition of the Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard
Details for Public Works Construction, and as hereafter may be amended,
and/or the current edition of the Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform
Specifications for Public Works Construction, and as hereafter may be
amended, and/or the City of Apache Junction Engineering Standards, as
amended, as the public works director may deem applicable to the proposed
encroachment. Additional requirements may be added to a permit in accordance
with the provisions of subsection (C) above. Work pursuant to a permit must
be completed within the time indicated on the permit, which shall not exceed
12 months. If work is not completed within the allotted time, the permit
shall be canceled by the city. If a permit is canceled and the applicant or
contractor desires to complete the work, a new permit must be obtained for
such remaining work.



   (E)   New pavement construction, pavement overlay or pavement
reconstruction on newly paved streets may not be cut for 3 years after their
initial completion, subject to the exceptions set forth below. Underground
utility work will be permitted during the three year period but an
underground bore must first be performed. If boring is not an option and
connections cannot be made at an alternate location, then open cuts of newly
paved streets may be permitted upon approval of the public works director. If
the public works director approves in writing excavation on newly paved
arterial, section line and mid-section line streets, the following criteria
must be fully met:



      (1)   A 1-sack slurry backfill will be required for all
trenches unless otherwise approved in writing by the public works director;



      (2)   The base asphalt shall be T-Top according to the Apache
Junction Standard Detail 200M-AJ extending 12 inches beyond the undisturbed
trench walls;



      (3)   The entire roadway width (lip of gutter to lip of
gutter) shall be chip sealed per MAG Section 330 for a minimum width of 10
feet on both sides of the trench centerline for which trenches extend beyond
the road centerline. The roadway shall be chip sealed per MAG Section 330 for
a minimum width of 10 feet on both sides of the trench centerline, from the
lip of the gutter to the roadway centerline for trenches which do not cross
the roadway centerline. Slurry seal, per MAG Section 332, may be substituted
for chip seal only with written permission of the public works director;



      (4)   All trench backfill and overlay will be inspected by the
public works department - engineering division, and any work not conforming
to MAG Standards will be ordered removed and replaced by the contractor at
the contractor’s expense;



      (5)   The period from the date trenching begins to the date
the roadway overlaying is completed shall not exceed 2 weeks unless approved
in writing by the public works director; and



      (6)   These above conditions are in addition to the procedures
and requirements of the current encroachment permit process.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-2  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All work being performed must be performed in accordance with
the ordinances and codes of the city, the Maricopa Association of Governments
Uniform Standard Details for Public Works Construction, the Maricopa
Association of Governments Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction, the Engineering standards of the City of Apache Junction,
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the approved construction
drawings as submitted. If building codes require building permits for the
work being performed, applicants must conform with those particular
provisions of the ordinances of the city.



   (B)   The public works director may provide applicants with
inspection services to determine if the improvements constructed are
substantially in accordance with the approved plan, special condition and
permit granted. Any person or corporation, association or political
subdivision doing work under any permit as set forth in this article shall
notify the public works department at least 2 full working days in advance of
the time and place needing an inspection.



   (C)   Any and all inspections by the city shall be at such locations
and in such frequency, manner and method as may be determined by the public
works director.



   (D)   Neither the issuance of an encroachment permit, nor the
completion of an inspection, nor permission from the public works department
for the conduct of construction work shall constitute a representation,
warranty or guarantee, express or implied, that either the encroachment or
construction being performed complies with the applicable laws and ordinances
or is free from defects or will perform or last in any particular way.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-3  FEE SCHEDULE.



   Applicant shall, before any permit is issued, provide the city with a
fee to offset expenses incurred in connection with processing and inspecting
work. See A.J.C.C., Vol. I, Chapter 4, Fees.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-4  UNAUTHORIZED WORK.



   (A)   Any work undertaken prior to securing a permit may be required
to be restored to its original condition prior to granting a permit, or the
city may charge a fee not to exceed $2,000 in addition to the normal fee for
inspection and examination of the work done, prior to issuance of a permit.



   (B)   The public works department may issue a stop work order for
work undertaken without a permit. All stop work orders shall require that
work cease until the public works department determines whether the
construction should be restored to its original condition or grants a permit
in accordance with this article.



   (C)   It shall be an unlawful act for any work to be undertaken,
except for emergency repair as provided herein, without first securing a
permit. Each day unauthorized construction work has not been restored to its
original condition or exists prior to issuance of a permit shall be a
separate offense and punishable pursuant to A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-5  CONTROL OF WORK.



   The authority of the public works director with regard to work being
performed hereunder shall be that as contained in the current edition of the
Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Specifications for Public Works
Construction, or as hereafter amended. The public works director is hereby
authorized to suspend work and issue stop work orders in accordance with the
provisions of the specifications. It shall be an unlawful act for anyone to
conduct work in contravention of an issued stop work order. Each day work has
not been restored to its original condition prior to issuance of the stop
work order or exists in contravention of a stop work order shall be a
separate offense and punishable pursuant to A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-6  EMERGENCY REPAIR.



   This article shall not prevent any person, corporation, political
subdivision or entity who has legal authority to occupy the easements,
streets, alleys or rights-of-way of the public roads, streets, alleys or
rights-of-way of the city from maintaining any pipe or utility lawfully on or
under any public street, or from making excavation or performing any work as
may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when an urgent
necessity arises during the hours the city offices are closed, except that
those making emergency use shall apply for a permit within 1 calendar day
after the city offices are again open.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-7  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   All work performed in the public road, streets, alleys or ways shall be
done in accordance with the ordinances and codes of the city, the current
edition of the Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction and as hereafter may be amended,
the current edition of the Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform
Standard Details for Public Works Construction and as hereafter may be
amended, the City of Apache Junction Engineering standards, as amended, the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the Arizona
Department of Transportation, and any approved permit, plan, specifications
and special provisions of the city for such installation. The public works
director may require additional work, materials, equipment and devices to
properly control traffic, provide access to adjoining property and maintain
other facilities in the area during the time work is being performed.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-8  ASSURANCE OF CONSTRUCTION.



   Prior to issuing a permit, each applicant shall submit to the city an
assurance of construction as outlined in the current edition of the city’s
engineering standards. In the event the public works director determines that
special circumstances apply, and additional financial assurances to the city
are required or that financial assurances may be otherwise modified or waived
prior to issuance of a permit, the public works director shall provide to the
applicant notice of the requirements regarding financial assurances together
with the reasons and grounds regarding the requirement of additional
financial assurances, modification from the engineering standards or waiver;
Any applicant who disagrees with a decision of the public works director may
appeal the decision in accordance with the provisions of A.J.C.C., Vol. I, §
13-3-12(B). In the event of an appeal, no permit may be issued while the
appeal is pending. In instances where an applicant is issued numerous small
permits throughout the year, the applicant may post a continuing use bond to
cover work under more than 1 permit. However, this continuing bond provision
is not intended for use to construct residential and commercial projects. The
continuing bond shall be of value sufficient to cover all work under
construction by the permittee at any time and shall be satisfactory to the
city.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-9  LIABILITY AND PROPERTY INSURANCE.



   (A)   No applicant shall be entitled to a permit under this Article
unless and until the applicant shall have filed and maintained on file with
the city a certificate of insurance certifying that the applicant carries
public liability and property damage insurance issued by an insurance carrier
authorized to do business in the State of Arizona, at applicant’s own cost
and expense, insuring the applicant and the city and its agents against
claims and liability for personal injury, death and property damage arising,
from the construction, operation or maintenance by .applicant of its
facilities, in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence,
$2,000,000 aggregate. The city, its officers, agents and employees shall,
also be named as additional insured parties. It is the intent of the parties
that applicant’s insurance shall be primary and without right of
subrogation with respect to any claim or liability caused by applicant’s
negligence or other misconduct.



   (B)   Failure by the applicant to provide the city with such a
certificate and failure by the city to demand the filing by applicant of such
a certificate before such a permit is issued, shall not be deemed to waive
applicant’s obligation to provide the insurance specified herein. The
insurance certificates shall remain in effect and be kept on file with the
city so long as applicant maintains, operates or owns facilities within
rights-of-way of the city. The insurance certificate shall provide that
coverage cannot be canceled or expire without providing 30 days written
notice to the city of such action and noting the permit number on the written
notice. No evidence of liability insurance or surety bond shall be required
as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit to a resident on
residential property where the resident proposes to perform construction in
front of resident’s own property, or a federal, state, county or municipal
agency or political subdivision. The city shall in no way be liable to or
responsible for any accidents or damage which may occur in the construction,
operation by applicant of its appurtenances hereunder, and the acceptance of
a permit shall be deemed an agreement on the part of applicant to indemnify
the city and hold it harmless from and against any and all liability, loss,
costs, legal fees, damage or other expense which may accrue to city by reason
of the negligence, default or misconduct of applicant and the construction,
operation and maintenance of its lines, facilities or the appurtenances
hereunder, including maintenance of barricades and traffic control devices in
construction and maintenance areas. Applicant agrees to pay on behalf of city
any claims, settlement or judgments, including legal fees, made or entered
against city as a result of injury or damage to any person or property
occasioned by the exercise of any permit issued to applicant.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-10  EXEMPTIONS.



   A no-cost permit may be issued to federal, state or county agencies, a
political subdivision, or for a cable television system or a public utility
which holds a license or franchise from the city, or to contractors under
contract with the city for projects owned and maintained by the city.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-11  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The public works director shall be authorized to stop work or
refuse to renew any permit of any applicant or contractor who is in violation
of any provision of this article or any condition or requirement of an issued
permit. Any stop work or refusal to renew shall continue until such violation
has been fully corrected. All work is to cease during a period of suspension
or nonrenewal.



   (B)   Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be
revoked by the public works director after notice and hearing, for any of the
following causes:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
the application for permit;



      (2)   Any violation of this article;



      (3)   Any violation of any of the terms and conditions of the
permit as issued;



      (4)   Conducting a business in violation of the provisions of
the ordinances of the city or in violation of the Arizona Revised Statutes
Annotated; or



      (5)   A determination by the public works director that the
encroachment interferes with a need by the municipality for use of the
street, alley or way for another public purpose.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-12  NOTICE OF HEARING AND APPEAL.



   (A)   Notice of any decision of the public works director from which
an appeal is provided or for revocation of permit shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the decision and, in the case of
revocation, the time and place of hearing. The notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, certified mail to the applicant, contractor or permittee at
the address shown on the application for permit. In the case of revocation,
the notice shall be mailed at least 10 calendar days prior to the date set
for hearing.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the public works
director pursuant to A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 13-3-1(C), (D), and A.J.C.C., Vol.
I, § 13-3-8, or a decision with reference to the revocation of a license
shall have the right of appeal to the City Manager. The appeal shall be taken
by filing with the City Clerk, within 14 calendar days after notice of the
action complained of has been mailed to such person’s address as shown on
the application for permit, a written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for the appeal. The City Manager shall set a time and place for a
hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the
appellant in the same manner as provided for notice of hearing on revocation.
The decision and order of the City Manager shall be final and conclusive,
except any person aggrieved may pursue any proper judicial proceedings.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



§ 13-3-13  PENALTIES.



   Any person violating or failing or refusing to do or perform any act
required or provided for any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty and
multiple charging provisions set forth in A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Ord. 1424, passed 5-19-2016)



ARTICLE 13-4:  SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES LOCATED IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   13-4-1   Purpose



   13-4-2   Penalty



   Appendix A   Design standards, concepts and requirements for small
wireless facilities in the rights-of-way



   Appendix B   Wireless facilities standard terms and conditions



§ 13-4-1  PURPOSE.



   This article provides design standards, concepts and requirements, as
well as standard terms and conditions necessary for the preservation of the
public rights-of-way (“ROW”) in the city for the maximum benefit and use
for the public and applies to the siting, construction or modification of any
and all small wireless facilities (“SWF”) proposed to be located in the
ROW.



   (A)   Application authority. Any application for a SWF to be located
in the ROW is subject to approval by the city engineer in addition to other
requirements and processes specified in this chapter to include the design
standards, concepts and requirements set forth under Appendix A, and standard
terms and conditions set forth in Appendix B. Location or collocation of
wireless equipment on city-owned poles shall be at the discretion of the city
engineer as per state law.



   (B)   Eligible applicants. Only applicants who have been granted the
right to enter the ROW pursuant to state or federal law shall be eligible to
apply to install or modify a SWF or a collocation of such a facility in the
ROW. A valid ROW license shall also be required prior to construction.



   (C)   Speculative equipment prohibited. The city finds that the
practice of “preapprovtng” wireless equipment or other improvements that
the applicant does not presently intend to install but may wish to install at
some undetermined future time does not serve the public’s best interest.
The city shall not approve any equipment or other improvements in connection
with a SWF application when the applicant does not actually and presently
intend to install such equipment or construct such improvements.



   (D)   Fiber/cable. No applicant seeking to install SWF antennas
shall seek a ROW use permit for fiber or coaxial cable only. Applicants shall
simultaneously apply for fiber installation or other cable installation when
seeking to install antennas in the ROW.



   (E)   Application. Applications for a SWF in the ROW shall include,
in addition to other application requirements as stated in this article under
Appendices A and B, the following:



      (1)   Detailed engineering plans of the proposed facility and
related report prepared by an Arizona registered engineer documenting the
following:



         (a)   Technical engineering specifications.



         (b)   Evidence that demonstrates that the proposed
facility has been designed to be the least visible equipment within the
particular technology the carrier chooses to deploy.



         (c)   A photograph and model name and number of each
piece of equipment to be used.



         (d)   Power output and operating frequency for the
proposed antenna.



         (e)   Total anticipated capacity of the structure,
indicating the number and types of antennas and power and frequency ranges
which can be accommodated.



         (f)   Sufficient evidence of the structural integrity of
the pole or other supporting structure as required by the city.



         (g)   Electrical and mechanical engineering documents
for the facility and all appurtenant equipment, including support equipment
such as equipment cabinets and backup power.



      (2)   A statement providing the basis for the applicant’s
claimed right to enter the ROW. If the applicant has a certificate of
convenience and necessity (“CCN”) issued by the Arizona Corporation
Commission, it shall provide a copy of its CCN to public works department
staff.



   (F)   Additional design and performance standards.



      (1)   The applicant shall employ screening, undergrounding and
camouflage design techniques in the design and placement of SWF in order to
ensure that the facility is as visually screened as possible, to prevent the
facility from dominating the surrounding area and to minimize significant
view impacts from surrounding properties all in a manner that achieves
compatibility with the community.



      (2)   Screening shall be designed to be architecturally
compatible with surrounding structures using appropriate techniques to
camouflage, disguise, and/or blend into the environment, including
landscaping, color, and other techniques to minimize the facility’s visual
impact.



      (3)   Facilities shall be located such that views from an
adjacent residential structure are not significantly impaired.



      (4)   All facilities shall be designed and located in such a
manner as to avoid adverse impacts on traffic safety, including, but not
limited to, being located outside of sight visibility triangles and clear
zones.



      (5)   All facilities shall be of subdued colors and
non-reflective materials that blend with the materials and colors of the
surrounding area and structures.



      (6)   The applicant shall use the least visible equipment
possible. Antenna elements shall be flush-mounted, to the extent feasible.
All antenna mounts shall be designed so as not to preclude possible future
collocation by the same or other operators or carriers. Unless otherwise
provided in this section, antennas shall be situated as close to the ground
as possible.



      (7)   Poles.



         (a)   Only pole-mounted antennas shall be permitted in
the ROW. All other telecommunications towers are prohibited, and no new poles
are permitted that are not replacing existing poles, unless:



            1.   Such new poles shall be designed to resemble
existing poles in the ROW near that location, including size, height, color,
materials, and style, with the exception of any existing pole designs that
are scheduled to be removed and not replaced.



            2.   Such new poles that are not replacement poles
shall be located at least 90 feet from any existing pole to the extent
feasible.



            3.   A new pole analysis shall be submitted to
demonstrate that the new pole is designed to be the minimum functional height
and width required to support the proposed facility.



            4.   All cables, including, but not limited to,
electrical and utility cables, shall be run within the interior of the pole
and shall be camouflaged or hidden to the fullest extent possible.



            5.   No new wooden poles shall be permitted. For
collocations on existing wooden poles wherein interior installation is
infeasible, antennas, conduit, cables, and any other appurtenances attached
to the exterior of the poles shall be mounted flush thereto and painted to
match the pole.



         (b)   The maximum height of any antenna shall not exceed:



            1.   Four feet above the height of the existing
pole.



            2.   Nor shall any portion of the antenna or
equipment mounted on a pole be less than 24 feet above any driveable road
surface for utility poles, 16 feet above any driveable road surface for light
poles, or 10 feet from sidewalk elevation.



         (c)   No portion of any antenna shall project greater
than 24 inches from the pole.



         (d)   Panel or canister antennas, exclusive of shrouds
shall not exceed six cubic feet in dimension.



      (8)   Each facility shall be designed to occupy the least
amount of space in the ROW that is technically feasible.



      (9)   Each facility shall be properly engineered to withstand
wind loads as required by the adopted building code or any duly adopted or
incorporated code. An evaluation of high wind load capacity shall be
submitted and shall include the impact of modification of an existing
facility.



      (10)   Each component part of a facility shall be located so
as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian, bicycle, or
vehicular traffic, inconvenience the public’s use of the ROW, or create
safety hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists, and shall not be
located within sight visibility triangles.



      (11)   A facility shall not be located within any portion of
ROW interfering with access to a fire hydrant, fire station, fire escape,
water valve, underground vault, valve housing structure, or any other public
health or safety facility.



      (12)   All ground-mounted facilities, pole-mounted equipment,
or walls, fences, landscaping or other screening methods shall be installed
outside of the clear zone as determined by the city engineer. Placement shall
not obstruct existing or future sidewalk locations.



      (13)   Not including the electric meter, all accessory
equipment shall be located underground, unless city staff determines there is
no room in the ROW for undergrounding, or that undergrounding is not feasible.



         (a)   When above-ground is the only feasible location
for a particular type of accessory equipment and will be ground-mounted:



            1.   Such accessory equipment shall be enclosed
within a structure and shall not exceed a height of five feet and a total
footprint of 15 square feet, and shall be fully screened and/or camouflaged,
including the use of landscaping, architectural treatment, or acceptable
alternate screening. Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened
and/or camouflaged.



            2.   In locations with rural or residential zoning
only along one side of a street, above-ground accessory equipment shall not
be installed on that side of the street. Such above-ground accessory
equipment shall be installed along the side of the street that is not rural
or residential zoned.



         (b)   While pole-mounted equipment is generally the
least favored installation, should pole-mounted equipment be sought, it shall
be installed as required in this article.



      (14)   Where appropriate, each facility shall be installed so
as to maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees,
foliage, and shrubs. Additional landscaping shall be planted, irrigated, and
maintained by applicant where such landscaping is deemed necessary by the
city to provide screening or to conceal the facility.



      (15)   Where facility lighting is required by the FAA, FCC, or
other government entity, a lighting study shall be provided, prepared by a
qualified lighting professional, to evaluate potential impacts to adjacent
properties and traffic.



      (16)   Backup generators shall not be permitted in the ROW.



      (17)   At no time shall equipment noise from any facility
exceed an exterior noise level of 65 dBA three feet from the source of the
noise if the facility is located in the ROW adjacent to a business or
industrial zone. Any facility located within 500 feet of any rural or
residential zone, or a residential or school use, shall not exceed 55 dBA
three feet from the source of the noise.



      (18)   Each facility shall be designed to be resistant to, and
minimize opportunities for, unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism,
graffiti, and other conditions that would result in hazardous situations,
visual blight, or attractive nuisances. The director may require the
provision of warning signs, fencing, anti-climbing devices, or other
techniques to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism.



      (19)   Consistent with current federal laws, at the time of
modification of SWF, existing equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be
replaced with equipment that reduces visual, noise, and other impacts,
including, but not limited to, undergrounding the equipment and replacing
larger, more visually intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually
intrusive facilities.



      (20)   The installation and construction shall begin within
180 calendar days after the facility’s approval or it will expire without
further action by the city.



      (21)   All applicants must secure a letter of credit and ROW
license agreement as set forth in this article.



      (22)   All applicants shall pay the appropriate ROW license
fees as set forth in Apache Junction City Code. Vol. I, Chapter 4, Fees,
Article 4-6, Public Works Fee Schedule, Section 4-6-2, Small Wireless
Facilities Rights-of-Way Fees and Charges.



(Ord. 1453, passed 12-5-2017)



§ 13-4-2  PENALTY.



   Any violation of any provisions adopted in this chapter, shall be
punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor consistent with Apache Junction City
Code, Volume 1, Chapter 1: General, Article 1-1: General, § 1-1-11, Penalty.



(Ord. 1453, passed 12-5-2017)



APPENDIX A   DESIGN STANDARDS, CONCEPTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SMALL
WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANTENNA.  Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals and that is used in providing
wireless services.



   ANTENNA MOUNTING BRACKET.  The hardware required to secure the antenna
to the pole.



   ANTENNA MOUNTING POST.  The vertical post or pipe that the antenna
mounting bracket is mounted to in order for the antenna to be attached to the
pole.



   ANTENNA SHROUD.  The three-sided cover that is mounted at the base of
the antenna to conceal the appearance of the cables and wires from the
hand-hole port on the pole to the bottom-fed antenna.



   CANISTER ANTENNA.  The canister or cylinder style housing used to
conceal the antenna(s), amplifier(s), radio(s), cables, and wires at the top
of a pole.



   COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT.  Any and all electronic equipment at the
small wireless facility location that processes and transports information
from the antennas to the wireless provider’s network.



   DOG HOUSE.  The plastic or metal attachment to the base of a pole that
covers the transition point of underground cables and wires to the vertical
section of the pole.



   GROUND-MOUNTED EQUIPMENT.  Any communications equipment that is
mounted to a separate post or to a foundation on the ground.



   LIGHT EMITTING DIODE.  A type of lighting fixture installed on city
streetlight and traffic signal poles.



   LIGHT FIXTURE.  The lighting unit or luminaire that provides lighting
during the evening hours or during the hours of darkness.



   LUMINAIRE MAST ARM.  The horizontal post that attaches the light
fixture to the streetlight pole or traffic signal pole.



   OMNI-DIRECTIONAL ANTENNA.  Also referred to as an “omni-antenna”
this antenna is round in shape, like a pipe, and may be about one (1) inch
diameter up to about six (6) inches diameter.



   OUTSIDE DIAMETER.  The points of measurement, using the outer edges of
a pole, pipe or cylinder.



   PANEL ANTENNA.  The style of antenna that is rectangular in shape and
with dimensions that are generally four (4) feet to eight (8) feet in height,
by eight (8) inches to twelve (12) inches wide, and four (4) inches to nine
(9) inches deep.



   REMOTE RADIO HEADS /REMOTE RADIO UNITS.  The electronic devices that
are used to amplify radio signals so that there is increased performance
(farther distance) of the outgoing radio signal from the antenna.



   RIGHTS-OF-WAY.  The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway,
street, sidewalk, alley, or utility easement. RIGHTS-OF-WAY does not include
a federal interstate highway, a state highway or state route under the
jurisdiction of the Arizona Department of Transportation, a private easement,
property that is owned by a special taxing district, or a utility easement
that does not authorize the deployment sought by the wireless provider.



   SIGHT DISTANCE EASEMENTS.  The area of land adjacent to an
intersection, driveway or roadway that has restrictive uses in order to
preserve the view of oncoming or crossing vehicular and pedestrian traffic by
drivers in vehicles attempting to merge with traffic or enter a roadway.



   SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLES.  The traffic engineering and safety
concept that requires clear view by the driver of a vehicle to crossing
traffic at a stop sign, driveway or intersection. In order to achieve clear
visibility of the cross traffic, the land areas in the sight visibility
triangle has specific maximum heights on landscaping, cabinets, and other
potential view obstructions.



   SIGNAL HEAD.  The “red, yellow and green” light signals at a
signal-controlled intersection.



   SIGNAL HEAD MAST ARM.  The horizontal pole that has the signal heads
mounted to it and attaches to the traffic signal pole.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.  A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:



      (1)   All antennas are located inside an enclosure of not more
than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna, that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of the antenna’s exposed elements
could fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet
in volume.



      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
facility is cumulatively not more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in
volume, or fifty (50) cubic feet in volume if the equipment was
ground-mounted before the effective date of this section. The following types
of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume pursuant to this subdivision:



         (a)   An electric meter.



         (b)   Concealment elements.



         (c)   A telecommunications demarcation box.



         (d)   Grounding equipment.



         (e)   A power transfer switch.



         (f)   A cutoff switch.



         (g)   Vertical cable runs for the connection of power
and other services.



   STEALTH AND CONCEALMENT ELEMENTS.  The use of shrouds, decorative
elements, design concepts and faux elements so that a small wireless facility
can be designed to blend in with the surrounding streetscape with minimal to
any visual impact.



   UTILITY POLE.  A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part for communications services, electric distribution, lighting or traffic
signals as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591(21). UTILITY POLE does not include a
monopole.



STANDARD DESIGN REQUIREMENTS SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY ON EXISTING STREETLIGHT.



   The following design standards shall apply, in addition to the Common
Standards Design Concepts, Requirements and Details that is included in this
document, to a small wireless facility (“SWF”) proposed for a location
with an existing city-owned or third party-owned streetlight in the City of
Apache Junction rights-of-way (“ROW”). These design standards are not
exhaustive and the city, as the owner, keeper and manager of the ROW, retains
the right to modify or adjust the requirements on a case-by-case basis.



   (A)   Pole criteria:



      (1)   Purpose of streetlight pole: the primary purpose of the
pole shall remain as a pole structure supporting a streetlight luminaire and
related streetlight fixtures used to provide lighting to the city ROW. The
attachment of wireless equipment to an existing streetlight pole or to a
replacement pole that impedes this primary purpose will not be approved.



      (2)   General requirement:



         (a)   A SWF shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding streetscape with minimal to any visual impact.



         (b)   A replacement pole shall match the City of Apache
Junction standard streetlight pole, as closely as possible, subject to more
specific criteria below.



         (c)   As specified in section 6(N) of the City of Apache
Junction’s Wireless Facilities Standard Term and Conditions, for each
individual pole type or style used to support the wireless equipment, one
spare replacement pole shall be provided by the wireless provider to city in
advance so the pole can be replaced promptly in case of a knockdown.



         (d)   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Arizona.



         (e)   All other details in the City of Apache Junction
Street Light Standards which the City Engineer determines that are applicable.



      (3)   Specific criteria:



         (a)   New or replacement pole height: a new or
replacement pole may be installed if one of the two height requirements is
met:



            1.   Up to a ten (10) foot increase, not to exceed
fifty (50) feet total (whichever is less), per A.R.S. § 9-592(1); or



            2.   Up to forty (40) feet above ground level, per
A.R.S. § 9-592(J).



         (b)   Overall height of replacement pole.



            1.   The “base” height of an existing
streetlight pole shall be the height of the vertical pole section from the
existing grade. The height of the luminaire mast arm, if higher than the
vertical pole section, shall not be used to determine the new overall height
of the replacement pole.



            2.   If the antennas are the highest vertical
element of the site, then the new overall height of the replacement pole is
measured from the existing grade to the top of the canister, top of the
omni-directional antenna, or the top of the panel antenna.



         (c)   Increase in outside diameter (“OD”) of pole:
the non-tapered replacement pole OD of the base section shall be equal to the
top section, and the OD shall not exceed eight and five-eights (8-5/8) inches
(the pole manufacturing industry standard OD for an 8 inch diameter pole) or
a 100% increase in diameter of the original pole, whichever is less.



         (d)   Luminaire mast arms.



            1.   All luminaire mast arms shall be the same
length as the original luminaire arm, unless the city requires the mast arm
to be different (longer or shorter) based upon the location of the
replacement pole.



            2.   Unless otherwise approved, all luminaire mast
arms shall match the arc (if applicable) and style of the original luminaire
arm.



            3.   The replacement luminaire mast arm shall be
at the same height above the ground as the existing luminaire.



         (e)   Luminaire fixtures.



            1.   All replacement poles shall have the city
standard light-emitting diode (“LED”) light fixture installed.



            2.   All replacement light fixtures shall have a
new city standard photo cell or sensor provided by the wireless provider.



            3.   The replacement light fixture mounting height
shall be at the same mounting height as the existing luminaire, or as
directed by city engineer.



         (f)   Pole foundation.



            1.   All pole foundations shall conform to the
city’s adopted standards and specifications on streetlight design and shall
be modified for wireless communications equipment and cables.



            2.   The city, in its sole discretion, may allow
the pole foundation design to be “worst case” for all soil conditions.



            3.   A separate, one-inch diameter conduit shall
be installed in the pole foundation for the city’s luminaire wire and any
additional city wires or cables. The city’s conduit shall be trimmed to
three (3) inches above the top of the pole foundation.



            4.   The height of the pole foundation shall be
two (2) inches above finished grade. If the pole foundation encroaches into
any portion of the sidewalk, then the pole foundation shall be flush with the
sidewalk.



            5.   Shrouds for the streetlight pole mounting
bolts may be required for the replacement pole.



            6.   City standard is a direct bury pole. If the
wireless provider determines a replacement pole needs to be mounted to a
concrete foundation, (A)(3)(f)1. through 5. shall be strictly followed.



         (g)   Painting of replacement pole.



            1.   If the replacement pole is an unpainted
galvanized pole, the pole shall not be painted or have a finish unless
otherwise specified by the city.



            2.   For powder coated bronze/silver street light
poles, the wireless provider shall replace with same powder coated color
and/or color combination as determined by the City Engineer.



            3.   For Park Green SL-10 style poles (no longer
being installed), the wireless provider shall replace with powder-coated
bronze/silver SL-8 type pole.



         (h)   Painting antennas and mounting equipment.



            1.   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware,
antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and other equipment mounted on a new
or replacement unpainted galvanized pole shall be painted Sherwin Williams
“Web Grey” (SW7075) color or equivalent, unless specified otherwise by
the city.



            2.   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware,
antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and all other equipment mounted on a
painted new or replacement pole shall be painted a color specified by the
city.



         (i)   Wireless provider shall install pole numbers on
each replacement pole (to match the number on the existing streetlight pole
being replaced) per Apache Junction Street Light Design Manual Standards that
the City Engineer determine are applicable.



STANDARD DESIGN REQUIREMENTS SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY ON TRAFFIC SIGNAL POLE



   The following design standards shall apply, in addition to the common
standards design concepts, requirements and details included in this
document, to a small wireless facility (“SWF”) proposed for a location
with an existing city-owned traffic signal in the City of Apache Junction
right-of-way (“ROW”). These design standards are not exhaustive and the
city, as the owner and manager of the ROW retains the right to modify or
adjust the requirements on a case-by-case basis.



   (A)   Pole criteria:



      (1)   Purpose of traffic signal pole: the primary purpose of
the traffic signal pole shall remain as a pole structure supporting a traffic
signal and related streetlight fixtures used to provide traffic control and
lighting to the city ROW. The attachment of wireless equipment to a new or
replacement traffic signal pole that impedes this primary purpose will not be
approved.



      (2)   General requirement:



         (a)   A SWF shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding streetscape with minimal to any visual impact.



         (b)   A replacement pole shall match the City of Apache
Junction standard traffic signal pole, as closely as possible, subject to
more specific criteria below.



         (c)   As specified in section 6(N) of the City of Apache
Junction’s Wireless Facilities Standard Terms and Conditions, for each
individual pole type or style used to support the wireless equipment, one
spare replacement pole shall be provided by wireless provider to city in
advance so the pole can be replaced promptly in case of a knockdown.



         (d)   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Arizona.



         (e)   All other details in the City of Apache Junction
Traffic Signal Design Standards that the City Engineer determines are
applicable.



      (3)   Specific criteria:



         (a)   New or replacement pole height: a new or
replacement pole may be installed if one of the two height requirements is
met:



            1.   Up to a ten (10) foot increase, not to exceed
fifty (50) feet total (whichever is less), per A.R.S. § 9-592(1); or



            2.   Up to forty (40) feet above ground level, per
A.R.S. § 9-592(J).



         (b)   Overall height of replacement pole: the height of
the replacement pole is measured from grade to the top of the antenna
canister or the top of the panel antennas if the antennas are the highest
elements.



         (c)   Increase in outside diameter (“OD”) of pole.



            1.   If the replacement pole is a taper design,
the diameter of the base section of the replacement pole OD shall not exceed
twelve (12) inches or a 100% increase in the OD of the base section,
whichever is less.



            2.   If the replacement pole is non-tapered, then
the diameter of the base section shall be equal to the top section and the OD
shall not exceed twelve (12) inches or a 100% increase, whichever is less.



         (d)   Signal head mast arms.



            1.   The traffic signal head mast arms shall be
the same length as the original signal head mast arm unless the City requires
the mast arm to be different (longer or shorter) based upon the location of
the replacement pole.



            2.   All signal head mast arms shall match the arc
(if applicable) and style of the original signal head mast arm.



         (e)   Luminaire mast arms.



            1.   All luminaire mast arms shall be the same
length as the original luminaire arm unless the city requires the mast arm to
be different (longer or shorter) based upon the location of the replacement
pole.



            2.   All luminaire mast arms shall match the arc
(if applicable) and style of the original luminaire arm.



         (f)   Signal heads.



            1.   All existing signal heads shall be replaced,
at no cost to city, with new light-emitting diode (“LED”) signal heads,
per City of Apache Junction Traffic Signal Design Standards that the City
Engineer determines apply.



            2.   All signal heads shall be procured from a
city approved signal heads supplier or manufacturer.



            3.   The replacement signal heads mounting height
shall be at the same mounting height as the existing signal head, or as
directed by City Engineer.



         (g)   Luminaire fixtures.



            1.   All replacement poles shall have the city
standard LED light fixture installed.



            2.   All replacement light fixture shall have a
new photo-cell or sensor installed to city standard.



            3.   The replacement light fixture mounting height
shall be at the same mounting height as the existing luminaire, or as
directed by City Engineer.



         (h)   Other city elements on signal mast arm or pole:
all existing emergency signal detection units, video detection cameras, video
cameras, cross walk service buttons, cross walk signals, and any other
pedestrian or traffic devices shall be replaced with new units by wireless
provider and installed at no cost to the city. All equipment shall be
procured from a list of city approved suppliers.



         (i)   Signs and other miscellaneous: all street name
plates or signs, directional signs and any other city approved signs shall be
replaced with new signs at no cost to the city. All signs and attachments
shall be procured from a list of city approved suppliers.



         (j)   Traffic signal pole foundation.



            1.   All pole foundations shall conform to the
city’s standards and specifications on traffic signal pole design and shall
be modified for wireless communications equipment, hand holes and cables.



            2.   The wireless provider shall install a three
(3) inch diameter OD conduit in the pole foundation for the city’s cables
and wires for the signal heads, luminaire and devices on the signal mast arm
and luminaire mast arm. The city’s conduit shall be trimmed to three (3)
inches above the top of the pole foundation.



            3.   In addition to the conduits for the city’s
use inside the pole, the wireless provider shall install one of the two
options for its cables and wires:



               a.    One, six (6) inch diameter OD conduit
in the pole foundation; or



               b.    Two, four (4) inch diameter OD
conduits in the pole foundation. The length of the conduit shall extend from
the pole foundation to six (6) inches above the signal head mast arm.



            4.   Pole foundation - height above ground level.



               a.   If the pole foundation is in a
landscaped or unimproved area, the height of the caisson shall be two (2)
inches above finished grade. However, if the pole foundation is adjacent to
or within a sidewalk or ramp, the height of the pole foundation shall be
flush with the surface of the immediate area.



               b.    Shrouds for the traffic signal pole
mounting bolts may be required for the replacement pole.



         (k)   Painting of pole, antennas and mounting equipment.



            1.    Specifications on paint color and painting
process are provided in the City of Apache Junction Traffic Signal Design
Standards that the City Engineer determines apply.



            2.   For powder-coated traffic signal poles, the
wireless provider shall replace with same powder-coated color and/or color
combination.



         (l)   Construction of traffic signal: the installation
work of the replacement traffic signal pole, including mast arms, signal
heads and devices, must be performed by an Arizona licensed traffic signal
contractor with a minimum of five (5) years of experience installing traffic
signals.



STANDARD DESIGN REQUIREMENTS SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY ON EXISTING UTILITY POLE



   The following design standards shall apply, in addition to the common
standards design concepts, requirements and details that is included in this
document, to a small wireless facility (“SWF”) proposed for a location
with an existing third party-owned utility pole in the City of Apache
Junction rights-of-way (“ROW”). These design standards are not exhaustive
and the city, as the owner, keeper and manager of the ROW retains the right
to modify or adjust the requirements on a case-by-case basis.



   (A)   Pole criteria:



      (1)   Purpose of utility pole: the primary purpose of the pole
shall remain as a pole structure supporting a cables and wires used to
provide communications services and electric distribution in the city ROW.
The attachment of wireless equipment to an existing third party-owned utility
pole that impedes this primary purpose will not be approved.



      (2)   General requirement:



         (a)   An SWF shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding streetscape with minimal to any visual impact.



         (b)   A SWF mounted on an existing third party-owned
utility pole is subject to more specific criteria below.



         (c)   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Arizona.



      (3)   Specific criteria:



         (a)   Replacement pole height: a replacement pole may be
installed if one of the two height requirements is met:



            1.   Up to a ten (10) foot increase, not to exceed
fifty (50) feet total (whichever is less), per A.R.S. § 9-592(1); or



            2.   Up to forty (40) feet above ground level, per
A.R.S. § 9-592(J).



         (b)   Overall height of replacement utility pole.



            1.   The “base” height of an existing utility
pole shall be the height of the vertical pole section from the existing grade.



            2.   If the antennas are the highest vertical
element of the site, then the new overall height of the replacement pole is
measured from the existing grade to the top of the canister or the top of the
panel antenna.



         (c)   Use of existing pole-wood.



            1.   An existing wood pole used for a SWF shall
have the antennas contained within an eighteen (18) inch OD canister mounted
at the top of the pole.



            2.   Unless otherwise approved, the cables and
wires from the base of the pole to the antennas shall be installed in a
conduit or cable chase outside of the pole, facing away from the street or
away from on-coming traffic.



            3.   If a “dog house” (see Exhibit C) is
required as a transition point connecting the underground cables and wires
from the ground mounted equipment to the pole, the city shall provide the
maximum size, dimension and shape of the dog house on a case-by-case basis.



         (d)   Use of existing pole-metal.



            1.   An existing metal pole used for a SWF shall
have the antennas contained within an eighteen (18) inch OD canister mounted
at the top of the pole.



            2.   Panel antennas on a metal pole shall have the
same “RAD center” (center of radiation) so the antennas will be at the
same height on the pole.



            3.   The cables and wires from the base of the
pole to the antennas shall be installed in a conduit or cable chase on the
outside of the pole, facing away from the street or away from on-coming
traffic.



            4.   If a “dog house” (see Exhibit C) is
required as a transition point connecting the underground cables and wires
from the ground mounted equipment to the pole, the city shall provide the
maximum size, dimension and shape of the dog house on a case-by-case basis.



         (e)   Painting of pole and dog house.



            1.   If the replacement pole is an unpainted
galvanized pole, the pole shall not be painted or have a finish unless
otherwise specified by the city.



            2.   If the existing or replacement pole includes
a dog house for the transition of the cables and wires to the pole, the dog
house shall be painted the same color as the pole or a color specified by the
city.



         (f)   Painting antennas and mounting equipment.



            1.   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware,
antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and other equipment mounted on a new
or replacement unpainted galvanized pole shall be painted Sherwin Williams
“Web Grey” (SW7075) color or equivalent, unless specified otherwise by
the city.



            2.   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware,
antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and all other equipment mounted on a
painted new or replacement pole shall be painted a color specified by the
city.



            3.   If the antenna is mounted on a wood pole, the
color of the antenna, antenna canister, mounting brackets and posts, shrouds
and cable chases shall be painted a color specified by the city that will
closely match the color of the wood.



         (g)   Ground-mounted equipment: the city may require the
ground-mounted wireless equipment to be screened or concealed to reduce the
visual impact to the surrounding area. The screening or concealment shall
take into account the location of the site, the use of the immediate area,
and the existing aesthetic elements surrounding the site.



STANDARD DESIGN REQUIREMENTS SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY ON NEW POLES IN
RIGHTS-OF-WAY



   (A)   The following design standards, in addition to the common
standards design concepts, requirements and details that are included in this
document, shall apply to a small wireless facility (“SWF”) that a
wireless provider may install in the rights-of-way (“ROW”) that is not
either: 1) a replacement pole for an existing streetlight, or 2) a
replacement pole for an existing traffic signal.



   (B)   A new wireless support structure, including a monopole that is
up to forty (40) inches in outside diameter (“OD”), shall incorporate the
highest level of stealth and concealment of the antennas and wireless
equipment in order to minimize the visual impact of the site to the public.



   (C)   Pole criteria:



      (1)   Purpose of wireless support structure: the sole purpose
of a new vertical element or wireless support structure is to attach antennas
for the provision of wireless services by a wireless provider in the city’s
ROW.



      (2)   General requirement:



         (a)   A new wireless support structure shall be designed
to minimize the visual and aesthetic impact of the new vertical element and
associated equipment upon the look, feel, theme, and use of the surrounding
area.



         (b)   A SWF shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding streetscape with minimal to any visual impact.



         (c)   The new wireless support structure shall be
architecturally integrated and compatible with the use of the surrounding
area.



         (d)   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Arizona.



      (3)   Specific criteria:



         (a)   New pole height: a new wireless support structure
may be installed if one of the two height requirements are met, see A.R.S. §
9-592(1) and A.R.S.§ 9-592(J):



            1.   Up to a ten (10) foot increase, not to exceed
fifty (50) feet total (whichever is less), per A.R.S. § 9-592(1); or



            2.   Up to forty (40) feet above ground level, per
A.R.S. § 9-592(J).



         (b)   Overall height of new pole: the height of the new
wireless support structure is measured from grade to top of the antenna
canister, or the top of the panel antenna if the antennas are the highest
elements of the site. Otherwise, the measured heightshall befrom existing
grade to the highest point of the wireless support structure.



         (c)   Outside diameter of monopole: the maximum outside
diameter of a monopole, as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591(13), shall not exceed
forty (40) inches.



         (d)   Stealth and concealment elements: as part of the
stealth and concealment elements of the wireless support structure, the city
may require the wireless provider to install street name plates, directional
signs, and other decorative signs or artistic elements on the structure.



            1.   The wireless provider is solely responsible
for the cost of all stealth and concealment elements and the installation of
other elements required by the city.



            2.   The wireless provider is responsible for the
performance of and any costs incurred for regular upkeep, maintenance and
replacement (if necessary) of these stealth and concealment elements.



         (e)   Architectural integration with surrounding area.



            1.   The new wireless support structure shall be
designed in consultation with various internal city stakeholders and may
include external stakeholders.



            2.   No new wireless support structure shall be
constructed without the consent and simple majority approval of the key
stakeholders.



            3.   The city may require the new wireless support
structure to be constructed of a specific material that will enhance the
stealth and concealment of the site.



         (f)   Pole foundation.



            1.   The pole foundation for the wireless support
structure, if required, shall conform to structural engineering standards
acceptable to the city, with design modifications for wireless communications
equipment and cables.



            2.   The height of the pole foundation shall be
two (2) inches above finished grade. However, if the pole foundation is
adjacent to or within a sidewalk or ramp, the height of the pole foundation
shall be flush with the surface of the immediate area.



            3.   Shrouds for the pole mounting bolts may be
required.



         (g)   Painting of wireless support structure, antennas
and mounting equipment.



            1.   The city shall identify the paint colors,
location of paint and any decorative work that may be painted onto the new
wireless support structure.



            2.   The city shall identify the paint colors for
the antennas, antenna mounting brackets and posts, antenna shrouds, and
cables.



            3.   The city may require the new wireless support
structure to be painted using a powder-coat process.



         (h)   Ground-mounted equipment: the city may require the
ground-mounted wireless equipment to be screened or concealed to reduce the
visual impact to the surrounding area. The screening or concealment shall
take into account the location of the site, the use of the immediate area,
and the existing aesthetic elements surrounding the site.



STANDARD DESIGN REQUIREMENTS



COMMON STANDARD DESIGN CONCEPTS REQUIREMENTS AND DETAILS FOR SMALL WIRELESS
IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   The following standard design requirements shall be applied to all new
small wireless facilities in the City’s rights-of-way (“ROW”), whether
for a small wireless facility to be installed on an existing or replacement
streetlight pole, an existing or replacement traffic signal pole, an existing
or replacement utility pole, or on an existing or new wireless support
structure.



   (A)   Pole design and installation.



      (1)   Replacement pole clearances - underground utilities:



         (a)   All ground-mounted electrical equipment shall
maintain minimum horizontal clearance from underground utilities.



            1.   Clearance from water lines shall be at least
six (6) feet.



            2.   Clearance from sewer lines shall be at least
six (6) feet.



            3.   Clearance from telecommunications shall be at
least one (1) foot.



            4.   Clearance from cable television lines shall
be at least one (1) foot.



            5.   Clearance from all other underground
infrastructure shall be at least six (6) feet.



         (b)   All of the above distances shall be verified by
the wireless provider and communicated to the City Engineer in a form as
he/she so directs.



         (c)   The city, in its sole discretion, may grant an
exception, upon approval by the City Engineer, from these horizontal
separation distances on a case-by-case basis. The approval of an exception is
dependent factors specific to the site.



         (d)   In the case where there is an issue with
horizontal separation from other underground utilities, the wireless provider
may elect to work with the impacted utility to have lines, pipes or property
moved so that minimum clearance is achieved. All relocation of city owned or
a privately-owned facility shall be at the sole expense of the wireless
provider.



      (2)   Calculating the base height of an existing pole: the
base height, from which the calculation of the “increase in pole height”
is referenced for determining the overall pole height, shall be calculated as
follows:



         (a)   Streetlight pole (see Exhibit A1 andA2).



            1.   A streetlight with a separate luminaire mast
arm mounted to the vertical pole shall use the top of the vertical pole as
the base height.



            2.   A streetlight, with the luminaire mast arm
integrated (e.g. telescopic style pole) into the top vertical section of the
pole, shall use the point on the pole where the mast arm is connected plus
twenty-four (24) inches as the base height.



         (b)   Traffic signal pole (see Exhibit B): A traffic
signal pole with a luminaire mast arm that is mounted above the signal head
mast arm to the pole shall use the top of the vertical portion of the pole as
the base height.



      (3)   Replacement pole clearance - original streetlight pole
or traffic signal pole: the minimum distance of the replacement pole from the
original pole location shall be sixty (60) inches or more so that
construction can occur safely. The city may change this minimum distance on a
case-by-case basis.



      (4)   Replacement pole clearances - sidewalks: the new or
replacement pole shall maintain twelve (12) inch minimum clearance distance
from sidewalks. The city, in its sole discretion, may increase that minimum
clearance on a case-by-case basis to ensure the safe use of the sidewalk and
adjacent area. The wireless provider shall verify this dimension in a form as
directed by the City Engineer.



      (5)   Sight distance easements (“SDE”) and sight
visibility triangles (“SVT”): all new and replacement poles shall be
installed in a location that does not impair or interfere with SDE or SVT
safety requirements.



      (6)   Cables, wires and jumpers.



         (a)   All cables for the wireless equipment and antennas
- except where such cables or wires attach to the ports in the antenna -
shall be located inside a conduit, inside the caisson and pole. There shall
not be any “dog house” or externally visible conduit or entry point of
the cables.



         (b)   All electrical wires for the streetlight
luminaire, traffic signal heads, and any city device on the pole shall be new
and connected to the existing power source.



      (7)   Hand-holes.



         (a)   All hand-hole locations shall be called out on the
plans.



         (b)   All hand-holes near antennas shall have the top of
the hand-hole no lower than the bottom height of the antennas.



         (c)   The bottom of the hand-hole should not exceed six
(6) inches below the bottom of the antenna.



      (8)   Wireless facility identification information.



         (a)   A four (4) inch by six (6) inch radio frequency
safety notice may be mounted no less than twenty-four (24) inches from the
bottom of the antenna, facing away from traffic.



         (b)   The wireless provider may place a discreet site
identification or number. The size, color and location of this identifier
shall be determined by the city.



         (c)   No wireless provider signs may be placed on a
streetlight, traffic signal pole, wireless support structure, or a new or
replacement pole except to the extent required by local, state or federal law
or regulations.



      (9)   Interference with city wireless network: the city has
certain wireless devices in a network that connects traffic signals,
community centers, water sites, and other locations for the city’s
proprietary use. The selection of a location for a wireless site shall
consider the potential interference of the city’s wireless network with RF
from a wireless provider’s proposed site.



      (10)   Cable chase and dog houses: the city, in its sole
discretion, shall determine if an exterior cable chase and dog house are
aesthetically compatible with the pole and immediate area. The materials and
paint color of the cable chase and dog house shall be determined on a
case-by-case basis.



   (B)   Removal of original pole, equipment and pole foundation.



      (1)   Removal of original signal pole, mast arm, signal heads
and luminaire.



         (a)   The city shall determine what original components,
(e.g., original pole, mast arm, signal heads and luminaire, and the like)
shall be delivered at no cost to the city, to the city’s Public Works
Department by the wireless provider.



         (b)   If the city accepts some of the original
components, then only those components shall be delivered by the wireless
provider to the City Public Works Department and the remaining components
shall be discarded by the wireless provider.



      (2)   Removal of original streetlight or traffic signal pole
foundation: the concrete pole foundation for the original streetlight or
traffic signal pole shall be removed by the wireless provider as instructed
by the City:



         (a)   Partial removal: the original pole foundation
shall be taken back to a level that is twelve (12) inches below existing
grade and covered with four (4) inches of one-half (½") inch to three (3/4")
quarter inch rock materials. The remaining eight (8) inches shall be native
soil.



         (b)   Complete removal: if the entire original pole
foundation must be removed, then all materials (concrete, rebar, metals,
bolts, etc.) shall be removed. The city’s Inspector shall determine, on a
case-by-case basis, the type of backfill material and compaction required -
ranging from native soil that is compacted to a half (½) sack slurry for the
entire depth, or a combination of native soil and slurry.



   (C)   Antennas, RRH/RRU, cables and mounting on pole.



      (1)   General requirement: all antennas shall be installed in
a manner that minimizesthevisual impacttothegeneralpublic.
Allworkshallbeperformed in a professional manner that is consistent with the
highest standard of workmanship.



      (2)   Specific criteria:



         (a)   Antenna mounting posts and brackets.



            1.   All panel antennas shall be mounted directly
to the pole or onto a mounting pole so that the distance from the “face”
of the streetlight pole to the back of the antenna does not exceed nine (9)
inches.



            2.   All mounting posts shall be trimmed so that
the poles do not extend higher than the top of the antenna or protrude lower
than the antenna unless necessary to install the shroud.



            3.   All pole attached wireless equipment must be
a minimum ten (10) feet from the sidewalk elevation.



            4.   All of the above dimensions shall be
confirmed by the wireless provider in a form as directed by the City Engineer.



         (b)   Panel antennas.



            1.   All panel antennas for a small cell site
shall fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet
in volume in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-591(19)(a). (NOTE: This volume does
not include antenna cable shrouds when required.)



            2.   All panel antennas with exposed cables from
the bottom of the antenna shall have a shroud installed on the antenna or
antenna mounting posts to conceal the cables, (see Exhibits D1 and D2).



               a.   The type of shroud may be a forty-five
(45) degree angle (away from the bottom of the antenna; toward the pole) or a
ninety (90) degree angle (parallel to the bottom of the antenna) depending on
the location of the site.



               b.   The shroud shall extend from the bottom
of the antenna to two (2) inches below the bottom of the nearest hand-hole.



         (c)   Canister antennas.



            1.   All canister antennas shall fit within an
imaginary enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume. (Note:
This volume does not include the canister as it is a stealth device and not
the antenna).



            2.   The canister shall be no larger than eighteen
(18) inches in diameter OD.



            3.   All canister antennas shall be located in a
canister that is mounted to a base plate at the top of the vertical section
of the replacement pole.



            4.   All cables protruding from the canister shall
be concealed within the canister or by a shroud at the point where the
canister is mounted to the base plate.



         (d)   Remote radio heads (“RRH”)/ remote radio units
(“RRU”): Under A.R.S. § 9-591(19)(a), the RRH/RRU is not considered part
of the antenna. If allowed, the RRH/RRU shall be calculated as part of “all
other wireless equipment associated with this facility...” in A.R.S. §
9-591(19) (b) that is subject to the twenty-eight (28) cubic feet maximum
size for small cell sites.



            1.   On a case-by-case basis, the city in its sole
discretion and - upon reviewing the landscape in the immediate surrounding
area, the location of the pole, and stealth options, may allow a site to have
an RRH/RRU installed on the pole.



   (D)   Ground-mounted equipment:



      (1)   General requirement: all ground-mounted equipment shall
be installed in a manner that minimizes the visual and ingress/egress impact
to the general public. All work shall be performed in a professional manner
that is consistent with the highest standards of workmanship.



      (2)   Specific criteria:



         (a)   Sight distance easements (“SDE”) and sight
visibility triangles (“SVT”) all ground-based wireless equipment shall be
installed in a location that does not impair or interfere with SDE or SVT
safety requirements. To ensure proper sight distance, all City of Apache
Junction Standard Details that the City Engineer determines shall apply.



         (b)   Ground equipment location - generally: all
ground-based wireless equipment, including but not limited to equipment
cabinets or power pedestals, shall be placed as far as practical to the back
of the ROW while maintaining at least three (3) feet of ingress/egress in the
ROW or public utility easement (“PUE”) around the equipment.



         (c)   Ground equipment clearances-underground utilities.



            1.   All ground-mounted electrical equipment shall
maintain minimum horizontal clearance from below-ground utilities:



               a.    Clearance from water lines shall be at
least six (6) feet.



               b.    Clearance from sewer lines shall be at
least six (6) feet.



               c.    Clearance from telecommunications
shall be at least one (1) foot.



               d.    Clearance from cable television lines
shall be at least one (1) foot.



               e.    Clearance from all other underground
infrastructure shall be at least six (6) feet.



            2.   All of the above dimensions shall be
confirmed by the wireless provider in a form as directed by the City Engineer.



            3.   The city, in its sole discretion, may grant
an exception upon approval from the city engineer, from these horizontal
separation distances on a case-by-case basis. The approval of an exception is
dependent on factors specific to the site.



            4.   In the case where there is an issue with
horizontal separation from other underground utilities, the wireless provider
may elect to work with the impacted utility to have its lines, pipes or
property moved so that minimum clearance is achieved. All relocation work of
city-owned or a privately-owned utility shall be at the sole expense of the
wireless provider.



         (d)   Ground equipment clearance - sidewalks: the ground
equipment shall maintain a minimum twelve (12) inch clearance distance from
sidewalks. The city, in its sole discretion, may increase the minimum
clearance on a case-by-case basis to ensure the safe use of the sidewalk and
adjacent area.



         (e)   Compliance with height requirements: evidence or
documentation that, where the above-ground structure is over thirty-six (36)
inches in height, given its proposed location, the structure will comply or
be in compliance with applicable state and City of Apache Junction planning
and zoning ordinances.



         (f)   Screening of ground equipment: the city, in its
sole discretion, may require the ground-mounted equipment to be screened; the
type of screening materials and design will be addressed on a case-by-case
basis.



            1.   In cases when screening is not required, the
City may specify the paint color of the ground-mounted equipment.



         (g)   Decals and labels.



            1.   All equipment manufacturers’ decals, logos
and other identification information shall be removed unless required for
warranty purposes.



            2.   The wireless provider of the site may place
an “emergency contact” decal or emblem to the ground equipment.



            3.   The ground-mounted equipment shall not have
any flashing lights, sirens or regular noise other than a cooling fan that
may run intermittently.



         (h)   Equipment cabinets on residential property.



            1.   Residential single-family lot: the wireless
equipment and ancillary equipment listed in A.R.S. § 9-591(19)(b) shall not
exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height in the front yard of a residential
single-family zoned property.



            2.   Air-conditioning units: unless otherwise
specified by city, a wireless equipment cabinet with air-conditioning (not a
fan only) shall be enclosed by walls and setback a minimum of fifteen (15)
feet from lots where the existing or planned primary use is a residential
single-family dwelling.



         (i)   Electric company meter.



            1.   All electric company meters shall be
installed in the ROW or PUE. The location of the meter equipment shall have
minimum ingress and egress clearance from private property lines and
driveways.



            2.   All electric company meters shall maintain
minimum clearance from above-ground utility cabinets and below-ground
utilities.



            3.   All electric company meters shall be
installed in a location that does not impair or interfere with the SDE or SVT
safety requirements of the city.



            4.   The electric company meters shall be screened
or contained within a “Myers-type” or “Milbank-type” pedestal cabinet
that is painted to match the ground equipment or as specified by the city,
(see Exhibit E)



            5.   In the case where screening is not required,
the city may specify the paint color of the electric company meter cabinet on
a case-by-case basis.



For questions regarding these design standards, concepts and requirements
contact:



City Engineer



575 East Baseline Avenue



Apache Junction, AZ 85119



480-982-1055



Exhibit A1



Calculation Points for Height of an Existing Streetlight with Separate
Luminaire Mast Arm







 



Exhibit A2



Calculation Points for Height of an Existing Streetlight with Integrated
Luminaire Mast Arm







 



Exhibit B



Calculation Points for Height of Existing Traffic Signal Pole







 



Exhibit C



Dog House - Cable Transition from Underground to Electric Utility Pole







 



Exhibit D1



Antenna Shrouds-45 Degrees







 



Exhibit D2



Antenna Shrouds-90 Degrees







 



Exhibit E



Examples of Electrical Meter Pedestals - “Myers” or “Milbank” Style







 



(Ord. 1453, passed 12-5-2017)



APPENDIX B   WIRELESS FACILITIES STANDARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS



The Wireless Facilities Standard Terms and Conditions (“Standard Terms”)
are made by the City of Apache Junction, an Arizona municipal corporation
(“city”).



STANDARD RECITALS



   (A)   Various laws (the “telecommunications laws”) authorize
city to regulate its streets, alleys and public utility easements, and to
grant, renew, deny, amend and terminate a licenses for a telecommunication
provider (“provider”) and otherwise regulate the installation, operation
and maintenance of telecommunications systems. The telecommunications laws
include, without limitation, the following:



      (1)   Apache Junction City Code, Volume I, Chapter 13: Public
Works, Articles 13-3 and 13-4.



      (2)   A.R.S. §§ 9-581 through 9-583, §§ 9-591 through
9-599 and other state and federal statutes.



      (3)   The Constitution of the State of Arizona.



      (4)   Other applicable federal, state and local laws, codes,
rules and regulations.



      (5)   City’s  police  powers,  its  authority  over 
public rights-of-way (“ROW”), and its other governmental powers and
authority.



   (B)   City owns public street and alley ROW and public utility
easements within the boundaries of the City of Apache Junction that are
designated for use by utility companies for installation, operation and
repair of water, electrical and other utilities pursuant to licenses or other
agreements between utility companies and city (collectively the “ROW”).



   (C)   City anticipates that one or more providers may desire to
locate antennas and immediately related equipment at various sites within the
ROW.



   (D)   The standard terms become effective as to each site as they
are incorporated in the Rights-of-Way Antenna License Agreement
(“Agreement”) by reference. Except as otherwise stated, each Agreement
stands on its own.



   (E)   The purpose of these standard terms is to promote uniformity
in the Agreements and to streamline the preparation and administration of the
Agreement.



   (F)   Because city’s existing streetlight poles and traffic signed
poles are not designed to safely support the additional weight and stress of
wireless facilities, Providers shall be required to provide poles designed to
support these facilities to replace existing poles prior to attaching
wireless facilities.



STANDARD TERMS



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of the standard terms:



      ANTENNA.  Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency (“RF”) signals and that is used in
providing wireless services.



      BASE USE FEE.  The amount that the Provider shall pay to city
for each year of this license for use of city ROW and city-owned pole, as set
out in the current fee schedule.



      COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT.  Any and all electronic equipment at
the small wireless facility (“SWF”) location that processes and
transports information from the antennas to the provider’s network.



      COMPETING USERS.  Entities that own the water pipes, cables and
wires, pavement, and other facilities which may be located within the ROW.
The COMPETING USERS include without limitation, the city, the State of
Arizona and its political subdivisions, the public, and all manner of utility
companies and other existing or future users of the use areas.



      ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.  A permit issued pursuant to Chapter 13,
Volume I of the Apache Junction City Code that allows the Provider to perform
work in the ROW and to install and operate improvements in the ROW.



      FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission.



      FCC RULES.  All applicable RF emissions laws and regulations.



      FCC OET BULLETIN 65.  The FCC’s Office of Engineering and
Technology Bulletin 65 that includes the FCC RF Exposure Guidelines.



      ORDINARY PERMIT USE FEE.  The city’s encroachment permit
application, review and other fees related to the issuance of the permit.



      PROVIDER.  A cable operator, wireless infrastructure provider or
wireless services provider.



      PROVIDER’S IMPROVEMENTS.  All improvements installed by the
provider, including, but not limited to: all elements of the wireless
facility, all screening elements, any landscaping plants or materials, and
any other elements provided by the provider in the approved Agreement.



      RF.  Radio frequency.



      RF LETTER.  A letter attesting to the Provider’s compliance
with FCC RF exposure guidelines from the Provider’s senior internal
engineer.



      RIGHTS-OF-WAY.  The area on, below or above a public roadway,
highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or utility easement. ROW does not include a
federal interstate highway, a state highway or state route under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation, a private easement,
property that is owned by a special taxing district, or a utility easement
that does not authorize the deployment sought by the Provider.



      SITE DOCUMENTS.  The depiction of the use area, schematic plans
and map showing location of the installation of the wireless facility in the
ROW, including but not limited to the title report of the use area, vicinity
map, site plan, elevations, technical specifications and the cubic feet of
the non-antenna wireless equipment.



      SITE LICENSE AGREEMENT.  The site specific license that
incorporates the Standard Recitals and the Standard Terms for providers to
install and operate wireless facilities in the city’s ROW (see three
available forms set forth in Exhibits A-1, A-2 and A-3).



      SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.  A wireless facility that meets both of
the following qualifications:



         (a)   All antennas are located inside an enclosure of
not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that
has exposed elements, the antenna and all of the antenna’s exposed elements
could fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet
in volume.



         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
facility is cumulatively not more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in
volume, or fifty (50) cubic feet in volume if the equipment was ground
mounted before the effective date of this section. The following types of
associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume pursuant to this subdivision:



            1.   An electric meter.



            2.    Concealment elements.



            3.   A telecommunications demarcation box.



            4.   Grounding equipment.



            5.   A power transfer switch.



            6.   A cutoff switch.



            7.   Vertical cable runs for the connection of
power and other services.



      THIRD PARTY AREAS.  The portions of the ROW, such as canal
crossings or other areas that for any reason have limited ROW dedications or
that have regulatory use restrictions imposed by a third party.



      VIOLATION USE FEE.  The types of fees that the city has
available to remedy certain breaches of the Agreement by a provider.



      WIRELESS FACILITY.



         (a)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including both of the following:



            1.   Equipment associated with wireless
communications.



            2.   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
fiber-optic cables, regular and backup power supplies and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration.



         (b)   Includes small wireless facilities.



         (c)   Does not include the structure or improvements on,
under or within which the equipment is collocated, wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber-optic that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or coaxial or fiberoptic cable that is otherwise
not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, an antenna.



         (d)   Does not include Wi-Fi radio equipment described
in Section 9-506, Subsection I or microcell equipment described in Section
9-584, Subsection E.



      WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER.  Any person that is authorized
to provide telecommunications service in this state and that builds or
installs wireless communications transmission equipment, wireless facilities,
utility poles or monopoles but that is not a wireless service provider.
Wireless Infrastructure Provider does not include a special taxing district.



      WIRELESS SERVICES.  Any services that are provided to the public
and that use licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or
mobile, using wireless facilities.



      WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER.  A person that provides wireless
services. WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER does not include a special taxing
district.



      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.



         (a)   A freestanding structure, such as a monopole.



         (b)   A tower, either guyed or self-supporting.



         (c)   A sign or billboard.



         (d)   Any other existing or proposed structure designed
to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities.



         (e)   Does not include a utility pole.



   (B)   Use areas. Upon approval of an antenna site ROW license
agreement (“Agreement”), city grants to provider a license to use the use
areas as follows:



      (1)   Limitations. Notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, the use areas include and are limited to only certain areas that
provider is permitted to exclusively use and occupy (“exclusive areas”)
and certain areas that provider is permitted to use on a shared basis
(“shared areas”). The use areas are defined by the boundary plan.



      (2)   Use areas boundary. The use areas is the smallest
geometric shape that includes the exclusive areas and the shared areas. The
use areas excludes other parts of the street parcel and all other land.
Provider shall not occupy or use any other portion of the street parcel or
adjoining lands. This agreement does not allow any use of provider’s land
outside the street parcel. If any portion of provider’s work, improvement
or equipment is to be located on other land, then such work, improvements and
equipment are prohibited unless provider first obtains from the owner of said
land (including city, if applicable) an agreement allowing such work,
improvements and equipment (a “supplemental parcel agreement”).



      (3)   Exclusive areas. The exclusive areas are limited to the
following, if and as defined by the boundary plan:



         (a)   The land area defined as “enclosure” on the
boundary plan to be used by provider solely for the enclosure housing the
electronic ground equipment shown on the site plan (“enclosure”). Such
area is confined to the actual area occupied by the exterior structure and
the interior of the enclosure. If the boundary plan does not show a clearly
defined and correctly labeled enclosure area, then no enclosure area is
available for provider’s use under an approved agreement and any enclosure
for provider’s use must be located outside the street parcel and authorized
by a supplemental parcel agreement.



         (b)   The area on the pole defined as “antennas” on
the boundary plan to be used by provider solely for mounting the antennas.
Such area is confined to the city approved elevations and locations actually
occupied by the antennas and their supporting brackets. If the boundary plan
does not show a clearly defined and correctly labeled “antennas” area,
then no main antennas area is available for provider’s use under this
agreement and any main antennas for provider’s use must be located outside
the street parcel and authorized by a supplemental parcel agreement.



      (4)   Shared areas. Shared areas are limited to the following
areas, if and as defined by the boundary plan:



         (a)   A motor vehicle parking space (“parking
space”) at the parking space location described on the boundary plan to be
used by provider solely for parking a service vehicle to service the
communications equipment and for ingress and egress to that parking space.



         (b)   no temporary construction area is provided by
these standard terms or an approved agreement. Provider must obtain from city
a separate written document giving provider permission to work in the ROW, as
described elsewhere herein.



         (c)   An underground cable route (“signal route”)
labeled as the signal route described on the boundary plan from the enclosure
to the antenna to be used by provider solely for underground RF lines between
the enclosure and the antenna. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the
portion of the signal route upon the pole shall not be underground but shall
be within the pole. If the boundary plan does not show a clearly defined and
correctly labeled signal route area, then no signal route area is available
for provider’s use under these Standard Terms or an approved agreement and
any signal route for provider’s use must be located outside the street
parcel and authorized by a supplemental parcel agreement.



      (5)   Power and telephone service. Nothing herein grants
permission for any portion of the power, telephone or other service routes,
if any. (Use of the public street ROW or public utility easements for these
purposes, if any, is governed by normal city ROW rules and policies and by
the franchise between the city and the electrical and telephone service
providers.)



      (6)   Rights in adjacent land. Provider’s rights are
expressly limited to the real property defined as the “use areas” in this
agreement. Without limitation, in the event any public ROW or other public or
private property at or adjacent to the use areas is owned, dedicated,
abandoned or otherwise acquired, used, improved or disposed of by city, such
property shall not accrue to provider but shall be city’s only.



      (7)   Variation in area. In the event the Use Areas consist of
more or less than any stated area, Provider’s obligations hereunder shall
not be increased or diminished.



      (8)   Condition of title. Provider shall not have power to
amend, modify, terminate or otherwise change the site documents or create new
site documents. City does not warrant its own or any other person’s title
to or rights to use the use areas or any other property. Provider shall pay,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless city and its agents and representatives
of, from and against any and all claims, demands, damages, expenses, interest
or penalties of any kind or nature whatsoever, including attorneys’,
arbitrators’ and experts’ fees and court costs that arise from or relate
to provider’s non-compliance with the site documents.



      (9)   Condition of use areas. The use areas are being made
available in an “as is” condition without any express or implied
warranties of any kind, including without limitation any warranties or
representations as to their condition or fitness for any use.



      (10)   No real property interest. Notwithstanding any
provision hereof to the contrary, and notwithstanding any negotiation,
correspondence,  course of performance or dealing, or other statements or
acts by or between the parties, Provider’s rights herein are limited to use
and occupation of the use areas for the permitted uses. Provider’s rights
in the use areas are limited to the specific rights created herein as an
approved agreement.



      (11)   Limited rights in use areas. An approved agreement
grants provider no rights to or use of the use areas other than those
expressly granted herein.



      (12)   Reserved right and competing users and activities.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, city specifically reserves
to itself and excludes from an approved agreement a non-exclusive delegable
right (“reserved right”) over the entire use areas for all manner of real
and personal improvements and for streets, sidewalks, trails, landscaping,
utilities and every other land use of every description. Without limitation:



         (a)   Competing users. Provider accepts the risk that
city and others (“competing users”) may now or in the future install
their facilities in the use areas in locations that make parts of the ROW
unavailable for Provider’s use.



         (b)   Competing activities. Provider accepts the risk
that there may now or in the future exist upon the use areas all manner of
work and improvements upon the use areas (“competing activities”). The
competing activities include without limitation any and all laying
construction, erection, installation, use, operation, repair, replacement,
removal, relocation, raising, lowering, widening, realigning or other dealing
with any or all of the following, whether above, upon or below the surface of
the use areas and whether occasioned by existing or proposed uses of the ROW
or existing or proposed uses of adjoining or nearby land:



            1.   All manner of streets, alleys, sidewalks,
trails, ways, traffic control devices, subways, tunnels, trains and gates of
every description, and alt manner of other transportation facilities and
their appurtenances.



            2.   All manner of pipes, wires, cables, conduits,
sewers, pumps, valves, switches, conductors, connectors, poles, supports,
access points and guy wires of every description, and all manner of other
utility facilities and their appurtenances.



            3.   All manner of canals, drains, bridges,
viaducts, overpasses, underpasses, culverts, markings, balconies, porches,
overhangs and other encroachments of every description and all manner of
other facilities and their appurtenances.



            4.   All other uses of the ROW that City may
permit from time to time,



         (c)   City’s rights cumulative. All of city’s
reserved rights under various provisions of this site license herein shall be
cumulative to each other.



         (d)   Use priorities. These Standard Terms do not grant
to provider or establish for provider any exclusive rights or priority in
favor of provider to use the use areas. Provider shall not obstruct or
interfere with or prevent any competing user from using the use areas.



         (e)   Regulation. City shall have full authority to
regulate use of the use areas and to resolve competing demands and
preferences regarding use of the use areas and to require provider to
cooperate and participate in implementing such resolutions. Without
limitation, city may take any or all of the following into account in
regulating use of the use areas:



            1.   All timing, public, operational, financial
and other factors affecting existing and future proposals, needs and plans
for competing activities.



            2.   All other factors city may consider relevant,
whether or not mentioned in this agreement.



            3.   Differing regulatory regimes or laws
applicable to claimed rights, public benefits, community needs and all other
factors relating to competing users and competing activities.



         (f)   Communications equipment relocation. Upon one
hundred eighty (180) calendar days notice from city, provider shall
temporarily or



permanently relocate or otherwise modify the communications equipment
relocation (the “relocation work”) as follows:



            1.   Provider shall perform the relocation work at
its own expense when required by city’s city manager or designee.



            2.   The relocation work includes all work
determined by city to be necessary to accommodate competing activities,
including without limitation temporarily or permanently removing, protecting,
supporting, disconnecting or relocating any portion of the communications
equipment.



            3.   City may perform any part of the relocation
work that has not been performed within the allotted time. Provider shall
reimburse city for its actual costs in performing any relocation work. City
has no obligation to move provider’s, city’s or others’ facilities.



            4.   City and not provider shall be entitled to
use any of provider’s facilities that are abandoned in place or that are
not relocated on city’s request.



            5.   All relocation work shall be subject to and
comply with all other provisions of this agreement.



         (g)   Disruption by competing users. Neither city nor
any agent, contractor or employee of city shall be liable to provider, its
customers or third parties for any service disruption or for any other harm
caused them or the communications equipment due to competing users or
competing activities.



         (h)   Emergency disruption by city. City may remove,
alter, tear out, relocate or damage portions of the communications equipment
in the case of fire, disaster, or other emergencies if city’s city manager
or designee deems such action to be reasonably necessary under the
circumstances. In such event, neither city nor any agent, contractor or
employee of city shall be liable to provider or its customers or third
parties for any harm so caused to them or the communications equipment. When
practical, city shall consult with provider in advance to assess the
necessity of such actions and to minimize to the extent practical under the
circumstances damage to and disruption of operation of the communications
equipment. In any event, city shall inform provider after such actions.
Provider’s work to repair or restore the communications equipment shall be
relocation work.



         (i)   Public safety. If the communications equipment or
any other provider equipment, improvements or activities present any
immediate hazard or impediment to the public, to city, to city’s equipment
or facilities, to other improvements or activities within or without the use
areas, or to city’s ability to safely and conveniently operate the ROW or
perform city’s utility, public safety or other public health, safety and
welfare functions, then provider shall immediately remedy the hazard, comply
with city’s requests to secure the street parcel, and otherwise cooperate
with city at no expense to city to remove any such hazard or impediment.
Provider’s work crews shall report the use areas within four (4) hours of
any request by city under this paragraph (“safety paragraph”).



      (13)   Third party permission. There may be portions of the
ROW, such as canal crossings or other areas that for any reason have limited
ROW dedications or that have regulatory use restrictions imposed by a third
party. Areas subject to such restrictions or regulations by third parties are
referred to as third party areas and communications equipment may not be
built without permission from the third party or third parties that have
property rights or regulatory authority over a specific third party area.
Provider’s right to use any use areas shall be suspended, but not its
obligations with respect thereto, during any period that a third party
permission is not in effect.



   (C)   Term of agreement. The term of each agreement shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Original term. The original term of each agreement shall
be for a period often (10) years commencing on the effective date stated
herein.



      (2)   Extensions. The term of each agreement may be extended
as follows:



         (a)   The term of each agreement may be extended for one
(1) additional ten (10) year period subject to consent by city and provider,
which either may withhold in its sole and absolute discretion.



         (b)   Both city and provider shall be deemed to have
elected to extend unless city or provider, respectively, gives notice to the
contrary to the other at least ninety (90) calendar days prior to the end of
the original term or the current extension.



         (c)   The second term shall begin ten (10) years plus
one (1) calendar day after the initial effective date.



      (3)   Holding over. In any circumstance whereby provider would
remain in possession or occupancy of the use areas after the expiration of
this agreement, (as extended, if applicable), such holding over shall not be
deemed to operate as a renewal or extension of this agreement, but shall only
create a use right from month to month that may be terminated at any time by
city upon thirty (30) calendar days notice to provider, or by provider upon
sixty (60) calendar days notice to city.



      (4)   City’s right to cancel. Notwithstanding anything
contained herein to the contrary, city shall have the unconditional right,
with or without cause, to terminate any agreement for any reason including
but not limited to street widening, ROW abandonment or development that may
impact the location of the site upon one hundred eighty (180) calendar days
notice given at any time after the first one hundred eighty days (180)
calendar days.



      (5)   Provider’s right to cancel. Provider shall have the
unilateral right to terminate any agreement without cause upon thirty (30)
calendar days written notice. Provider has no right to terminate any time
after an event of default by provider has occurred (or an event has occurred
that would become a default after passage of time or giving of notice).



   (D)   Provider’s payments. Provider shall make payments to city as
follows:



      (1)   Use fee items. Provider shall pay to city each of the
following separate and cumulative amounts (collectively “use fee”):



         (a)   An annual amount (“base use fee”).



         (b)   An amount (“ordinary permit use fee”) based on
provider’s permit review and other costs as set out below.



         (c)   An amount (“violation use fee”) based on
certain breaches by provider of this agreement as set out below.



         (d)   All other amounts required by this agreement.



      (2)   Base use fee amount. The amount of base use fee provider
shall pay to city for each year of this agreement shall be the total of all
applicable fee line items for wireless communications facilities (including
without limitation “antenna base fee” and “ground equipment fee”, as
applicable) as set out in the then current fee schedule as it may be amended
from time to time by city council.



      (3)   Ordinary permit use fee amount. The amount of the
ordinary permit use fee shall be the total amount of all applicable ordinary
fees payable to city for city’s review of plans, issuance of permits, and
inspection of provider’s work upon the use areas (including, without
limitation, encroachment permits) as set out in the then current fee schedule
in Chapter 4 of the Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I as it may be amended
from time to time by city council. The permit use fee for SWF as defined in
A.R.S. § 9-591(19) shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and the
permit use fee for wireless sites under A.R.S. § 9-594 shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).



      (4)   Use fee cumulative. All items of use fee shall be
cumulative and separate from each other.



      (5)   Use fee schedule. Except as specifically provided
elsewhere for violation use fee, provider shall pay all Use Fee on the
following schedule:



         (a)   Provider shall pay base use fee and ordinary
permit use fee at the times and in the amounts specified by city’s normal
processes for base use fee and ordinary permit use fee.



         (b)   All other use fee shall be payable quarterly in
arrears on the last day of the first month of the next calendar quarter. For
example, the violation use fee for the first calendar quarter of a year, if
any, shall be payable on or before April 30th.



      (6)   Letter of credit. The initial letter of credit amount
shall be based upon the provider’s good faith projection of the number of
sites to be constructed within the City of Apache Junction during the current
calendar year. The initial letter of credit shall be received by the city
from a local bank branch within the city limits before any construction and
encroachment permits are issued as follows:



         (a)   The Amount of the letter of credit shall be as
follows: thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for up to ten (10) wireless
sites; sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) for eleven (11) to twenty (20)
wireless sites; one hundred five thousand dollars ($105,000.00) for twenty
one (21) to thirty five (35) wireless sites; one hundred eighty thousand
dollars ($180,000.00) for thirty six (36) to sixty (60) wireless sites; three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for sixty one (61) to one hundred
(100) wireless sites; four hundred fifty thousand dollars ($450,000.00) for
one hundred one (101) to one hundred fifty (150) wireless sites; six hundred
seventy five thousand dollars ($675,000.00) for one hundred fifty one (151)
to two hundred twenty five (225) wireless sites; one million fifty thousand
dollars ($1,050,000.00) for two hundred twenty six (226) to three hundred
fifty (350) wireless sites; one million five hundred thousand dollars
($1,500,000.00) for three hundred fifty one (351) to five hundred (500)
wireless sites; two million two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($2,250,000.00) for five hundred one (501) to seven hundred fifty (750)
wireless sites; and three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for seven hundred
fifty one (751) to one thousand (1,000) wireless sites. If the number of
provider’s wireless sites is more than one thousand (1,000), the three
million dollar ($3,000,000.00) letter of credit shall remain in effect and
the letter of credit for the wireless sites in excess of one thousand sites
shall be calculated using the schedule provided in this subsection.



            1.   The city will determine at least once
annually if the number of provider’s wireless sites that are licensed
require that the letter of credit be upgraded to a higher amount. If city
requires a new letter of credit, it shall provide formal notice in writing to
the provider. The Provider must provide the new letter of credit within
forty-five (45) calendar days of receiving written notice.



         (b)   The letter of credit is a security deposit for
provider’s performance of all of its obligations under these Standard Terms
within the City of Apache Junction.



         (c)   The letter of credit shall meet the requirements
listed on Exhibit B attached hereto.



         (d)   Provider shall provide and maintain the letter of
credit during the entire term of each agreement as follows:



            1.   Provider shall cause the original letter of
credit to be delivered to City Engineer.



            2.   Provider shall pay all costs associated with
the letter of credit, regardless of the reason or manner such costs are
required.



            3.   Within ten (10) business days after city
gives provider notice that city has drawn on the letter of credit, provider
shall cause the letter of credit to be replenished to its prior amount.



         (e)   City may draw on the letter of credit upon any
event of default, and in the following circumstances whether or not they are
an event of default:



            1.   Provider fails to cause the letter of credit
to be renewed, extended, increased in amount or otherwise maintained as
required by these Standard Terms.



            2.   Provider fails to make monetary payments as
required by these Standard Terms.



            3.   The issuer of the letter of credit fails to
immediately honor a draft on the letter of credit or otherwise repudiates or
fails to honor the letter of credit.



         (f)   City shall also have such additional rights
regarding the letter of credit as may be provided elsewhere in this agreement.



      (7)   Late Fees. Use fee is deemed paid only when city
actually receives good cash payment. Should any use fee not be paid on or
before the date due, a late fee shall be added to the amount due in the
amount of the greater often percent (10%) of the amount due, or one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Furthermore, any use fee that is not timely paid shall
accrue simple interest at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per
month from the date the amount first came due until paid. Provider expressly
agrees that the foregoing represent fair and reasonable estimates by city and
provider of city’s costs (such as accounting, administrative, legal and
processing costs, etc..) in the event of a delay in payment of use fee. City
shall have the right to allocate payments received from provider among
provider’s obligations.



      (8)   Use fee amounts cumulative. All amounts payable by
provider hereunder or under any tax, assessment or other existing or future
ordinance, law or other contractor obligations to the City of Apache Junction
or the State of Arizona shall be cumulative and payable in addition to each
other payment required hereunder, and such amounts shall not be credited
toward, substituted for, or setoff against each other in any manner.



   (E)   Use restrictions. Provider’s use and occupation of the use
areas shall in all respects conform to all and each of the following
cumulative provisions:



      (1)   Permitted uses. Provider shall use the use areas solely
for the permitted uses and shall conduct no other activity at or from the use
areas.



      (2)   Enclosure use. Provider shall use the enclosure solely
for locating utility cabinets and housing the communications equipment used
for the antennas.



      (3)   Small wireless facility. Provider may install a SWF, as
defined in A.R.S. § 14 9-591(19), to be limited to:



         (a)   All antennas, including the antenna’s exposed
elements, are located inside an enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet
in volume, and



         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
facility is cumulatively not more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume.



            1.   The following ancillary equipment is not
included in the equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecom demarcation box, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cutoff
switch, and vertical cable runs.



      (4)   Communications operations restriction. Provider shall
not install, operate, or allow the use of equipment, methodology or
technology that interferes or is likely to interfere with the optimum
effective use or operation of city’s existing or future fire, emergency or
other communications equipment, methodology or technology (i.e., voice or
other data carrying, receiving or transmitting equipment). If such
interference should occur, Provider shall immediately discontinue using the
equipment, methodology or technology that causes the interference until
provider takes corrective measures to alter the communications equipment to
eliminate such interference. Any such corrective measures shall be made at no
cost to city. Provider shall give to city notice containing a list of the
radio frequencies provider is using at the use areas and shall give notice to
city of any change in frequencies.



      (5)   Other equipment. Provider shall not disturb or otherwise
interfere with any other antennas or other equipment city may have already
installed or may yet install upon the street parcel.



      (6)   Signs. All signage is prohibited except in compliance
with the following requirements:



         (a)   Provider shall install and thereafter maintain the
following signs and other markings as reasonably determined by city from time
to time:



            1.   All signs and markings required for safe use
of the use areas by city, provider and other persons who may be at the use
areas at any time for any reason.



            2.   Any signage city may request directing
parking, deliveries and other vehicles and other users to comply with this
agreement.



            3.   Warning signs listing only provider’s name,
permanent business address, telephone number, emergency telephone number, and
any information required by law.



         (b)   All signage not expressly allowed by these
Standard Terms is prohibited.



         (c)   The location, size, content and style of each sign
shall be subject to the provisions of the applicable sign ordinance and shall
comply with city’s sign programs as the same may change from time to time.
Provider shall update signs as required to comply with changes in the
applicable sign ordinance and city’s sign programs.



         (d)   Provider shall design, make, install and maintain
all signage in a first class, professional manner without broken panels,
faded or peeling paint or other damage.



         (e)   Provider shall bear all costs pertaining to the
erection, installation, operation, maintenance, replacement and removal of
all signs including, but not limited to, the application for and obtaining of
any required building or other permits regardless of the reason for any such
activity, even if such activity is required by city pursuant to these
Standard Terms.



         (f)   The requirements of this paragraph apply to all
signs, designs, monuments, decals, graphics, posters, banners, markings, and
other manner of signage.



      (7)   Provider’s lighting. Except for security lighting
operated with city’s approval from time to time, provider shall not operate
outdoor lights at the use areas.



      (8)   Noise. Except during construction permitted under this
agreement and for burglar alarms and other safety devices, outdoor loud
speakers, sirens or other devices for making noise are prohibited. All
equipment shall be operated so that sound coming therefrom does not exceed
the ambient noise level at the boundary of the street parcel and cannot be
heard at the closer of i) the exterior boundary of the street parcel or ii)
two hundred feet (200') outside the boundary of the street parcel. The
preceding sentence does not apply to use of normal, properly maintained
construction equipment used as permitted by an approved agreement, to
infrequent use of equipment that is as quiet or quieter than a typical well
maintained gasoline powered passenger automobile, to use of an air
conditioning unit that is no noisier than a typical well maintained
residential air conditioning unit.



      (9)   Limited Access. It is Provider’s and not City’s
responsibility to keep unauthorized persons from accessing the communications
equipment and the exclusive areas.



      (10)   Standards of service. Provider shall operate the use
areas in a first-class manner, and shall keep the use areas attractively
maintained, orderly, clean, neat and tidy at all times. Provider shall not
allow any person or persons in or about the use areas related to provider’s
operations who shall fail to be clean, courteous, efficient and neat in
appearance.



      (11)   Provider’s agent. Provider shall at all times retain
on-call available to city by telephone an active, qualified, competent and
experienced person to supervise all activities upon the use areas and
operation of the communications equipment and who shall be authorized to
represent and act for provider in matters pertaining to all emergencies and
the day-to-day operation of the ROW and all other matters affecting approved
agreement. Provider shall also provide notice to city of the name, street
address, electronic mail address, and regular and after hours telephone
number of a person to handle provider’s affairs and emergencies at the ROW.
Any change shall be given in writing to City Engineer in the manner stated
for notices required herein.



      (12)   Coordination meetings. Provider shall meet with city
and other ROW users from time to time as requested by city to coordinate and
plan construction on the use areas and all matters affected by these Standard
Terms. Without limitation, provider shall attend city’s scheduled utility
planning meetings.



      (13)   Toxic substances. Provider’s activities upon or about
the use areas shall be subject to the following regarding any hazardous or
toxic substances, waste or materials or any substance now or hereafter
subject to regulation under the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601, et seq., the Arizona
Hazardous Waste Management Act, A.R.S. §§ 49-901 et seq.,the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901, et seq., the Toxic
Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or any other federal,
state, county, or local law pertaining to hazardous substances, waste or
toxic substances and their reporting requirements (collectively “toxic
substances”):



         (a)   Provider understands the hazards presented to
persons, property and the environment by dealing with toxic substances. City
has made no warranties as to whether the use areas contain actual or presumed
asbestos or other toxic substances.



         (b)   Within twenty-four (24) hours after discovery by
provider of any toxic substances, provider shall report such toxic substances
to city in writing. Within fourteen (14) calendar days thereafter, provider
shall provide city with a written report of the nature and extent of such
toxic substances found by provider.



         (c)   Disturbance of toxic substances. Prior to
undertaking any construction or other significant work, provider shall cause
the use areas to be inspected to prevent disturbance of potential asbestos or
other toxic substances. Prior to any work of any description that bears a
material risk of disturbing potential asbestos or other toxic substances,
provider shall cause the contractor or other person performing such work to
give to city notice by the method described in these Standard Terms to the
effect that the person will inspect for toxic substances, will not disturb
toxic substances, and will indemnify, defend and hold city harmless against
any disturbance in toxic substances in the course of the contractor’s or
other person’s work. Provider shall cause any on-site or off-site storage,
inspection, treatment, transportation, disposal, handling, or other work
involving toxic substances by provider in connection with the use areas to be
performed by persons, equipment, facilities and other resources who are at
all times properly and lawfully trained, authorized, licensed, permitted and
otherwise qualified to perform such services. Provider shall promptly deliver
to city copies of all reports or other information regarding toxic substances.



      (14)   Required operation. During the entire term of each
agreement and any renewals or extensions, provider shall actively and
continuously operate the communications equipment twenty-four (24) hours a
day, seven (7) days a week, for the permitted uses. Notwithstanding anything
contained in this paragraph to the contrary, the operation requirements of
this paragraph shall be effective commencing on the earlier of completion of
the project or the completion deadline and shall continue through the date
the agreement terminates or expires for any reason. In the event of
relocation of the communications equipment or damage to the use areas severe
enough that the communications equipment cannot reasonably be operated during
repairs, the operation requirements of this paragraph shall be suspended
during the time specified by these Standard Terms for accomplishing repair of
such damage to relocation of the Communications Equipment. Provider may
temporarily cease operating the communications equipment for short periods
necessary to test, repair, service or upgrade the communications equipment.



      (15)   Actions by others. Provider shall be responsible to
ensure compliance with these Standard Terms by all persons using the ROW
through or under provider or these Standard Terms.



   (F)   Provider’s improvements generally. All of provider’s
improvements and other construction work whether or not specifically
described herein upon or related to the use areas (collectively
“provider’s improvements”) shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Provider’s improvements. Provider’s improvements
include without limitation, all modification, replacement, repairs,
installation, construction, grading, structural, utility, lighting, plumbing,
sewer or other alterations, parking or traffic alterations, removal,
demolition or other cumulatively significant construction or similar work of
any description and all installation or alteration of the communications
equipment.



      (2)   General approval process. The general processes,
building permit processes, ROW management policies and similar regulatory
requirements that apply to provider’s improvements are completely separate
from the plans approval processes set forth in these Standard Terms.
Provider’s satisfaction of any requirement set forth these Standard Terms
does not substitute for compliance with any regulatory requirement.
Provider’s satisfaction of any regulatory requirement does not substitute
for compliance with any requirement of these standard terms. Provider must
make all submittals and communications regarding the requirements of these
Standard Terms through the City Engineer and not through planning, zoning,
building safety or other staff. Provider shall be responsible to directly
obtain all necessary permits and approvals from any and all governmental or
other entities having standing or jurisdiction over the use areas. Provider
bears sole responsibility to comply with all stipulations and conditions that
are required in order to secure such rezoning and other approvals.
Notwithstanding anything in this paragraph, to the extent regulatory
requirements and requirements of these Standard Terms are identical,
compliance with regulatory requirements shall constitute compliance with
these Standard Terms and vice versa.



         (a)   Batching sites for approval. Only sites that do
not have a new or a replacement pole required for the antennas, and do not
have any underground cables, conduit, and foundations, are eligible for batch
processing of the applications.



      (3)   Relationship of plans approval to regulatory processes.
Provider’s submission of plans under these Standard Terms, city’s
approval of plans for purposes of these Standard Terms, and the plans
approval process herein shall be separate and independent of all development,
zoning, design review and other regulatory or similar plans submittal and
approval processes, all of which shall continue to apply as provided under
state law, in addition to the requirements of these Standard Terms and its
approvals. Building permits, zoning clearances, or any other governmental
reviews or actions do not constitute approval of any plans for purposes of
this agreement.



      (4)   City’s fixtures and personal property. Provider shall
not remove, alter or damage in any way any improvements or any personal
property of city upon the use areas without city’s prior written approval.
In all cases, Provider will repair any damage or other alteration to city’s
property caused by provider or its contractors, employees or agents to as
good or better condition than existed before the damage or alteration.



      (5)   Design requirements. All provider’s improvements shall
comply with the following design requirements:



         (a)   All provider’s improvements shall be contained
entirely within the use areas and without any encroachment or dependence upon
any other property, except for permitted utility service.



         (b)   Any changes to utility facilities shall be
strictly limited to the use areas, shall not affect utilities used by city,
and shall be undertaken by provider at its sole cost and expense.



         (c)   The antennas and other communications equipment
shall be properly designed, installed and maintained so as not to create a
risk of damage to the pole, to persons or property upon or using the street
parcel or city’s other property.



         (d)   To the extent requested by city, provider’s
plans shall include a description of construction methods employed to address
environmental issues affecting or affected by the use areas and protect other
facilities at the street parcel and surrounding properties.



         (e)   All specifications set forth in the City of Apache
Junction Design Standards for Small Wireless Facilities in the ROW (Exhibit
A).



      (6)   Approval required. Provider shall not construct any
provider’s improvements (including work on adjacent public lands, if
applicable) without having first received written plans approval from city.
Such consent requirement shall apply to all improvements, furnishings,
equipment, fixtures, paint, wall treatments, utilities of every description,
communications cabling and other construction work of any description as
described in all plans heretofore or hereafter delivered by provider to city.
Such consent requirement does not apply to work to the communications
equipment confined completely inside the enclosure and not visible, audible,
or otherwise discernible outside the enclosure.



      (7)   Effect of plans approval. Provider shall submit
engineering and construction plans to the city for review and approval.
City’s approval of plans submitted shall be for purposes of these Standard
Terms only and shall constitute irrevocable approval (but only at the level
of detail of the applicable stage of the review process) of the matters
plainly shown on the plans approved. City shall not reject subsequent plans
to the extent the matter to which city objects was plainly shown on plans
previously approved by city. However, city is not precluded from objecting to
matters not previously approved, changes to plans, matters not previously
clearly disclosed on approved plans, or refinements or implementation of
matters previously approved.



      (8)   Plans required. Provider’s design of all provider’s
improvements shall occur in three stages culminating in final working
construction documents for the provider’s improvements (the “final
plans”). The three stages are, in order of submission and in increasing
order of detail, as follows:



         (a)   Conceptual plans showing the general layout,
locations, elevations, configuration, and capacities of all significant
improvements, topographical features, pedestrian and vehicular ways,
buildings, utilities, and other features significantly affecting the
appearance, design, function or operation of each element of provider’s
improvements.



         (b)   Preliminary plans showing all surface finishes and
treatments, finished elevations, general internal and external design
(including without limitation colors, textures and materials), mechanical,
communications, electrical, plumbing and other utility systems, building
materials, landscaping and all other elements necessary prior to preparation
of final working construction documents and showing compliance with all
requirements of these Standard Terms.  The preliminary plans shall show all
detail necessary prior to preparation of final plans.



         (c)   In addition to the information that city required
for preliminary plans, the final plans shall include a title report for the
use area and the shared use area, engineering design documents for the pole
foundation, pole structural design, and other generally required engineering
specifications for construction drawings or CD plans for permits.



      (9)   Approval process. The following procedure shall govern
provider’s submission to city of all plans for provider’s improvements,
including any proposed changes by provider to previously approved plans:



         (a)   All plans provider submits under these Standard
Terms shall show design, appearance, capacity, views, and other information
reasonably deemed necessary by city for a complete understanding of the work
proposed, all in detail reasonably deemed appropriate by city for the level
of plans required herein.



         (b)   Provider shall deliver all plans submissions for
non-regulatory approvals required herein directly to City Engineer and shall
clearly label the submissions to indicate that they are submitted pursuant to
the Standard Terms and not for building permits or other approvals. Each
submittal of plans by provider for city’s review shall include five (5)
complete sets of the plans on paper and, if requested, two (2) copies of the
plans in electronic form.



         (c)   All construction plans shall be prepared by
qualified registered professional engineers.



         (d)   City and provider shall endeavor to resolve design
and construction issues to their mutual satisfaction but, in the event of an
impasse for any reason or however arising, in light of city’s ownership and
other uses of the use areas, and as a condition of city’s entering into an
agreement, final decision authority regarding all design and construction
issues shall rest with city.



         (e)   All provider’s improvements shall comply with
all requirements of law, any applicable insurance contracts and these
Standard Terms.



      (10)   Cost of provider improvements. All provider’s
improvements shall be designed and constructed by provider at provider’s
sole cost and expense, including without limitation any alteration or other
change to city’s equipment or other improvements or personal property that
may occur. In no event shall city be obligated to compensate provider in any
manner for any of provider’s improvements or other work provided by
provider during or related to the term of any approved agreement. Provider
shall timely pay for all labor, materials, work, and all professional and
other services related thereto and shall pay, protect, indemnify, defend and
hold harmless city and city’s employees, officers, contractors and agents
against all claims related to such items. Provider shall bear the cost of all
work required from time to time to cause the use areas and city’s adjoining
property (if directly affected by provider’s work) to comply with local
zoning rules, the Americans with Disabilities Act, building codes and all
similar rules, regulations and other laws if such work is required because of
work performed by provider, by provider’s use of the use areas, or by any
exercise of the rights granted to provider under this site license agreement.



      (11)   Improvement quality. Any and all work performed on the
use areas by provider shall be performed in a workman-like manner meeting or
exceeding the best practices of similar facilities in the phoenix
metropolitan area, and shall be diligently pursued to completion and in
conformance with all building codes and similar rules. All of provider’s
improvements shall be high quality, safe, fire resistant, modern in design,
and attractive in appearance, all as approved by city through the plans
approval processes described in these Standard Terms in addition to any
zoning, building code or other regulatory processes that may apply.



      (12)   Ownership of provider’s improvements. All
provider’s improvements (including without limitation poles and lights)
except the communications equipment shall be and become part of the real
property of city “brick by brick” as constructed or installed.



      (13)   Damage during work. Upon performing any work upon the
ROW, provider shall simultaneously restore the ROW to its prior condition, as
directed by city and repair any holes, mounting surfaces or other damage
whatsoever to the ROW. Such work shall include revegetation and appropriate
irrigation systems for revegetated areas.



      (14)   Replacement pole. If city approves a provider proposal
to install antennas on a city owned pole, then in addition to the other
requirements, the following shall apply:



         (a)   Provider shall provide and deliver to city a
replacement pole, including mast arm, so that a replacement is immediately
available to city in case the original pole is damaged.



         (b)   If city uses a replacement pole, then provider
shall provide another replacement pole.



         (c)   Upon installation of a replacement pole, the city
will determine if the original pole, mast arm(s), signal head(s), and light
fixture(s) shall be delivered by provider to the city’s streets and
transportation yard or if the provider shall dispose of the original pole,
mast arm, signal head and light fixture.



         (d)   All performance under this paragraph shall be at
provider’s expense. City owns the original pole and all replacement poles.



      (15)   Coordination with encroachment permit. The street
parcel is located in city’s public street ROW, an approved agreement serves
as an encroachment permit under Chapter 13 of the Apache Junction City Code
to the extent of allowing provider’s improvements to exist upon the street
parcel. Provider shall obtain additional encroachment permits at provider’s
expense as follows:



         (a)   Provider shall perform no construction work in the
ROW without obtaining from city a permit giving permission to work in the ROW.



         (b)   Provider shall not alter or modify its antennas,
wireless equipment or any improvements without submitting plans or drawings
of the proposed alteration or modification to city and obtaining approval
from City’s Engineer.



         (c)   Provider shall not perform any work on its own
antennas or wireless equipment without first obtaining from City an
encroachment permit giving it permission to work in the ROW.



         (d)   Provider shall not in any way obstruct pedestrian
or vehicular traffic within the ROW without first obtaining from city a
permit giving permission to obstruct traffic.



      (16)   Time for completion. Provider shall diligently and
expeditiously pursue to completion the construction of all approved
provider’s improvements. Provider shall complete initial construction of
the project no later than the completion deadline. Provider shall complete
construction of all of other provider’s improvements no later than one
hundred eighty (180) calendar days of permit issuance unless city and
provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by a lack of
commercial power at the site. If city, in its sole examination of the
construction activity at a site, determines that provider has not
substantially performed construction at a site within one hundred eighty
(180) calendar days of the permit issuance date, city may require the
provider to cease construction and resubmit the site for approval.



      (17)   Construction notification. City may establish
requirements for notification of nearby residents and property owners prior
to construction.



      (18)   Work time and manner restrictions. All installation,
construction, maintenance, inspection, repair and other work of any kind
shall be done in a manner that does not disrupt traffic (except in compliance
with appropriate permits) or nearby land uses. Without limitation, such work
shall be done in compliance with applicable city policies and directions from
time to time, taking into account the various sensitivities of traffic,
tourism, events, adjoining land uses, other ROW uses, and all other needs and
concerns that are likely to be affected by provider’s work.



   (G)   RF safety for city employees. As city’s employees, agents,
and representatives must have uninterrupted and safe access to the ROW and
all structures located thereon, provider must comply with at least one of the
following safety protocols:



      (1)   Participate in a city RF safety program (“city’s
safety program”), enrollment in which shall include:



         (a)   A one-time contribution to the city of two (2) RF
personal monitors, as specified below, for monitoring radio frequency
emissions from provider facilities during the repair and maintenance of
city’s facilities and ROW. The RF personal monitors shall be delivered to
the City Engineer within sixty (60) calendar days of the issuance date of the
first permit for a SWF issued to the provider.



            1.   The RF personal monitor shall be a new
manufactured with full original manufacturer’s warranty NARDA (2271/101) -
Nardalert S3 Personal and Area Monitor or equivalent device that is approved
by the city.



            2.   The provider shall provide for each Nardalert
S3 Personal and Area Monitor, a protective silicon or rubberized cover, and a
case to store and carry the device.



         (b)   An annual contribution of two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for third-party training of city employees who
will work on poles that have a wireless facility and for the ongoing
operation - including the annual recertification training of city employees,
test set calibration, and test set maintenance and repair - of the city’s
safety program (“annual contribution”).



            1.   The first annual contribution, payable to the
City of Apache Junction, shall be delivered or transferred as directed by the
City Engineer within sixty (60) calendar days of the issuance date of the
first permit for a SWF issued to the provider.



            2.   Each annual contribution thereafter shall be
made payable to the City of Apache Junction as directed by the City Engineer
on or before the anniversary date of the issuance date of the first permit
for a SWF issued to the provider.



            3.   On each five (5) year interval of the
issuance date of the first permit to install a SWF in the city, the provider
shall provide the city with one (1) additional RF personal monitor that meets
or exceeds the requirement in Sections (G)(1)(a)1 and (G)(1)(a)2 that the
city must approve prior to purchase.



            4.   Prior to performing any work on a wireless
site in the ROW, the city’s employee will contact the network operations
center (“NOC”) whose information shall be located on the ground equipment
or on the pole. The city’s employee shall identify himself or herself as an
employee of city and needs the RF to be turned off at the site for a
specified period to perform maintenance or repair work at the site. Upon
completion of the work, the city’s employee shall contact the NOC and
inform them that the site may activate the RF signals.



      (2)   Provide access to a “kill switch” for each wireless
site that the city’s employees, agents, or representatives can use to turn
off all power to the provider’s facilities while city’s work is performed
at the location.



      (3)   Within 24 hours of a request, agree to send a technician
with an RF monitor to confirm that all RF emitting equipment has, in fact,
been deactivated, and to install all appropriate lockout tags and devices.



   (H)   Maintenance and utilities. Except as expressly provided below,
provider shall be solely responsible for all maintenance, repair and
utilities for the use areas during the term of an approved agreement. Without
limitation, provider shall perform the following:



      (1)   Maintenance by city. City has no maintenance or repair
obligations for the communications equipment or other provider’s
improvements.



      (2)   Maintenance by provider. Provider shall at all times
repair and maintain the use areas at provider’s sole expense in a
first-class, sound, clean, safe and attractive manner, meeting or exceeding
the manner of maintenance at first class comparable facilities in the phoenix
metropolitan area, as determined in city’s reasonable discretion. The
preceding sentence does not require provider to repair or maintain city’s
facilities at the license area unless such work is attributable in whole or
in part to provider’s use of the use areas.



      (3)   Utility service. Provider shall contract for and pay all
charges, fees, deposits and other amounts for electricity and telephone and
other data communication service to the use areas at the rates applicable
thereto. Provider shall use no other utilities at the use areas.



      (4)   Utility interruptions. City is not responsible for any
interruption of utilities to or upon the use areas or other difficulties
related to utilities at the use areas.



      (5)   Right of inspection. City shall be entitled to inspect
all construction, reconstruction or installation work and to make such tests
as it deems necessary to ensure compliance with the terms herein, the public
works code, or other telecommunications laws. All city plans reviews,
inspections, standards and other rights and actions with relation to
provider’s improvements are for city’s sole and exclusive benefit and
neither provider nor any other person shall rely thereon or have any rights
related thereto. The preceding sentence does not prevent provider from
relying on consents, permits or approvals city may grant based on city’s
plans, reviews, and inspections. This right of access is in addition to
access rights for city inspectors or other employees and officers acting
within their legal authority.



      (6)   Construction notification. City may establish
requirements for provider to notify nearby residents prior to construction.



      (7)   Blue stake. Provider shall register with and comply with
the local blue stake program.



   (I)   Breach by provider. Provider shall comply with, perform and do
each obligation required of provider herein and shall cause all persons using
the use areas through or under provider or these Standard Terms to do the
same. Provider’s failure to do so shall be a material breach by provider of
these Standard Terms.



      (1)   Events of default. All site licenses are approved upon
the condition that each and every one of the following events herein shall be
deemed an “event of default” by provider of provider’s material
obligations under these Standard Terms:



         (a)   If provider shall be in arrears in the payment of
use fee and shall not cure such arrearage within ten (10) calendar days after
city has notified provider of such arrearage.



         (b)   If provider shall fail to operate the
communications equipment (except during specific periods expressly excused
herein) for a period of three (3) consecutive days or a total of five (5)
calendar days within any twelve (12) month period.



         (c)   If provider shall fail to maintain any insurance
required under these Standard Terms. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence,
such failure shall not be a default if within five (5) business days after
notice from city, provider provides to city the required insurance and the
required evidence thereof. Such insurance must cover the past for a period
adequate that there is no gap in the insurance coverage required by these
Standard Terms.



         (d)   If a pole ROW agreement, pole antenna agreement or
supplemental parcel agreement shall expire or be terminated for any reason.



         (e)   If provider does not commence and diligently
pursue to completion each required stage of construction of the site within
the times required herein. The times specified for concluding each stage of
required construction have been established far enough in advance, and have
taken into account the likelihood of construction delays, so that no cure
period is provided.



         (f)   If provider shall be the subject of a voluntary or
involuntary bankruptcy, receivership, insolvency or similar proceeding or if
any assignment of any of provider’s or such other person’s property shall
be made for the benefit of creditors or if provider or such other person dies
or is not regularly paying its debts as they come due (collectively a
“provider insolvency”).



         (g)   If the issuer of any letter of credit shall fail
for any reason to timely and fully honor any request by city for funds or
other performance under the instrument and provider fails to cause the issuer
to or some other person to honor the request within ten (10) calendar days
after city notifies provider that such request has not been honored.



         (h)   If provider shall fail to obtain or maintain any
licenses, permits, or other governmental approvals pertaining to the ROW or
timely pay any taxes pertaining to the ROW and shall not cure such failure
within thirty (30) calendar days.



         (i)   If city shall be exposed to any liability,
obligation, damage, cost, expense, or other claim of any description, whether
or not asserted, unless provider gives immediate notice to city of
provider’s commitment to indemnify, defend and hold city harmless against
such claim provider does in fact promptly commence and continue to indemnify,
defend and hold city harmless against such claim and, provider delivers to
city with said notice bonds or other financial security in city’s
reasonable discretion adequate to assure that provider will indemnify, defend
and hold city harmless against such claim “and adequate to protect city and
the use areas from adverse consequences of such claim.



         (j)   If provider shall fail to meet its obligations
under the RF safety paragraph.



         (k)   If provider shall engage in a pattern of repeated
failure (or neglect) to timely do or perform or observe any provision
contained herein. After city has once given notice of any failure by provider
to comply with its obligations set forth in these Standard Terms, the
following shall constitute a repeated failure by provider to comply with such
provision:



            1.   Another failure to comply with any provision
of these Standard Terms during the following thirty (30) calendar day period.



            2.   Three (3) or more failures to comply with any
provision of these Standard Terms during any ninety (90) calendar day period.



            3.   Six (6) or more failures to comply with any
provision of these Standard Terms during any twelve (12) month period.



         (l)   If Provider shall fail to or neglect to timely and
completely do or perform or observe any other provisions herein and such
failure or neglect shall continue for a period of thirty (30) calendar days
after city has notified provider in writing of such failure or neglect.



      (2)   City’s remedies. Upon the occurrence of any event of
default or at any time thereafter, city may, at its option and from time to
time, exercise at provider’s expense any or all or any combination of the
following cumulative remedies in any order and repetitively at city’s
option:



         (a)   Terminate any or all site licenses due to
provider’s breach or for any other reason does not terminate provider’s
obligations arising during the time simultaneous with or prior to or the
termination, and in no way terminates any of provider’s liability related
to any breach of these Standard Terms.



         (b)   Pay or perform, for provider’s account, in
provider’s name, and at provider’s expense, any or all payments or
performances required hereunder to be paid or performed by provider.



         (c)   Abate at provider’s expense any violation of
these Standard Terms.



         (d)   Notwithstanding anything under these Standard
Terms to the contrary, unilaterally and without provider’s or any other
person’s consent or approval, draw upon, withdraw or otherwise realize upon
or obtain the value of any letter of credit, escrowed funds, insurance
policies, or other deposits, sureties, bonds Or other funds or security held
by city or pledged or otherwise obligated to city by provider or by any third
party (whether or not specifically mentioned herein) and use the proceeds for
any remedy permitted by these Standard Terms.



         (e)   Require an additional security deposit adequate in
city’s sole discretion to protect city and the ROW.



         (f)   Assert, exercise or otherwise pursue at
provider’s expense any and all other rights or remedies, legal or
equitable, to which city may be entitled, subject only to the limitation set
out below on city’s ability to collect money damages in light of the
violation use fee.



      (3)   Violation use fee. In lieu of certain money damages (the
“inconvenience costs”) set out below, the following shall apply to
provider’s violation of certain limited requirements of these Standard
Terms (the “violation fee provisions”):



         (a)   The inconvenience costs are the money damages that
city suffers in the form of administrative cost and inconvenience, disharmony
among competing users, and general inconvenience in ROW use by city,
competing users and the public when provider fails to comply with the
violation fee provisions.



         (b)   Provider’s failure to comply with violation fee
provisions will result in inconvenience costs in an amount that is and will
be impracticable to determine. Therefore, the parties have agreed that, in
lieu of provider paying to city as damages the actual amount of the
inconvenience costs for violating the violation fee provisions, provider
shall pay violation use fee.



         (c)   Violation use fee is only intended to remedy
inconvenience costs that city suffers because of provider’s breach of the
violation fee provisions. Provider’s payment of violation use fee does not
in any way excuse any breach by provider of these Standard Terms or limit in
any way provider’s obtaining any other legal or equitable remedy provided
by these Standard Terms or otherwise or such breach. For example,
provider’s obligation to pay violation use fee does not in any way detract
from provider’s indemnity and insurance obligations under these Standard
Terms, which shall apply according to their terms in addition to provider’s
obligation to pay violation use fee.



         (d)   Provider may elect to draw upon the letter of
credit to collect the violation use fee.



         (e)   The violation fee provisions and the amount of the
violation use fee per day or part thereof are as follows:



            1.   The amount of six hundred dollars ($600.00)
per day for provider’s failure to properly restore the public ROW or to
correct related violations of specifications, code, ordinance or standards
within ten (10) business days after city’s notice to correct such defects.
Such violation use fee shall be in addition to any cost the city may incur to
restore the ROW or correct the violation.



            2.   The amount of two hundred fifty ($250.00) per
day for each failure to make provider’s books and records available as
required by this agreement.



            3.   The amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
per instance of any other action or non-action by the provider contrary to
these Standard Terms herein, that causes inconvenience costs and that is not
cured after three (3) business days’ notice.



         (f)   Violation use fees shall be assessed as follows:



            1.   If city determines that provider is liable
for violation use fee, then city shall issue to provider a notice of city’s
assessing a violation use fee. The notice shall set forth the nature of the
violation and the amount of the assessment.



            2.   Provider shall pay the violation use fee
within ten (10) calendar days after city’s notice. However, if the
violation use fee amount exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), then the
following shall apply:



            3.   Provider shall have thirty (30) calendar days
after the notice to pay the violation use fee or give city notice contesting
the assertion of noncompliance.



            4.   If provider fails to respond to the notice,
provider shall pay the violation use fee. Otherwise, city shall schedule a
public hearing to investigate whether the violation use fee is properly
assessed. City shall provide provider at least ten (10) calendar days notice
of such hearing, which shall specify the time, place and purpose of the
hearing. At the hearing, provider shall be provided an opportunity to be
heard and present evidence. If the result of the hearing is that provider is
liable for violation use fee, then the violation use fee is due ten (10)
calendar days after the hearing decision is announced.



      (4)   Non-waiver. Provider acknowledges provider’s
unconditional obligation to comply with these standard terms herein. No
failure by city to demand any performance required of provider under these
Standard Terms herein, and no acceptance by city of any imperfect or partial
performances under these Standard Terms herein, shall excuse such performance
or impair in any way city’s ability to insist, prospectively and
retroactively, upon full compliance with these Standard Terms herein. No
acceptance by city of use fee payments or other performances hereunder shall
be deemed a compromise or settlement of any right city may have for
additional, different or further payments or performances as provided for in
these Standard Terms. Any waiver by city of any breach of condition or
covenant herein contained to be kept and performed by provider shall not be
deemed or considered as a continuing waiver and shall not operate to bar or
otherwise prevent city from declaring a default for any breach or succeeding
or continuing breach either of the same condition or covenant or otherwise.
No statement, bill or notice by city or provider concerning payments or other
performances due hereunder, or failure by city to demand any performance
hereunder, shall excuse provider from compliance with its obligations nor
estop city (or otherwise impair city’s ability) to at any time correct such
notice and/or insist prospectively and retroactively upon full compliance
with this agreement. No waiver of any description (including any waiver of
this sentence or paragraph) shall be effective against city unless made in
writing by a duly authorized representative of city specifically identifying
the particular provision being waived and specifically stating the scope of
the waiver. Provider expressly disclaims and shall not have the right to rely
on any supposed waiver or other change or modification, whether by word or
conduct or otherwise, not conforming to this paragraph.



      (5)   Reimbursement of city’s expenses. Provider shall pay
to city within thirty (30) calendar days after city’s demand any and all
amounts expended or incurred by city in performing provider’s obligations
(upon provider’s failure to perform the same after notice from city)
together with interest thereon at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum
from the date expended or incurred by city.



      (6)   Breach by city. Notwithstanding anything in these
Standard Terms to the contrary, if



city at any time is required to pay to provider any amount or render any
performance, such amount or performance is not due until thirty (30) calendar
days after notice by provider to city that the amount has become payable or
that the performance is due. In the event a cure cannot be effected during
that period, city shall not be in default so long as city commences cure
during the period and diligently prosecutes the cure to completion provided
such cure must be completed within sixty (60) calendar days after the notice.



      (7)   Right to setoff and credit. In addition to its other
rights and remedies city shall have the right to setoff and credit from time
to time and at any time, any and all amounts due from provider to city,
whether pursuant to these Standard Terms herein or otherwise, against any sum
which may be due from city to provider.



   (J)   Termination. The following provisions shall apply at the
expiration of the term of each site license:



      (1)   Surviving obligations. Expiration or termination of a
site license does not terminate provider’s obligations existing or arising
prior to or simultaneous with, or attributable to, the termination or events
leading to or occurring before termination.



      (2)   Delivery of possession. Provider shall cease using the
use areas of the expired or terminated site license. Provider shall without
demand, peaceably and quietly quit and deliver up the use areas to city
thoroughly cleaned, in good repair with the use areas maintained and repaired
and in as good order and condition, reasonable use and wear excepted, as the
use areas now are or in such better condition as the use areas may hereafter
be placed.



      (3)   Confirmation of termination. Upon expiration or
termination of an agreement for any reason, provider shall provide to city
upon demand recordable disclaimers covering the use areas executed and
acknowledged by provider and by all persons claiming through this agreement
or provider any interest in or right to use the use areas.



      (4)   Removal of improvements. Provider shall remove all
communications equipment and restore the use areas including pole, mast arms,
luminaires, or wireless support structure to its prior condition, or to a
condition matching city’s surrounding land and improvements, as directed by
city, at provider’s expense prior to normal expiration of the term of a
site license or within thirty (30) calendar days; after termination of an
agreement for any other reason whatsoever. Without limitation, such work
shall include revegetation and appropriate irrigation systems for revegetated
areas. Notwithstanding anything in these Standard Terms to the contrary, city
may elect to require provider to leave any or all construction or other items
(except the communications equipment) in place, and all such items shall be
owned by city. Unless city directs otherwise, all wiring, pipes and conduits
shall be left in good and safe condition, in working order, with each end
properly labeled and enclosed in proper junction boxes.



      (5)   Prior improvements. This article also applies to any
improvements that provider may have made to the use areas.



   (K)   Indemnity and insurance. During the entire term of any site
license, provider shall insure its property and activities at and about the
use areas and shall provide insurance and indemnification as follows:



      (1)   Insurance required. Not later than the date of this
agreement, and at all times thereafter when provider is occupying or using
the use areas in any way, provider shall obtain and cause to be in force and
effect the following insurance:



         (a)   Commercial general liability. Commercial general
liability insurance with a limit of ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for
each occurrence, a limit of ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for products
and completed operations annual aggregate, and a limit of ten million dollars
($10,000,000) general aggregate limit per policy year. The policy shall cover
liability arising from premises, operations, independent contractors,
products, completed operations, personal injury, bodily injury, advertising
injury, and liability assumed under an “insured contract” including this
agreement. The policy will cover provider’s liability under the indemnity
provisions set forth in these Standard Terms. The policy shall contain a
“separation of insured’s” clause.



         (b)   Automobile liability. Automobile liability
insurance with a limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for each
occurrence covering any and all owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles assigned
to or used in any way in connection with provider’s use of the ROW. Without
limitation, such insurance shall cover hazards of motor vehicle use for
loading and off-loading.



         (c)   Workers’ compensation. Such workers’
compensation and similar insurance as is required by law and employer’s
liability insurance with a minimum limit of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000) for each accident, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) disease
for each employee, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) policy limit for
disease. All contractors and subcontractors must provide like insurance.



         (d)   Special risk property. Unless waived by city in
writing, all risk property insurance covering damage to or destruction of all
real and personal improvements to the ROW, including without limitation, all
improvements existing upon the ROW prior to this agreement or hereafter
constructed in an amount equal to full replacement cost of all such
improvements. Such insurance shall be special causes of loss policy form
(minimally including perils of fire, lightning, explosion, windstorm, hail,
smoke, aircraft, vehicles, riot, civil commotion, theft, vandalism, malicious
mischief, collapse and flood). Coverage shall include pollutant clean up and
removal with minimum limits coverage of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).



            1.   Other insurance. Any other insurance city may
reasonably require for the protection of city and city’s employees,
officials, representatives, officers and agents (all of whom, including city,
are collectively “additional insureds”), the ROW, surrounding property,
provider, or the activities carried on or about the ROW. Such insurance shall
be limited to insurance a reasonable person owning, leasing, designing,
constructing, occupying, or operating similar facilities might reasonably
purchase.



      (2)   Policy limit escalation. City may elect by notice to
provider to increase the amount or type of any insurance to account for
inflation, changes in risk, or any other factor that city reasonably
determines to affect the prudent amount of insurance to be provided.



      (3)   Form of all insurance. All insurance provided by
provider with respect to the ROW, whether required in these Standard Terms or
not, shall meet the following requirements:



         (a)   “Occurrence” coverage is required.



         (b)   If Provider uses any excess insurance then such
excess insurance shall be “follow form” equal to or broader in coverage
than the underlying insurance.



         (c)   Policies must also cover and insure provider’s
activities relating to the business operations and activities conducted away
from the ROW.



         (d)   Within five (5) business days of receiving a
written request from the city, provider shall provide copies of insurance
certificates, insurance policies, formal endorsements or other documentation
acceptable to city that all insurance coverage required herein is provided.



         (e)   Provider’s insurance shall be primary insurance
with respect to claims arising out of Provider’s operations, activities and
obligations set forth in these Standard Terms.



         (f)   All policies, including workers’ compensation,
shall waive transfer rights of recovery (subrogation) against city, and the
other additional insureds.



         (g)   All deductibles, retentions, or “self-insured”
amounts shall be subject to the following:



            1.   Provider shall be solely responsible for any
self-insurance amount or deductible.



            2.   Such amounts shall not exceed in total one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) per loss. At such times as provider’s
net worth is more than one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000), such limit
shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000).



            3.   Any self-insured exposure shall be deemed to
be an insured risk under this agreement.



            4.   Provider shall provide to the beneficiaries
of all such amounts no less insurance protection than if such self-insured
portion was fully insured by an insurance company of the quality and caliber
required hereunder.



            5.   The right to self-insure is limited and
specific to Provider and does not extend to Provider’s contractors or
others.



         (h)   All policies except workers’ compensation must
name city and the other additional insureds as additional insureds. Provider
shall cause coverage for additional insureds to be incorporated into each
insurance policy by endorsement with respect to claims arising out of
provider’s operations, activities and obligations under these Standard
Terms.



         (i)   All policies must require the insurer to provide
city with at least thirty (30) calendar days prior notice of any
cancellation. The insurer’s duty to notify city of changes in coverage
shall not include phrases such as “endeavor to” or “but failure to mail
such notice shall impose no obligation or liability of any kind upon the
company, its agents or representatives.”



         (j)   All policies shall require that notices be given
to city in the manner specified for notices to city set forth in these
Standard Terms.



      (4)   Insurance certificates. Provider shall evidence all
insurance by furnishing to city certificates of insurance annually and with
each change in insurance coverage. Certificates must evidence that the policy
described by the certificate is in full force and effect and that the policy
satisfies each requirement of these Standard Terms applicable to the policy.
For example, certificates must evidence that city and the other additional
insureds are additional insureds. Certificates must also be in an industry
standard form reasonably acceptable to city. Provider shall provide updated
certificates at city’s request.



      (5)   Acceptable insurers. All insurance policies shall be
issued by insurers acceptable to city. At a minimum, all insurers shall be
duly licensed (or qualified unlicensed non-admitted insurer) by the State of
Arizona, Department of Insurance. At a minimum, all insurers shall have and
maintain an A.M. Best, Inc. rating of B++ 6.



      (6)   No representation of coverage adequacy. By requiring
insurance herein, city does not represent that coverage and limits will be
adequate to protect provider. City reserves the right to review any and all
of the insurance policies and/or endorsements cited in these Standard Terms
but has no obligation to do so. Failure to demand such evidence of full
compliance with the insurance requirements set forth in these Standard Terms
or failure to identify any insurance deficiency shall not relieve provider
from, nor be construed or deemed a waiver of, provider’s obligation to
maintain the required insurance at all times.



      (7)   Indemnity. In addition to all other indemnities and
other obligations hereunder, to the fullest extent permitted by law,
throughout the term of any site license and until all obligations and
performances under or related to these Standard Terms are satisfied and all
matters described in this paragraph are completely resolved, Provider and all
other persons using, acting, working or claiming through or for Provider (if
they or their subcontractor, employee or other person or entity hired or
directed by them participated in any way in causing the claim in question)
shall jointly and severally indemnify, defend and hold harmless city and all
other additional insureds for, from and against any and all claims or harm
related to provider’s use of the ROW or the rights granted to provider with
respect to the ROW or Provider’s exercise of its rights under these
Standard Terms (the “Indemnity”). Without limitation, the Indemnity shall
include and apply to any and all allegations, demands, judgments,
assessments, taxes, impositions, expenses, proceedings, liabilities,
obligations, suits, actions, claims (including without limitation claims of
personal injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease, death, property damage,
destruction, loss of use, financial harm, or other impairment), damages,
losses, expenses, penalties, fines or other matters (together with all
attorney fees, court costs, and the cost of appellate proceedings and all
other costs and expenses of litigation or resolving the claim) that may arise
in any manner out of any use of the ROW or other property pursuant to any
site license or any actions, acts, errors, mistakes or omissions relating to
work or services in the performance of or related to this agreement,
including without limitation any injury or damages or cause of action claimed
or caused by any employees, contractors, subcontractors, tenants, subtenants,
agents or other persons upon or using the ROW or surrounding areas related to
provider’s exercise of its rights under this agreement, including without
limitation, claims, liability, harm or damages caused in part by city or any
other additional insured or anyone for whose mistakes, errors, omissions or
negligence provider or city may be liable. As a condition to city’s
approval of any site license, provider specifically agrees that to the extent
any provision of this paragraph is not fully enforceable against provider for
any reason whatsoever, this paragraph shall be deemed automatically reformed
to the minimal extent necessary to cause it to be enforceable to the fullest
extent permitted by law. The indemnity shall also include and apply to any
environmental injury, personal injury or other liability relating to
provider’s use of real property under this agreement. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the indemnity does not apply to:



         (a)   Claims arising only from the sole gross negligence
or intentionally wrongful acts of city.



         (b)   Claims that the law prohibits from being imposed
upon the indemnitor.



      (8)   Risk of loss. Provider assumes the risk of any and all
loss, damage or claims related to provider’s use of the ROW or other
property of city, provider or third parties throughout the term hereof.
Provider shall be responsible for any and all damage to its property and
equipment related to these Standard Terms.



      (9)   Insurance to be provided by others. Provider shall cause
its contractors or other persons occupying, working on or about, or using the
ROW pursuant to these Standard Terms to be covered by their own or
provider’s insurance as required by these Standard Terms. The required
policy limits for commercial general liability insurance provided by such
persons shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000) for each occurrence, one
million dollars ($1,000,000) for products and completed operations annual
aggregate, and two million dollars ($2,000,000) general aggregate limit per
policy year. This paragraph does not apply to persons who do not actually
perform physical labor in the ROW (such as provider’s consulting design
engineers).



   (L)   Damage to or destruction of the use areas. The following
provisions shall govern damage to or destruction of the use areas by fire,
flood, explosion, the elements, the public enemy, or other casualty
(collectively “casualty damage”):



      (1)   Damage to provider’s improvements. Provider shall
commence restoring the casualty damage to provider’s improvements within
thirty (30) calendar days after any casualty damage occurs. Provider shall
complete the restoration work within thirty (30) calendar days after
commencement. Such work shall be subject to the plans approval process and
all other requirements for provider’s improvements. Provider shall perform
all restoration work at provider’s sole cost and expense.



      (2)   Monthly restoration work report. Provider shall provide
to city no later than the tenth day of each month a written narrative report
of the progress of the restoration work.



   (M)   Provider’s records. During the entire term of any agreement,
provider shall keep records and provide information to city as follows:



      (1)   Scope of information. Unless otherwise specified, all of
provider’s recordkeeping and disclosure obligations under this article are
limited to the following (collectively the “covered information”):



         (a)   The status of the construction, repair or
restoration of provider improvements.



         (b)   Information indicating whether city or provider is
in compliance with the terms herein.



      (2)   Records inspection. At provider’s expense, provider
shall:



         (a)   Permit and assist city and its representatives
upon twenty-one (21) calendar days notice to inspect, audit, and copy
provider’s records of covered information.



         (b)   Make the records of covered information (and
reasonable  accommodations for city’s audit and inspection) available to
city at provider’s offices in the Phoenix metropolitan area.



         (c)   Cause provider’s employees and agents and
accountants to give their full cooperation and assistance in connection with
city’s access to the covered information.



      (3)   Record retention. Provider shall preserve records of the
covered information in a secure place at provider’s corporate headquarters
in the continental United States for a period ending seven (7) years after
the time period reported by the records.



      (4)   Record media included. City’s and provider’s rights
and obligations regarding the covered information apply regardless of the
type of media, materials, or data repositories that may contain the covered
information. City shall have access to covered information contained, without
limitation, in records, books, papers, documents, recordings, computer data,
contracts, logs, notes, ledgers, correspondence, reports, drawings, and
memoranda, and any and all other sources, records and repositories of covered
information.



      (5)   Reports. Provider shall deliver to city written reports
(and, if requested by city, a presentation to city’s governing council or
designee) covering such covered information as city may request from time to
time. City shall notrequestsuch reports more often than once in any twelve
(12) month period.



      (6)   Standards for records. Provider shall maintain a
standard, modern system of recordkeeping for the covered information and
shall keep and maintain proper and accurate books and other repositories of
information relating to the covered information.



   (N)   Compliance with law. Provider shall perform its obligations
under these Standard Terms in accordance with all federal, state, county and
local laws, ordinances, regulations or other rules or policies as are now in
effect or as may hereafter be adopted or amended. Without limiting in any way
the generality of the foregoing, provider shall comply with all and each of
the following:



      (1)   Applicability of municipal law. Without limitation,
provider shall comply with municipal laws as follows:



         (a)   Provider acknowledges nothing set forth herein
constitutes, and city has not promised or offered, any type of waiver of, or
agreement to waive (or show any type of forbearance, priority or favoritism
to provider with regard to) any law, ordinance, power, regulation, tax,
assessment or other legal requirement now or hereafter imposed by the City of
Apache Junction or any other governmental body upon or affecting provider,
the use areas, or the street parcel or provider’s use of the use areas, the
street parcel or the rights-of-way.



         (b)   All of provider’s obligations hereunder are in
addition to, and cumulative upon (and not to any extent in substitution or
satisfaction of), all existing or future laws and regulations applicable to
Provider.



         (c)   City by this agreement cannot and has not
relinquished or limited any right of condemnation or eminent domain over the
ROW or any other property related to these Standard Terms or within the ROW.



         (d)   This agreement cannot and does not impair
city’s, power to enact, apply or enforce any laws or regulations, or
exercise any governmental powers affecting in any way provider, the use
areas, the street parcel, or the ROW.



         (e)   City’s rights and remedies hereunder for
provider’s failure to comply with all applicable laws supplement and are in
addition to and do not replace otherwise existing powers of the City of
Apache Junction or any other governmental body.



         (f)   Provider’s rights hereunder are further subject
to all present and future building restrictions, regulations, zoning laws,
and all ordinances, resolutions, rules and orders of all bodies, bureaus,
commissions and bodies of any municipal, county, state, or federal authority,
now or hereafter having jurisdiction over the use areas or provider’s use
thereof. Provider shall comply with all of the foregoing.



      (2)   Radio frequency compliance requirements. Provider shall
document, report and confirm its compliance with Federal Communications
Commission (“FCC”) Radio Frequency Exposure Guidelines (FCC OET Bulletin
65) and all other applicable RF emissions laws and regulations in effect from
time to time (collectively, the “FCC rules”) as follows:



         (a)   Provider shall cause its senior internal engineer
responsible for compliance with the FCC Rules to deliver to city a written
letter (the “RF letter”), as follows:



            1.   The RF letter shall attest that provider’s
operation of the communications equipment is in compliance with the FCC
rules. A statement from wireless provider declaring exemption from reporting
to FCC is not acceptable to comply with the requirements of this paragraph.



            2.   Provider shall maintain records of RF
measurements and communications equipment performance in accordance with the
FCC rules.



            3.   Provider shall also evidence and demonstrate
its compliance with the FCC rules in such manner and at such intervals as the
Apache Junction City Code and other applicable laws and regulations may
mandate.



      (3)   Government property lease excise tax. Provider shall be
responsible for any and all property taxes and all government property lease
excise taxes described in A.R.S. § 42-6201 et seq. or similar laws in force
from time to time. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-6206, failure by provider to pay
the taxes after notice and an opportunity to cure is an event of default that
could result in divesting provider of any interest in or right of occupancy
of the use areas.



      (4)   Use area regulations. City reserves the right to adopt,
amend and enforce against provider rules and regulations governing the
operation of the street parcel, including the use areas, provider’s
activities therein and thereon, and the public areas and facilities used by
provider in connection therewith.



      (5)   Taxes, liens and assessments. In addition to all other
amounts herein provided and to the extent consistent with applicable law,
provider shall pay, when the same become due and payable, all taxes and
general and special fees, charges and assessments of every description that
during the term of any agreement may be levied upon or assessed upon or with
respect to provider’s use of the ROW, the operations conducted therein, any
amounts paid or other performances required by these Standard Terms by either
party, and all possessory interest in the ROW and provider’s improvements
and other property thereon. Provider shall pay, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless city from any and all such obligations, including any interest,
penalties and other expenses which may be imposed, and from any lien therefor
or sate or other proceedings to enforce payment thereof.



      (6)   Permits. Nothing in these Standard Terms relieves
provider of the obligation to obtain permits, licenses and other approvals
from city or other units of government that are required for the erection,
construction, reconstruction, installation, operation or maintenance of the
communications equipment or provision of telecommunications services; or from
compliance with applicable municipal codes, ordinances, laws and policies,
such as zoning and land use ordinances and regulations, pavement cut and
restoration ordinances and regulations, subdivision and project improvement
ordinances, curb cut permits, building permits, ROW permits and the like.



   (O)   Assignability. Site license agreements are not assignable by
provider (and any assignment shall be void and vest no rights in the
purported assignee) unless the assignment is made in strict compliance with
the following:



      (1)   Assignments affected. Every assignment of any of
provider’s interest in the ROW or this agreement or any of provider’s
rights or interests hereunder is prohibited unless provider first receives
from city notice of city’s consent to the assignment. All references in
these Standard Terms to assignments by provider or to assignees shall be
deemed also to apply to all of the following transactions, circumstances and
conditions and to all persons claiming pursuant to such transactions,
circumstances and conditions:



         (a)   Any voluntary or involuntary assignment,
conveyance or transfer of provider’s right to use the ROW under this
agreement or any interest or rights of city under this agreement, in whole or
in part.



         (b)   Any voluntary or involuntary pledge, lien,
mortgage, security interest, judgment, claim or demand, whether arising from
any contract, any agreement, any work of construction, repair, restoration,
maintenance or removal, or otherwise affecting provider’s rights to use the
ROW (collectively “liens”).



         (c)   Any assignment by provider of any interest in any
agreement for the benefit of creditors, voluntary or involuntary.



         (d)   A provider insolvency.



         (e)   The occurrence of any of the foregoing by
operation of law or otherwise.



         (f)   The occurrence of any of the foregoing with
respect to any assignee or other successor to provider.



      (2)   Pre-approved assignments. Subject to certain conditions
hereafter stated, city hereby consents to certain assignments (the
“pre-approved assignments”). Only the following assignments are
pre-approved assignments:



         (a)   Complete assignment of agreement. Provider’s
complete assignment of all of provider’s rights and Interests in the ROW
and approved agreements to a single assignee who meets all of the following
requirements, as determined by city in city’s reasonable discretion (a
“qualified operator”):



            1.   The assignee has experience, management,
credit standing and financial capacity and other resources equal to or
greater than Provider’s and adequate to successfully perform the
obligations set forth herein.



            2.   The assignee is experienced in the management
and operation of similar projects.



            3.   The assignee assumes all of provider’s
obligations herein.



            4.   The assignee has a net worth of not less than
fifty million dollars ($50,000,000).



         (b)   Stock transfers. The transfer of publicly traded
stock, regardless of quantity.



         (c)   Merger. The merger or consolidation of provider
with another entity that is a qualified operator.



         (d)   Common ownership transfer. Provider’s complete
assignment of all of provider’s rights and interests in the ROW and
approved agreements to single assignee who is and remains a wholly owned
subsidiary of provider’s sole owner as of the date of this agreement (or a
wholly owned subsidiary of a wholly owned subsidiary of provider’s sole
owner as of the date of this agreement).



      (3)   Limitations on assignments. City’s consent to any
assignment, including without limitation, pre-approved assignments, is not
effective until the following conditions are satisfied:



         (a)   Except for the sale of stock, provider shall
provide to city a complete copy of the document assigning its interests.



         (b)   Each assignee must execute an assumption of the
agreements in form acceptable to city.



         (c)   Each pre-approved assignment must satisfy all
other requirements of these Standard Terms pertaining to assignments.



      (4)   Assignment remedies. Any assignment without city’s
consent shall be void and shall not result in the assignee obtaining any
rights or interests. City may, in its sole discretion and in addition to all
other remedies available to city under these Standard Terms or otherwise, and
in any combination, terminate any and all site licenses, collect use fee from
the assignee and/or declare the assignment to be void, all without
prejudicing any other right or remedy of city under these Standard Terms. No
cure or grace periods shall apply to assignments prohibited under these
Standard Terms or to enforcement of any provision under these Standard Terms
against an assignee who did not receive city’s consent.



      (5)   Effect of assignment. Prior to any assignment, each
assignee must execute an assumption of each Site License in the form attached
hereto as Attachment C. No action or inaction by city shall be deemed a
waiver of the prohibition on assignments or any other provision herein, or
the acceptance of the assignee, provider or occupant as provider, or a
release of provider from the further performance by provider of the
provisions of this agreement. Consent by city to an assignment shall not
relieve provider from obtaining city’s consent to any further assignment.
No assignment shall release provider from any liability hereunder.



      (6)   Enforceability after assignment. No consent by city
shall be deemed to be a novation. City’s consent to any assignment does not
in any way expand or modify the terms set forth in these Standard Terms or
waive, diminish or modify any of city’s rights or remedies under this
agreement. The terms set forth in these Standard Terms shall be enforceable
against Provider and each successor, partial or total, and regardless of the
method of succession, to provider’s interest hereunder. Each successor
having actual or constructive notice of this agreement shall be deemed to
have agreed to the preceding sentence.



      (7)   Grounds for refusal. Except for the pre-approved
assignments, no assignment of any site license by provider is contemplated or
bargained for. Without limitation, city has the right to impose upon any
consent to assignment such conditions and requirements as city may deem
appropriate.



      (8)   Consent to assignments. Provider shall attach to each
pre-approved assignment a copy of provider’s notice to city of the
pre-approved assignment and other required documents, provider shall attach
to each other assignment, a copy of city’s notice to provider of city’s
consent to the assignment. These Standard Terms shall continue to be
enforceable according to its terms in spite of any provisions of any
documents relating to an assignment.



      (9)   Assignment fee. Provider shall pay to city in advance
the sum of five hundred dollars ($500) as a non-refundable fee for legal,
administrative and other expenses related to every pre-approved assignment
(other than the sale of publicly traded stock) or to any request for a
consent to assignment, whether or not city grants such request.



   (P)   Miscellaneous. The following additional provisions apply to
these Standard Terms:



      (1)   Amendments. These Standard Terms may not be amended
except by a formal writing executed by ail of the parties.



      (2)   Dates. Any reference to a year shall refer to a calendar
year unless a fiscal year is specifically stated. Sunday, Saturday and
Arizona legal holidays are holidays for purposes of this agreement.



      (3)   Time of essence. Time is of the essence of each and
every provision of this agreement.



      (4)   Severability. If any provision of these Standard Terms
shall be ruled by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid
or unenforceable for any reason, then:



         (a)   The invalidity or unenforceability of such
provision shall not affect the validity of any remaining provisions of these
Standard Terms.



         (b)   These Standard Terms shall be automatically
reformed to secure to the parties the benefits of the unenforceable
provision, to the maximum extent consistent with law.



      (5)   Conflicts of interest. No officer, representative or
employee of city shall have any direct or INDIRECT interest in this
agreement, nor participate in any decision relating to any site license that
is prohibited by law.



      (6)   No partnership. The transactions and performances
contemplated hereby shall not create any sort of partnership, joint venture
or similar relationship between the parties.



      (7)   Non-liability of officials and employees. No official,
representative or employee of city shall be personally liable to any party,
or to any successor in interest to any party, in the event of any default or
breach by city or for any amount which may become due to any party or
successor, or with respect to any obligation of city or otherwise under the
terms of this agreement or related to this agreement.



      (8)   Notices. Notices hereunder shall be given in writing
delivered to the other party or mailed by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, postage prepaid to the addresses set forth in the
Site License Agreements and to the City as follows:



      If to City:   City Engineer



            City of Apache Junction



            575 East Baseline Avenue



            Apache Junction, AZ 85119



   With a copy to:   City Attorney



            City of Apache Junction



            300 E. Superstition Blvd.



            Apache Junction, AZ 85119



         By notice from time to time, a person may designate any
other street address within Pinal County, Arizona as its address for giving
notice hereunder. Service of any notice by mail shall be deemed to be
complete three (3) days (excluding Friday, Saturday, Sunday and legal
holidays) after the notice is deposited in the United States mail.



      (9)   Construction. Whenever the context of these Standard
Terms requires herein the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine.



      (10)   Funding. This subparagraph shall control
notwithstanding any provision of this agreement or any exhibit or other
agreement or document related hereto. If funds necessary to fulfill city’s
obligations under this agreement are not appropriated by the Apache Junction
City Council, City may terminate this agreement, by notice to provider. City
shall use best efforts to give notice of such a termination to provider at
least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the end of city’s then current
fiscal period. Termination in accordance with this provision shall not
constitute a breach of this agreement by city. No person will be entitled to
any compensation, damages or other remedy from city if this agreement is
terminated pursuant to the terms of this subsection.



      (11)   Paragraph headings. The paragraph headings contained
herein are for convenience in reference and not intended to define or limit
the scope of any provision of this agreement.



      (12)   No third party beneficiaries. No person or entity shall
be a third party beneficiary to this agreement or shall have any right or
cause of action hereunder. City shall have no liability to third parties for
any approval of plans, provider’s construction of improvements,
provider’s negligence, provider’s failure to comply with the provisions
of these Standard Terms (including any absence or inadequacy of insurance
required to be carried by provider).



      (13)   Exhibits. All Exhibits specifically stated to be
attached hereto as specified herein are hereby incorporated into and made an
integral part of this agreement for all purposes.



      (14)   Attorneys’ fees. If any action, suitor proceeding is
brought by either party hereunder to enforce this agreement or for failure to
observe any of the covenants of this agreement or to vindicate or exercise
any rights or remedies hereunder, the prevailing party in such proceeding
shall be entitled to recover from the other party such prevailing party’s
reasonable attorneys’ fees and other reasonable litigation costs (as
determined by the court (and not a jury) in such proceeding).



      (15)   Approvals and inspections. All approvals, reviews and
inspections by city are for city’s sole benefit and not for the benefit of
provider, its contractors, engineers or other consultants or agents, or any
other person.



      (16)   Legal workers. If and to the extent A.R.S. § 41-4401
is applicable provider shall comply with laws regarding workers as follows:



         (a)   Provider warrants to city that provider and all
its subcontractors will comply with all federal immigration laws and
regulations that relate to their employees and that provider and all its
subcontractors now comply with the E-Verify Program under A.R.S. § 23-214(A).



         (b)   A Breach of the foregoing warranty by provider
shall be deemed a material breach of this agreement that is subject to
penalties up to and including termination of this agreement.



         (c)   City retains the legal right to inspect the papers
of any employee of provider or any subcontractor who works on a use area
pursuant to agreement to ensure that they or the subcontractor is complying
with the warranty given above.



         (d)   City may conduct random verification of
provider’s and its subcontractors’ employment records to ensure
compliance with the warranty given above.



         (e)   Provider shall indemnify, defend and hold city
harmless for, from and against all losses and liabilities arising from any
and all violations of the warranty given above.



EXHIBIT A-1



ANTENNA SITE RIGHT-OF-WAY LICENSE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF APACHE
JUNCTION AND FOR CITY OWNED POLE



THIS ANTENNA SITE RIGHT-OF-WAY LICENSE AGREEMENT (the “Agreement”) is
made and entered into this       day of                     ,
20    ,  (the “Execution  Date”)  by and between the CITY OF APACHE
JUNCTION, an Arizona municipal corporation (“City”), and [COMPANY NAME,
INC.], an Arizona [corporation/limited liability company], (“Provider”),
sometimes collectively referred to as the “Parties” or individually as a
“Party”.




RECITALS




   A.   The City of Apache Junction “Wireless Facilities Standard
Terms and Conditions” sets out various recitals (collectively the
“recitals”) and provisions (collectively the “terms”).



   B.   City holds an interest in a parcel of land (the “parcel”)
comprising street  rights-of-way (“ROW”) for                  
                                        .  The parcel is
located approximately                 feet of the center of the
intersection of                                        
and                                                
      .



   C.   This Agreement allows Provider to use certain limited portions
of the parcel.



   D.   The portions of the parcel that this Agreement allows Provider
to use (the “Use Areas”) are defined in the package of maps and related
materials (the “Boundary Plan”) attached hereto as Exhibit A.



   E.   Provider desires to install and operate on the Use Areas the
wireless telecommunications receiving, processing and transmitting devices
and related electronic equipment that is specified on the Site Plan (the
“communications equipment”) subject to the requirements of this
Agreement. The communications equipment is limited to the actual electronic
equipment, portable cabinets for such equipment, the enclosure, the antennas
(“antennas”) used to communicate with cell phones and similar devices,
all as shown on the drawing (the “Site Plan”) attached hereto as Exhibit
B. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the
communications equipment excludes any item not shown on the Site Plan.



   F.   The volume of the enclosure and the above ground portion of its
pad as shown in the Site Plan is               cubic feet.



   G.   The parcel is currently improved with an approximately      
      foot tall [electrical/traffic signal/street light/antenna support]
pole (the “Pole”) owned by City.



   H.   Provider proposes to [use the existing Pole/replace the
existing Pole] with a new Pole that City will own.



   I.   In order to install the communications equipment, Provider
desires to construct supporting improvements and perform alt other work shown
on the Site Plan (collectively the “Project”).



   J.   Provider shall complete the entire Project and put the
communications equipment in full operation no later than one hundred eighty
(180) calendar days after the date of the issuance of the encroachment permit
(the “completion deadline”), or otherwise abandons its application
request.



   K.   City desires to grant to Provider a license to install,
maintain, operate and repair the communications equipment (the “Permitted
Uses”) subject to the requirements of this Agreement.



   L.   The recitals are all incorporated herein by reference as if set
out in full.




TERMS




   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing Recitals and the
mutual promises and covenants set forth herein, and for other consideration,
the receipt and adequacy of which is hereby acknowledged, the Parties agree
as follows:



   1.   License Terms. City hereby grants to Provider a license to use
the Use Areas as follows:



      A.   Terms Incorporated. The terms are all incorporated herein
by reference as if set out in full. Provider warrants and represents that
provider has read and agrees to the recitals and the terms. Capitalized terms
used but not defined in this Agreement shall have the meanings assigned by
the recitals and the terms.



      B.   Terms Application. Provider shall comply with all of the
terms. Without limitation, the terms shall apply to the Use Areas as follows:



         i.   Provider’s Boundary Plan Responsibility. It is
Provider’s responsibility before signing this Agreement to ensure that the
Boundary Plan is prepared as follows:



            a.   Provider shall insure that the Boundary Plan
clearly depicts all portions of the parcel that Provider desires to use and
that each such area is clearly shown on the Boundary Plan and labeled to
clearly indicate which of the categories of exclusive areas or shared areas
set out in the standard terms applies to the area.



            b.   If the Boundary Plan does not clearly show
any portion of the parcel as one of the categories of exclusive areas or
shared areas set out in the terms, then such portion of the parcel is not
part of the Use Areas and Provider may not use such portion of the parcel,
even if the use is discussed in the terms.



            c.   Any exclusive area or shared area described
or named in the terms that is not clearly depicted and correctly labeled on
the Boundary Plan is excluded from this Agreement and unavailable for
Provider’s use.



            d.   Any portion of the Boundary Plan or the Site
Plan that indicates a Provider use of the parcel that is not one of the
exclusive areas or shared areas specifically enumerated in the terms is
excluded from this Agreement and not available for Provider’s use.



            e.   All work, improvements and equipment within
an exclusive area or shared area is limited to the purposes enumerated in the
terms for that particular exclusive area or shared area.



            f.   This Agreement does not allow use of any land
other than the specified portions of the parcel that are exclusive areas or
shared areas.



            g.   Any change to the Boundary Plan after City
executes this Agreement is void unless it is memorialized in a formal
amendment to this Agreement.



         ii.   Site Plan. It is Provider’s responsibility
before signing this Agreement to ensure that the Site Plan correctly shows
the work that Provider intends to perform, that the Site Plan correctly shows
all improvements and equipment that Provider intends be located on the Use
Areas, that the Site Plan shows no work, improvements or equipment outside
the exclusive areas and shared areas properly depicted and labeled on the
Boundary Plan, and that all work, improvements and equipment is encompassed
within the purposes enumerated in the terms for that particular exclusive
area or shared area. Any work, improvements or equipment not conforming to
all the foregoing is prohibited, even if it is clearly shown on the Site Plan
or discussed in the terms. Any refinement or other change to the Site Plan
after City executes this Agreement is void unless Provider obtains
Provider’s approval of the change pursuant to the plans approval processes
set out in the terms and pursuant to all applicable regulatory requirements.



         iii.   Term of Agreement. The term of this Agreement is
as stated in Section 1 License Terms.



         iv.   Provider’s Payments. Provider shall pay City the
amounts described in the terms.



         v.   Use Restrictions. Provider shall comply with the
use restrictions set out in the terms.



         vi.   Encroachment Permits. This Agreement constitutes
an “Encroachment Permit” under Chapter 13 , Volume I of the Apache
Junction City Code to the extent of granting permission for the
communications equipment to exist on the parcel but not to allow any
construction or other work of any description in the ROW or to allow
obstruction of traffic or alteration of City’s improvements. Before
performing any work on the ROW, Provider shall obtain the following
additional encroachment permits, as applicable:



            ∙   Permission to work in the ROW.



            ∙    Traffic Control Plan.



            ∙    Any other applicable permits regarding work
in the ROW.



         vii.   Compliance with Law. Provider acknowledges that
this Agreement does not constitute, and City has not promised or offered, any
type of waiver of, or agreement to waive (or show any type of forbearance,
priority or favoritism to Provider with regard to) any law, ordinance, power,
regulation, tax, assessment or other legal requirement now or hereafter
imposed by the City of Apache Junction or any other governmental body upon or
affecting Provider’s use of the parcel. For example, Provider shall comply
with all building and ROW codes, ordinances and policies.



   2.   City’s Initial Information. Unless and until City gives
notice otherwise, City’s contract administrator shall be the City Engineer.



   3.   Provider’s Initial Information. Unless and until Provider
gives notice otherwise Provider’s network operations center phone number is
(      )                              . Provider’s
address for notices shall be: [NAME, STREET ADDRESS, CITY, STATE, ZIP].
Provider’s billing address for routine billing invoices shall be: [NAME,
STREET ADDRESS, CITY, STATE, ZIP].



IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have executed this Agreement as of the date
first set forth above.



                     PROVIDER:



                     [COMPANY NAME, INC.], an Arizona



                     [corporation/limited liability
company]



                                            
                                                   
                 



                     By: [Name]



                     Its: [Title]



                     CITY:



                     CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION, ARIZONA,



                     an Arizona municipal corporation



                                            
                                                   
                 



                     By:                     
                                                   
                   



                     Its: City Engineer



STATE OF                                 )



               ) ss.



County of                                    )



The foregoing was subscribed and sworn to before me this              
      day of                                      ,



20        , by                                      
          as                                        
  of [Company Name], an Arizona [corporation/limited liability company].



                                       �
�                                               
       



                                       �
�        Notary Public



My Commission Expires:



                                                   
         



STATE OF                                 )



               ) ss.



County of                                    )



The foregoing was subscribed and sworn to before me this              
      day of                                      ,
20        , by                                      
          City Engineer of the city of Apache Junction, Arizona, an
Arizona municipal corporation.



                                       �
�                                               
       



                                       �
�        Notary Public



My Commission Expires:



                                                   
         



   EXHIBIT A



   BOUNDARY PLAN



 



 



   EXHIBIT B



   BOUNDARY PLAN



 



 



EXHIBIT A-2




ANTENNA SITE RIGHT-OF-WAY LICENSE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF APACHE
JUNCTION AND                                          
     
FOR WIRELESS PROVIDER OWNED NEW POLE




THIS ANTENNA SITE RIGHT-OF-WAY LICENSE AGREEMENT (the “Agreement”) is
made and entered into this             day of                
              , 20      ,  (the “Execution  Date”)  by and
between the CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION, an Arizona municipal corporation
(“City”), and [COMPANY NAME, INC.], an Arizona [corporation/limited
liability company], (“Provider”), sometimes collectively referred to as
the “Parties” or individually as a “Party”.




RECITALS




   A.   The City of Apache Junction “Wireless Facilities Standard
Terms and Conditions” sets out various recitals (collectively the
“recitals”) and provisions (collectively the “terms”).



   B.   City holds an interest in a parcel of land (the “parcel”)
comprising street  rights-of-way (“ROW”) for                  
                                  . The parcel is located
approximately                         feet of the center of the
intersection of                                        
        and                                        
        .



   C.   This Agreement allows Provider to use certain limited portions
of the parcel.



   D.   The portions of the parcel that this Agreement allows Provider
to use (the “Use Areas”) are defined in the package of maps and related
materials (the “Boundary Plan”) attached hereto as Exhibit A.



   E.   Provider desires to install and operate on the Use Areas the
wireless telecommunications receiving, processing and transmitting devices
and related electronic equipment that is specified on the Site Plan (the
“communications equipment”) subject to the requirements of this
Agreement. The communications equipment is limited to the actual electronic
equipment, portable cabinets for such equipment, the enclosure, the antennas
(“antennas”) used to communicate with cell phones and similar devices,
all as shown on the drawing (the “Site Plan”) attached hereto as Exhibit
B. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the
communications equipment excludes any item not shown on the Site Plan.



   F.   The volume of the enclosure and the above ground portion of its
pad as shown in the Site Plan is                 cubic feet.



   G.   Provider proposes to install an approximately            
    foot tall wireless support structure (the “Pole”) owned by Provider
(the “Owner”).



   H.   In order to install the communication equipment, Provider
desires to construct supporting improvements and perform all other work shown
on the Site Plan (collectively the “Project”).



   I.   Provider shall complete the entire Project and put the
communications equipment in full operation no later than one hundred eighty
(180) calendar days after the date of the issuance of the encroachment permit
(the “completion deadline”), or otherwise abandons its application
request.



   J.   City desires to grant to Provider a license to install,
maintain, operate and repair the communications equipment (the “Permitted
Uses”) subject to the requirements of this Agreement.



   K.   The recitals are all incorporated herein by reference as if set
out in full.




TERMS




   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing Recitals and the
mutual promises and covenants set forth herein, and for other consideration,
the receipt and adequacy of which is hereby acknowledged, the Parties agree
as follows:



   1.   License Terms. City hereby grants to Provider a license to use
the Use Areas as follows:



      A.   Terms Incorporated. The terms are all incorporated herein
by reference as if set out in full. Provider warrants and represents that
provider has read and agrees to the recitals and the terms. Capitalized terms
used but not defined in this Agreement shall have the meanings assigned by
the recitals and the terms.



      B.   Terms Application. Provider shall comply with all of the
terms. Without limitation, the terms shall apply to the Use Areas as follows:



         i.   Provider’s Boundary Plan Responsibility. It is
Provider’s responsibility before signing this Agreement to ensure that the
Boundary Plan is prepared as follows:



            a.   Provider shall insure that the Boundary Plan
clearly depicts all portions of the parcel that Provider desires to use and
that each such area is clearly shown on the Boundary Plan and labeled to
clearly indicate which of the categories of exclusive areas or shared areas
set out in the standard terms applies to the area.



            b.   If the Boundary Plan does not clearly show
any portion of the parcel as one of the categories of exclusive areas or
shared areas set out in the terms, then such portion of the parcel is not
part of the Use Areas and Provider may not use such portion of the parcel,
even if the use is discussed in the terms.



            c.   Any exclusive area or shared area described
or named in the terms that is not clearly depicted and correctly labeled on
the Boundary Plan is excluded from this Agreement and unavailable for
Provider’s use.



            d.   Any portion of the Boundary Plan or the Site
Plan that indicates a Provider use of the parcel that is not one of the
exclusive areas or shared areas specifically enumerated in the terms is
excluded from this Agreement and not available for Provider’s use.



            e.   All work, improvements and equipment within
an exclusive area or shared area is limited to the purposes enumerated in the
terms for that particular exclusive area or shared area.



            f.   This Agreement does not allow use of any land
other than the specified portions of the parcel that are exclusive areas or
shared areas.



            g.   Any change to the Boundary Plan after City
executes this Agreement is void unless it is memorialized in a formal
amendment to this Agreement.



         ii.   Site Plan. It is Provider’s responsibility
before signing this Agreement to ensure that the Site Plan correctly shows
the work that Provider intends to perform, that the Site Plan correctly shows
all improvements and equipment that Provider intends be located on the Use
Areas, that the Site Plan shows no work, improvements or equipment outside
the exclusive areas and shared areas properly depicted and labeled on the
Boundary Plan, and that all work, improvements and equipment is encompassed
within the purposes enumerated in the terms for that particular exclusive
area or shared area. Any work, improvements or equipment not conforming to
all the foregoing is prohibited, even if it is clearly shown on the Site Plan
or discussed in the terms. Any refinement or other change to the Site Plan
after City executes this Agreement is void unless Provider obtains
Provider’s approval of the change pursuant to the plans approval processes
set out in the terms and pursuant to all applicable regulatory requirements.



         iii.   Term of Agreement. The term of this Agreement is
as stated in Section 1 License Terms.



         iv.   Provider’s Payments. Provider shall pay City the
amounts described in the terms.



         v.   Use Restrictions. Provider shall comply with the
use restrictions set out in the terms.



         vi.   Encroachment Permits. This Agreement constitutes
an “Encroachment Permit” under Chapter 13, Volume I of the Apache
Junction City Code to the extent of granting permission for the
communications equipment to exist on the parcel but not to allow any
construction or other work of any description in the ROW or to allow
obstruction of traffic or alteration of City’s improvements. Before
performing any work on the ROW, Provider shall obtain the following
additional encroachment permits, as applicable:



            ∙   Permission to work in the ROW.



            ∙    Traffic Control Plan.



            ∙    Any other applicable permits regarding work
in the ROW.



         vii.   Compliance with Law. Provider acknowledges that
this Agreement does not constitute, and City has not promised or offered, any
type of waiver of, or agreement to waive (or show any type of forbearance,
priority or favoritism to Provider with regard to) any law, ordinance, power,
regulation, tax, assessment or other legal requirement now or hereafter
imposed by the City of Apache Junction or any other governmental body upon or
affecting Provider’s use of the parcel. For example, Provider shall comply
with all building and ROW codes, ordinances and policies.



   2.   City’s Initial Information. Unless and until City gives
notice otherwise, City’s contract administrator shall be the City Engineer.



   3.   Provider’s Initial Information. Unless and until Provider
gives notice otherwise Provider’s network  operations  center   
phone    number is (        )                        .
Provider’s address for notices shall be: [NAME, STREET ADDRESS, CITY,
STATE, ZIP]. Provider’s billing address for routine billing invoices shall
be: [NAME, STREET ADDRESS, CITY, STATE, ZIP].



IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have executed this Agreement as of the date
first set forth above.



                     PROVIDER:



                     [COMPANY NAME, INC.], an Arizona



                     [corporation/limited liability
company]



                                            
                                                   
   



                     By: [Name]



                     Its: [Title]



                     CITY:



                     CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION, ARIZONA, an



                     Arizona municipal corporation



                                            
                                                   
   



                     By:                    
                                                   
 



                     Its: City Engineer



STATE OF                                 )



               ) ss.



County of                                    )



The foregoing was subscribed and sworn to before me this              
      day of                                      ,
20        , by                                      
          as                                        
  of [Company Name], an Arizona [corporation/limited liability company].



                                       �
�                                               
       



                                       �
�        Notary Public



My Commission Expires:



                                                   
         



STATE OF                                 )



               ) ss.



County of                                    )



The foregoing was subscribed and sworn to before me this              
      day of                                      ,



20        , by                                      
          City Engineer of the city of Apache Junction, Arizona, an
Arizona municipal corporation.



                                       �
�                                               
       



                                       �
�        Notary Public



My Commission Expires:



                                                   
         



   EXHIBIT A



   BOUNDARY PLAN



 



 



   EXHIBIT B



   SITE PLAN



 



 




EXHIBIT A-3





ANTENNA SITE RIGHT-OF-WAY LICENSE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF APACHE
JUNCTION AND                                            
FOR THIRD PARTY OWNED POLE




THIS ANTENNA SITE RIGHT-OF-WAY LICENSE AGREEMENT (the “Agreement”) is
made and entered into this         day of                    
          , 20      ,  (the “Execution  Date”)  by and between
the CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION, an Arizona municipal corporation (“City”),
and [COMPANY NAME, INC.], an Arizona [corporation/limited liability company],
(“Provider”), sometimes collectively referred to as the “Parties” or
individually as a “Party”.




RECITALS




   A.   The City of Apache Junction “Wireless Facilities Standard
Terms and Conditions” sets out various recitals (collectively the
“recitals”) and provisions (collectively the “terms”).



   B.   City holds an interest in a parcel of land (the “parcel”)
comprising street  rights-of-way (“ROW”) for                  
                          . The parcel is located approximately
          feet of the center of the intersection of              
                                  and              
                                  .



   C.   This Agreement allows Provider to use certain limited portions
of the parcel.



   D.   The portions of the parcel that this Agreement allows Provider
to use (the “Use Areas”) are defined in the package of maps and related
materials (the “Boundary Plan”) attached hereto as Exhibit A.



   E.   Provider desires to install and operate on the Use Areas the
wireless telecommunications receiving, processing and transmitting devices
and related electronic equipment that is specified on the Site Plan (the
“communications equipment”) subject to the requirements of this
Agreement. The communications equipment is limited to the actual electronic
equipment, portable cabinets for such equipment, the enclosure, the antennas
(“antennas”) used to communicate with cell phones and similar devices,
all as shown on the drawing (the “Site Plan”) attached hereto as Exhibit
B. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the
communications equipment excludes any item not shown on the Site Plan.



   F.   The volume of the enclosure and the above ground portion of its
pad as shown in the Site Plan is               Cubic feet.



   G.   The parcel is currently improved with an approximately      
      foot tall [electrical/traffic signal/street light/antenna support]
pole (the “Pole”) owned by [City/Utility].



   H.   Provider has entered into a certain                  
                            (the “Pole Antenna Agreement”)
with Pole Owner dated                                    
    whereby Provider has obtained permission from Pole Owner to use the
existing Pole in the manner described in this Agreement or Provider proposes
to replace the existing Pole with a new Pole that Pole Owner will own.



   I.   In order to install the communications equipment, Provider
desires to construct supporting improvements and perform all other work shown
on the Site Plan (collectively the “Project”).



   J.   Provider shall complete the entire Project and put the
communications equipment in full operation no later than one hundred eighty
(180) calendar days after the date of the issuance of the encroachment permit
(the “completion deadline”), or otherwise abandons its application
request.



   K.   City desires to grant to Provider a license to install,
maintain, operate and repair the communications equipment (the “Permitted
Uses”) subject to the requirements of this Agreement.



   L.   The recitals are all incorporated herein by reference as if set
out in full.




TERMS




   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing Recitals and the
mutual promises and covenants set forth herein, and for other consideration,
the receipt and adequacy of which is hereby acknowledged, the Parties agree
as follows:



   1.   License Terms. City hereby grants to Provider a license to use
the Use Areas as follows:



      A.   Terms Incorporated. The terms are all incorporated herein
by reference as if set out in full. Provider warrants and represents that
provider has read and agrees to the recitals and the terms. Capitalized terms
used but not defined in this Agreement shall have the meanings assigned by
the recitals and the terms.



      B.   Terms Application. Provider shall comply with all of the
terms. Without limitation, the terms shall apply to the Use Areas as follows:



         i.   Provider’s Boundary Plan Responsibility. It is
Provider’s responsibility before signing this Agreement to ensure that the
Boundary Plan is prepared as follows:



            a.   Provider shall insure that the Boundary Plan
clearly depicts all portions of the parcel that Provider desires to use and
that each such area is clearly shown on the Boundary Plan and labeled to
clearly indicate which of the categories of exclusive areas or shared areas
set out in the standard terms applies to the area.



            b.   If the Boundary Plan does not clearly show
any portion of the parcel as one of the categories of exclusive areas or
shared areas set out in the terms, then such portion of the parcel is not
part of the Use Areas and Provider may not use such portion of the parcel,
even if the use is discussed in the terms.



            c.   Any exclusive area or shared area described
or named in the terms that is not clearly depicted and correctly labeled on
the Boundary Plan is excluded from this Agreement and unavailable for
Provider’s use.



            d.   Any portion of the Boundary Plan or the Site
Plan that indicates a Provider use of the parcel that is not one of the
exclusive areas or shared areas specifically enumerated in the terms is
excluded from this Agreement and not available for Provider’s use.



            e.   All work, improvements and equipment within
an exclusive area or shared area is limited to the purposes enumerated in the
terms for that particular exclusive area or shared area.



            f.   This Agreement does not allow use of any land
other than the specified portions of the parcel that are exclusive areas or
shared areas.



            g.   Any change to the Boundary Plan after City
executes this Agreement is void unless it is memorialized in a formal
amendment to this Agreement.



         ii.   Site Plan. It is Provider’s responsibility
before signing this Agreement to ensure that the Site Plan correctly shows
the work that Provider intends to perform, that the Site Plan correctly shows
all improvements and equipment that Provider intends be located on the Use
Areas, that the Site Plan shows no work, improvements or equipment outside
the exclusive areas and shared areas properly depicted and labeled on the
Boundary Plan, and that all work, improvements and equipment is encompassed
within the purposes enumerated in the terms for that particular exclusive
area or shared area. Any work, improvements or equipment not conforming to
all the foregoing is prohibited, even if it is clearly shown on the Site Plan
or discussed in the terms. Any refinement or other change to the Site Plan
after City executes this Agreement is void unless Provider obtains
Provider’s approval of the change pursuant to the plans approval processes
set out in the terms and pursuant to all applicable regulatory requirements.



         iii.   Term of Agreement. The term of this Agreement is
as stated in Section 1 License Terms.



         iv.   Provider’s Payments. Provider shall pay City the
amounts described in the terms.



         v.   Use Restrictions. Provider shall comply with the
use restrictions set out in the terms.



         vi.   Encroachment Permits. This Agreement constitutes
an “Encroachment Permit” under Chapter 13, Volume I of the Apache
Junction City Code to the extent of granting permission for the
communications equipment to exist on the parcel but not to allow any
construction or other work of any description in the ROW or to allow
obstruction of traffic or alteration of City’s improvements. Before
performing any work on the ROW, Provider shall obtain the following
additional encroachment permits, as applicable:



            ∙   Permission to work in the ROW.



            ∙    Traffic Control Plan.



            ∙    Any other applicable permits regarding work
in the ROW.



         vii.   Compliance with Law. Provider acknowledges that
this Agreement does not constitute, and City has not promised or offered, any
type of waiver of, or agreement to waive (or show any type of forbearance,
priority or favoritism to Provider with regard to) any law, ordinance, power,
regulation, tax, assessment or other legal requirement now or hereafter
imposed by the City of Apache Junction or any other governmental body upon or
affecting Provider’s use of the parcel. For example, Provider shall comply
with all building and ROW codes, ordinances and policies.



   2.   City’s Initial information. Unless and until City gives
notice otherwise, City’s contract administrator shall be the City Engineer.



   3.   Provider’s Initial Information. Unless and until Provider
gives notice otherwise Provider’s network  operations center phone number
is (      )                            . Provider’s
address for notices shall be: [NAME, STREET ADDRESS, CITY, STATE, ZIP].
Provider’s billing address for routine billing invoices shall be: [NAME,
STREET ADDRESS, CITY, STATE, ZIP].



IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have executed this Agreement as of the date
first set forth above.



                     PROVIDER:



                     [COMPANY NAME, INC.], an Arizona



                     [corporation/limited liability
company]



                                            
                                                   
   



                     By: [Name]



                     Its: [Title]



                     CITY:



                     CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION, ARIZONA, an



                     Arizona municipal corporation



                                            
                                                   
   



                     By:                    
                                                   
 



                     Its: City Engineer



 



STATE OF                                 )



               ) ss.



County of                                    )



The foregoing was subscribed and sworn to before me this              
      day of                                      ,
20        , by                                      
          as                                        
  of [Company Name], an Arizona [corporation/limited liability company].



                                       �
�                                               
       



                                       �
�        Notary Public



My Commission Expires:



                                                   
         



STATE OF                                 )



               ) ss.



County of                                    )



The foregoing was subscribed and sworn to before me this              
      day of                                      ,
20        , by                                      
          City Engineer of the city of Apache Junction, Arizona, an
Arizona municipal corporation.



                                       �
�                                               
       



                                       �
�        Notary Public



My Commission Expires:



                                                   
         



   EXHIBIT A



   BOUNDARY PLAN



 



 



   EXHIBIT B



   SITE PLAN



 



 



   EXHIBIT B



   STANDARDS FOR LETTERS OF CREDIT



In addition to any other requirements imposed upon a letter of credit (the
“Letter of Credit”) issued pursuant to these Standard Terms, each Letter
of Credit shall meet and be governed by the following additional standards
and requirements:



   A.   Letter of Credit Requirements. The Letter of Credit shall be
printed on Bank Safety Paper. The following terms and no others shall be
stated on the face of the Letter of Credit:



      i.   The Letter of Credit is clean, unconditional, and
irrevocable.



      ii.   The Letter of Credit is payable to City upon
presentation of the City’s draft.



      iii.   City may make partial draws upon the Letter of Credit.



      iv.   The Letter of Credit is conditioned for payment solely
upon presentation of a sight draft and a copy of the Letter of Credit.



      v.   Within ten (10) calendar days after City’s draft on the
Letter of Credit is honored, City must make the original of the Letter of
Credit available to the issuer.



      vi.   The issuer specifies a telefax number, email address,
and street address at which City may present drafts on the Letter of Credit.



      vii.   The Letter of Credit is valid until a specified date.



      viii.   The Letter of Credit will be automatically renewed for
successive one (1) year periods, unless at least one hundred twenty (120)
calendar days prior to expiration the issuer notifies City in writing, by
either registered or certified mail, that issuer elects not to renew the
Letter of Credit for the additional period. In the event of such
notification, any then unused portion of the Letter of Credit shall be
available by draft on or before the then current expiration date.



      ix.   The Letter of Credit is otherwise subject to the most
recent edition of the Uniform Customs and Practices for Documentary Credits,
published by the International Chamber of Commerce.



      x.   The Letter of Credit need not be transferable.



   B.   Approved Forms. The form of the Letter of Credit and of drafts
upon the Letter of Credit shall be as follows:



      i.   Except as approved in writing by City’s Engineer or
designee, the form of the Letter of Credit shall be in the form set out below.



      ii.   Except as approved in writing by City’s Engineer or
designee, the form of drafts upon the Letter of Credit shall be in the form
set out below.



   C.   Issuer Requirements. The issuer of the Letter of Credit shall
meet all of the following requirements:



      i.   The issuer shall be a federally insured financial
institution with offices in one of its branches within the City of Apache
Junction city limits, at which drafts upon the Letter of Credit may be
presented.



      ii.   The issuer shall be a member of the New York Clearing
House Association or a commercial bank or trust company satisfactory to City.



      iii.   The issuer shall have a net worth of not less than $1
billion.




LETTER OF CREDIT




                                       D
ate                                                 



                                       L
etter of Credit No.                       



City of Apache Junction



300 E. Superstition Blvd.



Apache Junction, A2 85119



Dear Sir or Madam:



We hereby establish our clean, unconditional and irrevocable Letter of Credit
in your favor at the  request and for the account of                
      in the  aggregate  amount of                        
                                        ($         
                ), available upon presentation of your draft in the
form attached hereto as Schedule 1.



We will honor each draft presented to us in compliance with the terms of this
Letter of Credit. Partial draws are permitted. Each draft must be accompanied
by a copy of this Letter of Credit. Within ten calendar (10) days after we
honor your draft, you must make the original of this Letter of Credit
available to us upon which we may endorse our payment. Drafts may be
presented by any of the following means:



   1.   By telefax to (        )                       
         



   2.   By email to                                  
                                                   
                   



   3.   By hand or overnight courier service delivery to: [This address
must be in Pinal County, Arizona.]



                                            
                               



                                            
                               



                                            
                               



   4.   By hand or overnight courier service delivery to: [This address
need not be in Pinal County, Arizona]



                                            
                               



                                            
                               



                                            
                               



This Letter of Credit is valid until                          
            , 20      and shall thereafter be automatically renewed
for successive one (1) year periods, unless at least one hundred twenty
calendar (120) days prior to expiration we notify you in writing, by either
registered or certified mail, that we elect not to renew the Letter of Credit
for such additional period. In the event of such notification, any then
unused portion of the Letter of Credit shall be available upon your
presenting to us your draft on or before the then current expiration date.



This Letter of Credit is subject to the UCP600. This Letter of Credit is not
assignable.



                                                   
                                                   
                                                 
Bank Name



                                                   
                                                   
                                                 
Bank Officer’s Signature               Bank Officer’s Name
(printed)



                                                   
                                                   
                                                 
Bank Officer’s Title                     Bank
Telephone Number




LETTER OF CREDIT ENCROACHMENT DEMAND




To:                                                 
                                   



                                                   
                                       



                                                   
                                       



From:                                               
       



     300 East Superstition Blvd.



     Apache Junction, AZ 85119



                                       D
ate:                                              
   



Ladies and Gentlemen:



Pursuant to your Credit No.                                 
                , the City of Apache Junction hereby demands cash
payment in the amount of                                  
                                 



($                                                 
                          ).



Please make your payment to the City of Apache Junction in the form of a wire
deposit to:



                                                   
                                       



                                                   
                                       



                                                   
                                       



If such deposit cannot be accomplished immediately for any reason, please
make your payment in the form of a cashier’s check issued by your
institution and delivered to me at the address listed above.



I certify that I am the                                    
                      for the City of Apache Junction.



If there is any imperfection or defect in this draft or its presentation,
please inform me immediately at (480)                         
          so that I can correct it. Also, please notify the City
Attorney at (480) 474-5105.



Thank you,



                                                   
                                       



                                                   
                                       



City of Apache Junction




EXHIBIT C





ASSUMPTION OF ANTENNA SITE RIGHTS-OF-WAY LICENSE AGREEMENT




                                       �
�           Regarding                              
                     



This assumption is made pursuant to paragraph 16 (E) of that certain Antenna
Site Rights-of-Way License Agreement (“Agreement”) between City of Apache
Junction, an Arizona municipal corporation (“City”) and,          
                                                   
                  (“Provider”) dated                 
                            .



                                                   
                                              ,
(“Assignee”), having acquired the rights of the Provider under the
Agreement, hereby assumes the Agreement, agrees to be bound thereby, and
obligates itself to perform the terms and conditions of the Agreement, all in
favor of City. The person signing this document on behalf of Assignee
warrants to City his authority to do so.



Dated:                                              
                                         



                                       �
�  ASSIGNEE:



                                       �
�                                                 
           



                                       �
�  a                                               
         



                                       �
�  By:                                             
         



                                       �
�  Its:                                             
         



STATE OF                                 )



               ) ss.



County of                                    )



The foregoing was subscribed and sworn to before me this              
      day of                                      ,



20        , by                                      
          as                                        
  of [Company Name], an Arizona [corporation/limited liability company].



                                       �
�                                               
       



                                       �
�        Notary Public



My Commission Expires:



                                                   
           



 



(Ord. 1453, passed 12-5-2017)



CHAPTER 14: CABLE SYSTEMS



      Article




         14-1.   CABLE TV SYSTEMS




ARTICLE 14-1:  CABLE TV SYSTEMS



Section



   14-1-1   Title



   14-1-2   Intent and purpose



   14-1-3   Definitions



   14-1-4   Authority to grant license; license required; non-exclusive
license



   14-1-5   Application procedures



   14-1-6   Standards for granting or denying license applications



   14-1-7   License agreement required



   14-1-8   Operating requirements for cable systems



   14-1-9   Fees, bonds, letters of credit, liquidated damages and
appeals



   14-1-10   Termination and revocation



   14-1-11   Renewal



   14-1-12   Transfers and change of control



   14-1-13   Indemnity and insurance



   14-1-14   Administration



   14-1-15   General provisions



   14-1-16   Rights reserved to Council



§ 14-1-1  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be entitled “City of Apache Junction Cable TV
Systems”.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-2  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of the city to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare by providing for the grant of one or more licenses for the
construction and operation of a cable TV system; to provide for the
regulation of each cable TV system by the city; to provide for the payment of
fees and other valuable consideration by a licensee to the city for the
privilege of using the public rights-of-way for constructing and operating a
cable TV system; to promote the widespread availability of cable TV service
to city residents wherever economically feasible, including, but not limited
to those who reside in multi-family buildings and in rural communities; to
encourage the development of cable TV service as a means of communication
between and among the members of the public and public institutions; and to
encourage the provision of diverse information to the community over cable TV.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-3  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following words, abbreviations and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Words not defined are
given the meaning in § 602 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522, and, if none,
their common and ordinary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The words MUST and SHALL are mandatory and the word MAY is
permissive.



   ACCESS CHANNEL.  Any channel set aside under the license agreement for
public use, educational use or governmental use without a charge to the user
by the licensee for channel usage. An ACCESS CHANNEL may be scheduled or may
be operated so that any member of the general public may cablecast.



   ACTIVATED CHANNELS.  Those channels engineered at the headend of a
cable TV system for the provision of services generally available to
residential subscribers of the cable TV system, regardless of whether those
services actually are provided, including any channel designated for public,
education or governmental use.



   ACTUAL COST.  The actual cost to the licensee of materials and labor
necessary to perform installation, construction or maintenance of facilities.



   AFFILIATE.  Any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled
by, or is under common ownership or control with the licensee.



   APPLICANT.  Any person that applies for a license.



   APPLICATION.  A proposal to construct and operate a cable TV system
within the city, transfer a license, renew a license or modify a license. An
application includes the initial proposal plus all subsequent amendments or
supplements to the proposal and relevant correspondence.



   BASIC CABLE SERVICE.  Any service tier that includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals.



   CABLE ACT.  The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C.
§§ 521 et seq.



   CABLE OPERATOR.  Any person or group of persons that is issued a
license by the licensing authority to construct, operate and maintain a cable
TV system in the public rights-of-way.



   CABLE SERVICE.  The one way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of the video programming or other
programming service.



   CABLE TV SYSTEM or SYSTEM.  Any facility consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM does not include:



      (1)   A facility that serves fewer than fifty subscribers.



      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any
public right-of-way.



      (3)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations.



      (4)   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole
or in part, to 47 United States Code sections 201 through 276, except that
the facility is considered a cable TV system, other than for purposes of 47
United States Code section 541(c), to the extent the facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent
of the use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services.



      (5)   An open video system that complies with 47 United States
Code section 573.



      (6)   A facility of an electric utility that is used solely
for operating its electric utility system.



   CHANNEL.  A time or frequency slot or technical equivalent on the
cable TV system in a specified format, discretely identified and capable of
carrying full motion color video and audio, and may include other non-video
subcarriers and digital information.



   CHANNEL EQUIVALENT.  The system capacity required to provide the
transmission of a video signal, with accompanying audio, that is in digital
format and capable of producing sound and picture of NTSC quality or better,
based on the compression technology then in use in the cable TV system.



   CITY.  The City of Apache Junction, an Arizona municipal corporation
(also referred to the (LICENSING AUTHORITY), in its present boundaries, and
its future boundaries as increased or decreased by law.



   CITY MANAGER.  The chief executive officer of the city or his or her
designee.



   COMPLAINT.  A subscriber or citizen issue, presented in verbal or
written form, to the licensee or the city relating to any regulatable aspect
of the licensee’s performance under this chapter.



   CONSUMER PRICE INDEX or CPI.  The annual average of the Consumer Price
Index for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U), as published by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.



   CONTROLLING INTEREST.  A business entity’s operational authority,
which is not limited to majority stock ownership, but also includes actual
working and management (day-to-day) control in whatever manner exercised.



   CONVERTER.  A tuning device which converts transmitted signals to a
frequency which permits their reception on a television set.



   COUNCIL.  The Council of the City of Apache Junction.



   DAY.  Calendar day.



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any separate and distinct structure or part thereof
which exists in finished form, occupied or capable of year-round occupation,
and serves as a residence to one or more persons. Included in this
definition, but not limited to are: all single family homes, each apartment
unit, each condominium unit, patio homes, guest quarters and similar type
structures.



   EASEMENT.  Property interest which allows the erection, construction
or maintenance of a cable TV system, its structures, equipment or facilities.



   EXPANDED BASIC SERVICE.  The next most highly penetrated tier of cable
service programming above the Basic Service tier excluding premium or
pay-per-view services.



   FAIR MARKET VALUE.  The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission.



   FEDERAL AGENCY.  Any agency of the United States.



   GROSS REVENUES.  Amounts in whatever form and from all sources derived
directly or indirectly by Licensee and/or an affiliate from the operation of
licensee’s cable system to provide cable services within a license area.
GROSS REVENUES include, by way of illustration and not limitation:



      (1)   Fees for cable services, regardless of whether such
cable services are provided to residential or commercial subscribers,
including revenues derived from the provision of all cable services
(including but not limited to pay or premium cable services, digital cable
services, pay-per-view, pay-per-event, audio channels and video-on-demand
cable services);



      (2)   Installation, disconnection, reconnection, downgrade,
upgrade, maintenance, repair, or similar charges associated with subscriber
cable service;



      (3)   Fees paid to licensee for channels designated for
commercial/leased access use, which shall be allocated on a pro rata basis
using total cable service subscribers within the license area;



      (4)   Converter, remote control, and other cable service
equipment rentals, leases, or sales;



      (5)   Payments for pre-paid cable services and/or equipment;



      (6)   Advertising Revenues as defined herein;



      (7)   Fees including, but not limited to: (1) late fees,
convenience fees and administrative fees which shall be allocated on a pro
rata basis using cable services revenue as a percentage of total licensee
revenues within the license area; (2) license fees; (3) the FCC user fee and
(4) public, education and government (“PEG”) fees if included on
subscriber billing statements;



      (8)   Revenues from program guides; and



      (9)   Commissions from home shopping channels and other cable
service revenue sharing arrangements which shall be allocated on a pro rata
basis using total cable service subscribers within the license area.



      (10)   GROSS REVENUES shall not be net of: (1) any operating
expense; (2) any accrual, including without limitation, any accrual for
commissions to affiliates; or (3) any other expenditure, regardless of
whether such expense, accrual, or expenditure reflects a cash payment.



   GROSS REVENUES, however, shall not be double counted. Revenues of both
licensee and an affiliate that represent a transfer of funds between the
licensee and the affiliate, and that would otherwise constitute GROSS
REVENUES of both the licensee and the affiliate, shall be counted only once
for purposes of determining GROSS REVENUES. Similarly, operating expenses of
the licensee which are payable from licensee’s revenue to an affiliate and
which may otherwise constitute revenue of the affiliate, shall not constitute
additional GROSS REVENUES for the purpose of this license. GROSS REVENUES
shall include amounts earned by affiliates only to the extent that licensee
could, in concept, have earned such types of revenue in connection with the
operation of licensee’s cable TV system to provide cable services and
recorded such types of revenue in its books and records directly, but for the
existence of affiliates. GROSS REVENUES shall not include sales taxes imposed
by law on subscribers that the licensee is obligated to collect. With the
exception of recovered bad debt, GROSS REVENUES shall not include bad debt.



         (a)   ADVERTISING REVENUES shall mean amounts revenues
derived from sales of advertising that are made available to licensee’s
cable system subscribers within the license area and shall be allocated on a
pro rata basis using total cable service subscribers reached by the
advertising. Whenever licensee acts as the principal in advertising
arrangements involving representation firms and/or advertising interconnects
and/or other multichannel video providers, advertising revenues subject to
license fees shall include the total amount from advertising that is sold,
and not be reduced by any operating expenses (e.g., “revenue offsets” and
“contra expenses” and “administrative expenses” or similar expenses),
or by fees, commissions, or other amounts paid to or retained by
representation firms, other multichannel video providers, involved with sales
of advertising on the cable system within the license area.



         (b)   GROSS REVENUES shall not include:



            1.   Actual cable services bad debt write-offs,
except any portion which is subsequently collected which shall be allocated
on a pro rata basis using cable services revenue as a percentage of total
licensee revenues within the license area;



            2.   Any taxes and/or fees on services furnished
by licensee imposed on subscribers by any municipality, state or other
governmental unit, provided that the license fee, the FCC User fee and PEG
fee shall not be regarded as such a tax or fee;



            3.   Launch fees and marketing co-op fees; and



            4.   Revenues associated with the provision of
managed network services provided under separate business contact.



            5.   Unaffiliated third party advertising sales
agency fees which are reflected as a deduction from revenues, except when
licensee acts as a principle as specified in paragraph (A) immediately above.



         (c)   To the extent revenues are derived by licensee for
the provision of a discounted bundle of services which includes cable
services and non-cable services, licensee shall calculate revenues to be
included in GROSS REVENUES using a methodology that allocates revenue on a
pro rata basis when comparing the bundled service price and its components to
the sum of the published rate card prices for such components. Except as
required by specific federal, state or local law, it is expressly understood
that equipment may be subject to inclusion in the bundled price at full rate
card value. This calculation shall be applied to every bundled service
package containing cable service from which licensee derives revenues in the
license area. The city reserves its right to review and to challenge
licensee’s calculations. Example: Prior to any bundle-related price
reduction, if cable service is valued at 50% of the total of the services to
be offered in a bundle, then cable service is to be valued and reported as
being no less than 50% of the price of the bundled service total.



   INSTALLATION.  The connection of the cable TV system from a remote
terminal to a subscriber’s residence or place of business.



   INTERACTIVE ON-DEMAND SERVICES.  A service providing video programming
to subscribers over switched networks on an on-demand, point-to-point basis,
but does not include services providing video programming prescheduled by the
programming provider.



   LABOR COSTS.  Actual cost to licensee of contract labor or hourly
wages or apportioned salaries of licensee’s employees plus fully loaded
labor costs.



   LICENSE.  An initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a
renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to Title 47 U.S.C.
§ 546), issued by a licensing authority, whether such authorization is
designated as a franchise, permit, resolution, contract, certificate,
agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a
cable TV system.



   LICENSE AGREEMENT.  A contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter between the city and a licensee that sets forth
the terms and conditions under which the license will be exercised.



   LICENSE AREA.  The entire existing territorial limits of the city and
any area annexed thereto during the term of the license.



   LICENSE FEE.  As defined in Title VI of the Federal Communications Act
of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 542, as amended.



   LICENSEE.  Any person who has been granted a license by the city or
any lawful transferee or successor interest.



   LICENSING AUTHORITY.  The City of Apache Junction.



   LIVING UNIT.  A distinct address in the network inventory system where
the cable operator currently has, had in the past, or had planned to provide
telephone or high-speed internet service to a customer. This includes, but is
not limited to, single family homes, multi-dwelling (e.g., apartment
buildings and condominiums) units and business locations.



   MATERIAL COSTS.  Actual cost of material to licensee, including sales
tax and freight paid, plus handling and processing charges equal to 3% of
material costs.



   MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR.  A person such as, but not
limited to, a cable operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution service,
a direct broadcast satellite service or a television receive-only satellite
program distributor, who makes available for purchase, by subscribers or
customers, multiple channels of video programming.



   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS.  Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, NORMAL
BUSINESS HOURS must include some evening hours at least 1 night per week
and/or some weekend hours.



   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS.  Those service conditions which are
within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not
within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to,
natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network
outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are
within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to,
special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or
seasonal demand periods, and maintenance, upgrade or rebuild of the cable TV
system.



   OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Information that a cable operator makes
available to all subscribers generally.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint
venture or organization of any kind and the lawful trustee, successor,
assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof.



   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.  The surface, the air space above the surface,
and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path,
alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway,
public utility easement or similar property now or hereafter held by the
city, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be
used for the purpose of installing and maintaining the cable TV system. No
reference herein to PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall be deemed to be a
representation or guarantee by the city that its interest or other right to
control the use of the property is sufficient to permit its use for those
purposes, and a licensee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as
are properly in the city and as the city may have the right and power to
give. PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY, for the purpose of this chapter, do not include
buildings, parks, poles, or similar facilities, or property owned by or
leased to the city, including by way of example and not limitation,
structures in the PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY, such as utility poles and light poles.



   REMOTE TERMINAL.  A “Digital Subscriber Line Access Multiplexer”
(“DSLAM”) capable of offering cable TV services to subscribers.



   SCHOOL.  Any public educational institution, which is accredited by a
nationally recognized institution, including primary and secondary schools,
colleges and universities.



   SERVICE INTERRUPTION.  The loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels or channel equivalents.



   SERVICE TIER.  A category of cable service or other services provided
by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the cable
operator.



   STANDARD DROP.  That cable connection which requires no more than
150-foot drop measured from the ground block on the subscriber’s home or
place of business to the nearest active tap on the cable TV system, (which
cannot be more than 4,000 feet from a Remote Terminal) involving only one
outlet and standard materials and does not involve a wallfish. In addition, a
STANDARD DROP shall exclude custom installation work including specific
subscriber requested work that requires nonstandard inventory or cable
routing that requires construction methods exceeding reasonable underground
or aerial work.



   STATE.  Any state or political subdivision, or agency thereof.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Any individual or entity legally receiving, for any
purpose, cable services of the licensee’s cable TV system.



   SYSTEM OUTAGE.  A service interruption affecting more than ten
subscribers.



   SYSTEM REBUILD or REBUILD.  A major improvement or enhancement in the
technology or service capabilities made by the licensee to the cable TV
system.



   TWO-WAY CAPABILITY.  The incorporation in a cable TV system of all
appropriate design and engineering characteristics so that two-way
transmission, including addressability, over the system can be implemented
with a minimum of expense. The two-way capability specifically includes, but
is not limited to, services for internet access and pay-per-view as well as
emerging technologies.



   USABLE ACTIVATED CHANNELS.  Activated channels of a cable TV system,
except those channels whose use for the distribution of broadcast signals
would conflict with technical and safety regulations as determined by the FCC.



   VIDEO PROGRAMMING.  Programming provided by, or generally considered
comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-4  AUTHORITY TO GRANT LICENSE; LICENSE REQUIRED; NON-EXCLUSIVE
LICENSE.



   (A)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-505 et seq. and as amended, the
council has the authority to issue non-exclusive licenses to construct,
install, maintain and operate cable TV systems within the city, and to
regulate those cable operations. The council’s authority is also based in
common law pursuant to the city’s ownership of the fee simple title to the
public rights-of-way of the city as well as its legal interest in easements
and licenses granted to it by property owners for the purposes of municipal
use.



   (B)   No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed to
require the granting of a license.



   (C)   No person shall construct, install or maintain a cable TV
system within the public rights-of-way in



the city, or within any other public property of the city, unless a license
agreement authorizing such use of the public rights-of-way or property is in
full force and effect.



   (D)   All licenses issued by the council shall be non-exclusive, and
the council specifically reserves the right to grant such additional licenses
for cable TV systems as the council deems appropriate.



   (E)   Any terms and conditions of agreements between licensee and
other entities or municipalities shall not effect any of the terms and
conditions including but not limited to the rates, services and work
schedules, set forth in a license agreement negotiated between the city and
licensee.



   (F)   A license shall not relieve the licensee of any obligation to
obtain and comply with any necessary permit or other forms of authorization
required by the city code or other applicable laws and regulations and shall
not convey rights other than as specified in this Chapter 14, or in the
license agreement; no rights shall pass by implication.



   (G)   Any license shall authorize the licensee to engage in the
business of operating a cable TV system and providing cable service in the
city, and may authorize non-cable service in the city to the extent not
prohibited by state and federal law, and to erect, install, construct,
prepare, replace, reconstruct, maintain and keep in any public rights-of-way
such poles, wire, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other facilities as may be necessary
and appurtenant to the cable TV system. In addition, any license shall
authorize the licensee to use and operate such facilities rented or leased
from other persons, including but not limited to any public utility or other
licensee holding a valid license or permitted to do business in the city;
provided, however, that:



      (1)   The safety, functioning, and appearance of the public
rights-of-way and the safety of other persons shall not be adversely affected
by the installation, construction, operation or removal of such facilities
necessary for a cable TV system; and



      (2)   The cost of the installation, construction, operation or
removal of such facilities shall be borne by the licensee.



   (H)   Nothing in this Chapter 14 shall relieve the licensee of any
obligation to obtain any authorizations or licenses from the city to use the
public rights-of-way to provide non-cable service, or to comply with any city
rules, regulations and standards with respect to the use of the public
rights-of-way for the provision of such non-cable service. The provisions of
this chapter 14 are not a bar to the imposition of similar, different or
additional city imposed rules, regulations and standards with respect to the
use of the public rights-of-way in connection with the provision of non-cable
service. In addition to other rights it has, the city may establish such
rules, regulations and standards related to the provision of such non-cable
service, to the extent not prohibited by state and federal law, as required
to protect the public interest.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-5  APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, install, maintain or operate
a cable TV system within the city who is not lawfully the holder of a license
to provide cable service in the city as of the effective date of this chapter
shall submit an application to the council addressed to and filed with the
city clerk. This application shall consist of a letter and proposed license
agreement. All applications and proposals filed with the city clerk shall
remain the property of the city and shall constitute a public record pursuant
to state law. The council reserves the right to issue a request for proposals
for cable TV system services at any time. Applications submitted pursuant to
a request for proposals may be returned as non-responsive if they do not
comply with all requirements of the request.



   (B)   Applications for consent to transfer a license or an interest
in a license must conform to the requirements of A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 14-1-12,
while applications for renewal, must conform to A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 14-1-11.



   (C)   An application for modification of a license agreement must at
a minimum, include the following information:



      (1)   The specific modification requested;



      (2)   The justification for the requested modification,
including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others,
and the impact on the applicant if the modification is not approved;



      (3)   A statement as to whether the modification sought is
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested
modification meets the legal standards of that section; and



      (4)   Any other information necessary for the council to make
a determination.



   (D)   To be acceptable for filing, an application must be submitted
with any required filing fee, be properly executed on the forms prescribed by
the council, and contain the information required by any required application
form, this chapter and meet the requirements of any applicable request for
proposals.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-6  STANDARDS FOR GRANTING OR DENYING LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   All applications and proposals received shall be placed in a
public file with the city clerk. The council shall publish notice of a public
hearing date when the council will consider an application and the proposal
in a newspaper of general circulation once a week for two consecutive weeks,
the first notice being published at least fourteen (14) days before the
public hearing takes place. The notice shall indicate the following:



      (1)   The proposed service or changes in service;



      (2)   Proposed changes in ownership;



      (3)   Where the application may be viewed, in person or
online; and



      (4)   The date and location of the public hearing.



   (B)   Notice of the hearing shall be published and held in
accordance with the provision of A.R.S. § 9-507(B). All interested parties
shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard.



   (C)   The council shall give full consideration to each application
and proposal. The following factors may be deemed appropriate and shall be
considered:



      (1)   The financial qualifications of the applicant and its
ability to construct and operate the proposed system;



      (2)   The need for and quality of the service proposed,
including rates to subscribers, whether or not rates are to be regulated;



      (3)   The technical, legal and character qualifications of the
applicant, including applicant’s willingness to abide by the limitations of
this chapter;



      (4)   Technical and performance adequacy of the proposed
system design, plant and equipment, including any specific knowledge or
experience the Council may have with the applicant;



      (5)   Where an applicant proposes to overbuild an existing
cable system, the economic and technical feasibility of multiple cable TV
systems, the impact on the existing licensee’s system and the public
interest if the application were to be granted; and



      (6)   All other factors which may affect the public interest.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-7  LICENSE AGREEMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   If council approves the application and proposal, the terms
shall be set forth in a written license agreement which shall also be
considered at the same public hearing. The license agreement shall
incorporate all terms and provisions of this chapter. The licensee shall
expressly and specifically agree to accept and be bound by the terms of this
chapter.



   (B)   A license agreement shall have the minimum following
characteristics, but the city and licensee may negotiate additional terms and
conditions consistent with A.J.C.C. Vol. I, § 14-1-4, state and federal law:



      (1)   It authorizes use of the public rights-of-way for
installing cables, wires, lines and other facilities to operate a cable TV
system, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the licensee to
provide service to, or install cable, wires, lines or any other equipment or
facilities upon property without owner consent (except for compatible
easements or rights-of-way pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)), or to use
publicly or privately owned utility poles or conduits without a separate
agreement with the owners. It also authorizes the licensee to so use, operate
and provide similar facilities or properties rented, licensed or leased from
other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to, any
public utility or other licensee licensed or permitted to do business in the
city; provided, however, that neither the licensee nor the third party shall
be relieved of any regulation or obligation as to its use of the facilities
in the public rights-of-way.



      (2)   It is subject to the paramount right of use of the
public rights-of-way by the council and the public for public purposes. The
council reserves the right to authorize use of public rights-of-way to other
persons as it determines appropriate.



      (3)   It is nonexclusive and will not expressly or implicitly
preclude the issuance of other licenses to operate cable systems within the
city.



      (4)   It conveys no property right to the licensee or right to
renewal other than as may be required by state or federal law, and the
agreement is not a franchise.



      (5)   It constitutes a legally binding contract between the
licensee and the city once it is approved by the Council and executed by both
parties. A licensee contractually commits itself to comply with the terms,
conditions and provisions of the license agreement and with all applicable
laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders.



      (6)   In no case shall the term of any license agreement
exceed 15 years commencing on its effective date. A greater period of time is
prohibited.



      (7)   A licensee shall execute a hold harmless agreement as
part of the license agreement which shall set forth the obligation of the
licensee over and above the insurance requirements contained in the license
and this chapter.



      (8)   A licensee shall be subject to all laws, rules and
regulations of the State of Arizona and the United States Government.



      (9)   Any of the provisions of this chapter may be amended by
the council at any time. This chapter and the amended provisions shall be
applicable to all existing license agreements; provided, however, that this
chapter and the amended provisions shall not be applicable to an existing
agreement where it would contravene a contractual right of the licensee under
the license agreement.



      (10)   All notices and communications from a licensee to the
council pursuant to this chapter or a license agreement shall be sent to the
city manager unless the licensee is otherwise directed.



      (11)   Insofar as it is not inconsistent with or otherwise
preempted by federal or state regulations, the license agreement shall grant
the right and privilege to the licensee to provide non-cable communications
services. Insofar as it is not inconsistent with or otherwise preempted by
federal or state regulations, the council shall retain all authority to
regulate non-cable telecommunication services to the extent necessary to
protect the public interest and to ensure compliance with all provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-8  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR CABLE SYSTEMS.



   A licensee shall conform to the following minimum standards relative to
the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable TV system in the city.
It is not the intent of this article to prevent any licensee from providing
more than the required minimum to meet the standards listed below.



   (A)   Rights of individuals, subscribers and users.



      (1)   A cable TV system shall be operated in a manner
consistent with the principles of fairness and equal accessibility of
facilities, channels, studios and other services to all residents and other
entities having a legitimate use of the system. A licensee shall not
discriminate in terms of rates, terms of service or extension of service on
the basis of age, race, creed, sex, religion, national origin or marital
status. Nor shall a licensee fail to extend service to any part of the city
on the basis of the income of the residents. This provision shall not
restrict licensee’s ability to provide senior citizen, other similar
discounts, or seasonal service.



      (2)   A licensee shall maintain a business office open during
normal business hours with listed local or toll-free telephone numbers to
allow reasonable access by subscribers and members of the public. The office
shall be conveniently and centrally located but shall be no further than 15
miles from Meridian Road where such road marks the city’s western boundary.
When the office is closed, an answering machine or service, capable of
receiving complaints and inquiries must be employed. The office shall be open
to the public between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Mondays through
Fridays, and 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturdays, during such hours licensee
will provide staff to field all subscriber questions, complaints, billing
procedures and exchange of converter boxes.



      (3)   Licensee shall maintain a written record listing date of
all complaints, identifying the subscriber or citizen, describing the nature
of the complaint and when and what action has been taken by the licensee, if
any, in response thereto. Such record shall be kept at the licensee’s
office and, subject to subscriber privacy laws, shall be available for
inspection during normal business hours without further notice of demand of
the city manager. A summary of such records must be retained for not less
than one year. The licensee shall notify each subscriber at the time of
initial subscription of the procedure for reporting and resolving complaints.



      (4)   A licensee shall establish procedures for the
investigation and resolution of all complaints including, but not limited to,
those regarding the quality of service and equipment malfunction. A copy of
such procedures shall be provided to the city manager and/or council upon
request.



      (5)   A licensee must provide each subscriber at the time
cable service is installed, the following:



         (a)   Written instructions for placing a service call,
filing a complaint or requesting an adjustment, including the phone number
and address of licensee’s office;



         (b)   The telephone number of the city office
responsible for administration of the cable license;



         (c)   A schedule of rates and charges for all available
services;



         (d)   Copies of the service contract, including
disconnect and reconnect procedures and charges; and



         (e)   A subscriber handbook and upon request any other
written policies applicable to subscribers.



      (6)   A licensee shall establish and conform to the following
policy regarding refunds to subscribers and users:



         (a)   If the licensee collects a deposit or advance
charge on any service or equipment requested by a subscriber or user, the
licensee shall provide such service or equipment within 30 days of the
collection of the deposit or charge or it shall refund the deposit or charge
within 5 days thereafter upon request of the subscriber. The subscriber must
be advised of this right of refund at the time the order is placed; and



         (b)   If any subscriber or user terminates any monthly
service during a period of time for which the subscriber or user has made an
annual or other payment in advance, the appropriate pro rata portion of the
payment shall be refunded by the licensee.



      (7)   The following requirements shall apply to disconnections:



         (a)   There shall be no charge for total disconnection
of cable service unless the charge was disclosed at the time the subscriber
ordered service. All cable communications equipment shall be removed within a
reasonable time from a subscriber’s property at the subscriber’s request,
such time not to exceed 30 days from the date of the request; and



         (b)   If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due
monthly subscriber’s fee or other charge, the licensee may disconnect the
subscriber’s service outlet; provided, however, that the disconnection
shall not be effected until 30 days after the due date of the charges and
shall include a prior written notice to the subscriber of the intent to
disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of all proper charges
or fees, including the payment of any reconnection charge, the licensee shall
promptly reinstate the service. The licensee may require a 60 day prepayment
of services as a condition to reconnection.



      (8)   Other than testing of the EAS system, a licensee may
interrupt service on the cable TV system only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible. No prior notice shall be required for the performance
of system maintenance work requiring a maximum of one hour between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



      (9)   A licensee shall at all times comply with subscriber
privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 551.



      (10)   No equipment shall be installed by the licensee for
subscriber service without first securing a service request from the owner or
resident of any private property involved, except in public utility easements.



      (11)   A licensee shall not originate or knowingly permit
subliminal transmission at any time for any purpose whatsoever.



      (12)   A licensee shall make available leased access channels
as required under 47 U.S.C. § 532.



      (13)   A licensee shall strictly adhere to the equal
employment opportunity requirements of the FCC, 47 U.S.C. § 554, state
statutes and local regulations, and as the same may be amended from time to
time.



   (B)   Cable system construction timetable.



      (1)   A cable system shall be constructed in accordance with
the provision of the license agreement.



      (2)   It is the policy of the council to require construction
of a cable system designed to serve subscribers in an area licensed by the
council as rapidly and expeditiously as possible. The licensee shall
immediately upon granting of the license agreement diligently pursue and
obtain all necessary permits from the appropriate governmental agencies,
utility companies and others as necessary to comply with the provision of
this chapter and other federal, state and city laws, codes and resolutions.



      (3)   The city manager may require a licensee to report on
construction progress and provide information showing specifically whether
the construction schedule is being met and the reasons for the delay. The
city manager shall determine the format to be used for the report and the
frequency of reporting.



      (4)   Where appropriate and reasonable, a licensee shall
schedule construction activities to coordinate with any city construction on
streets so as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the public.



   (C)   Line extension policy. A licensee shall extend its cable TV
system in accordance with the provisions of its license agreement.



      (1)   Upon reasonable request for service by any person
located within any area of the city that meets density requirements of
division (C)(2) below, the licensee shall, within 30 days, furnish the
requested service to such person, unless prevented from providing the service
due to factors outside licensee’s control, such as permit restrictions,
private easement considerations and the like. If the service has not been
implemented within 60 days of the request, the city manager may impose
liquidated damages for each day thereafter.



      (2)   The licensee must extend and make cable service
available to every unserved living unit within 4,000 feet of a licensee’s
remote terminal or any area of the city reaching the minimum density of at
least 25 dwelling units per mile of plant as measured from licensee’s
nearest activated feeder line, whether the existing plant is aerial or
underground, except that the licensee shall not be required to install cable
where another authorized licensee has already done so.



      (3)   The licensee shall prevent unnecessary damage to streets
and property by installing underground cable or conduit in all new
subdivisions of five or more dwelling units within the license area at the
same time, in the same trench as telephone, electric or similar services are
installed.



      (4)   In new residential developments in which all the
electric power and telephone utilities are underground, the city may, in its
sole discretion, require that the following procedure apply with respect to
access to and utilization of underground easements:



         (a)   The developer shall be responsible for contacting
and surveying all licensees to ascertain which licensees desire (or, pursuant
to the terms and provisions of this chapter and any license agreement, may be
required) to provide cable service to that development. The developer may
establish a reasonable deadline to receive responses from licensees. The
final development map shall indicate the licensees which have agreed to serve
the development.



         (b)   If one or more licensees wish to provide service
within all or part of the development, they shall be accommodated in the
joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory shared basis. If fewer than two
licensees indicate interest, the developer shall provide conduit to
accommodate a minimum of two sets of cable television cables and dedicate to
the city any initially unoccupied conduit.



         (c)   The developer shall provide at least ten business
days notice of the date that utility trenches will be open to the licensees
that have agreed to serve the development. When the trenches are open, such
licensees shall have two business days to begin the installation of their
cables, and five business days after beginning installation to complete
installation.



         (d)   The final development map shall not be approved
until the developer submits evidence that:



            1.   It has notified each licensee that
underground utility trenches are to open as of an estimated date, and that
each licensee will be allowed access to such trenches, including trenches
from proposed streets to individual homes or home sites, on specified
nondiscriminatory terms and conditions; and



            2.   It has received a written notification from
each licensee that the licensee intends to install its facilities during the
open trench period on the specified terms and conditions, or such other terms
and conditions as are mutually agreeable to the developer and licensee, or
has received no reply from a licensee within ten days after its notification
to such licensee, in which case the licensee will be deemed to have waived
its opportunity to install facilities during the open trench period.



         (e)   Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be
subject to compliance with state regulatory agency and utility standards. If
the compliance is not possible, the developer shall provide a separate trench
for the cable television cables, with the entire cost shared among the
participating licensee(s). With the concurrence of the developer, the
affected utilities and the licensee’s alternative installation procedures,
such as the use of deeper trenches, may be utilized, subject to the
requirements of applicable laws.



         (f)   Any licensee wishing to serve an area where the
trenches have been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and
associated costs and shall repair all property to the condition which existed
prior to such trenching.



      (5)   The licensee must extend and make cable service
available to any resident requesting connection within the licensee’s
authorized license area at the regular installation charge provided that
division (C)(2) above is met.



   (D)   Construction and technical standards. The following general
requirements, which are not to be interpreted as imposing standards in excess
of FCC imposed limits, apply to all licensees.



      (1)   In those areas and portions of the license area where
the transmission and distribution facilities of the telephone company and the
electric company are underground or later placed underground, the licensee
shall likewise install its transmission facilities underground.



      (2)   In areas where facilities do not have to be underground,
a licensee shall not erect any new poles along any street or public
rights-of-way of the city except as may be reasonably required or necessary
to fill small gaps in the existing aerial utility systems and only then with
the advance approval of the city manager.



      (3)   All television signals transmitted on a cable TV system
must include any closed captioning information for the hearing impaired.
Antennas, supporting structures and outside plant used in the system must be
designed to comply with the recommendations of the Electronics Industries
Association and applicable federal and local regulations on tower structures
and outside plant.



      (4)   The licensee must perform at its expense any proof of
performance tests designed to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of
this chapter, the license agreement and the FCC. The city manager may require
periodic proof of performance tests to be performed at the expense of the
licensee. Upon request, the licensee must provide the test results promptly
to the city manager.



      (5)   The licensee must advise the city manager a minimum of
30 days in advance when a proof of performance test pursuant to 47 C.F.R.
76.605(a)(4) (or subsequently renumbered) is scheduled. The licensee must
also advise the city manager of its anticipated schedule for any other FCC
required testing a minimum of 30 days in advance of the testing.



      (6)   A licensee must not design, install or operate its
facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any FCC
licensed service, including but not limited to television, radio, satellite,
two-way and paging services, the electrical or telephone system located in
any portion of the city, the cable TV system of another licensee, or
individual or master antennas used for receiving amateur radio television,
radio or other FCC authorized signals.



      (7)   The system shall meet or exceed FCC requirements as set
forth in 47 C.F.R. 76(K). If federal law is subsequently amended or minimum
technical specifications are no longer mandated by the FCC, the technical
specifications in effect at the time of adoption of the license agreement
shall govern.



   (E)   Maintenance specifications.



      (1)   The licensee shall construct, install and maintain its
cable TV system in an orderly and workmanlike manner. The safety of the
general public, the licensee’s employees, the employees of the utility
companies and all nearby property owners shall be a primary concern.



      (2)   All cables are to be installed, to the maximum extent
possible, parallel with electric and telephone distribution facilities.
Licensee’s multiple-cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and
bundled to the maximum extent possible.



      (3)   As between licensee and the city, the licensee shall be
solely and completely responsible for the actions taken by any contractor or
other agent employed to construct or install the licensee’s facilities
within the public rights-of-way as well as on other public or private
property.



      (4)   A licensee shall have available at all hours personnel
capable of responding to emergency conditions requiring immediate repair to
its cable facilities. The licensee shall be a member of the Blue Stake
Center, or otherwise comply with state underground law, for its service area.



      (5)   In the event that licensee property or the facilities
and equipment of unauthorized cable communication providers has been
installed in a public rights-of-way without complying with the requirements
of this chapter, or the license has been terminated, revoked or expired, or
the use of any licensee property is discontinued for any reason for a
continuous period of two months, licensee or any unauthorized cable
communication provider, shall at its sole expense on the demand of the city
manager remove promptly from the public rights-of-way all licensee or
unauthorized cable communication provider property other than that which the
city manager may permit to be abandoned in place absent any rights licensee
has under state and federal law. Upon such removal of subject property,
licensee or unauthorized cable communication provider shall promptly restore
the public rights-of-way or other public places from which the subject
property was removed to a condition as near as possible to its prior
condition. Subject property no longer in service may be left in place with
the approval of and in a manner prescribed by the city manager. Upon
abandonment of the property in place, licensee or unauthorized cable
communication provider shall deliver to the city manager an instrument
transferring ownership of the subject abandoned property to the city. Any
cost arising from compliance with this provision shall be borne by the
licensee or unauthorized cable communication provider.



   (F)   Use of public rights-of-way.



      (1)   A licensee must utilize, with the owner’s permission,
existing poles, conduits or such other facilities whenever possible.



      (2)   All transmission lines and other equipment must be
installed and located to minimize interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of public and private property owners. The council reserves the
right to issue the reasonable rules and regulations concerning the
installation and maintenance of cable TV systems in the public rights-of-way,
as may be consistent with this chapter, state and federal law. In addition,
licensee shall become a member of the Blue Stake Center, or its functional
equivalent, within 30 days following the effective date of this agreement.



      (3)   The licensee shall have at all times up-to-date route
maps showing trunk and distribution lines. Licensee shall make all such maps
available for review by the appropriate city personnel and shall be provided
on at least a yearly basis. Licensee shall, in addition to the paper maps,
also provide the city with updated maps in a suitable electronic format
determined by the city at least every three months if changes to the cable TV
system have occurred during the three-month period.



      (4)   All construction practices shall be in accordance with
all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, 29
U.S.C. §§ 651 et seq., as amended, as well as other applicable laws.



      (5)   A licensee must remove, replace or modify at its own
expense, any of its facilities within any public rights-of-way or any
federally patented easement when required to do so by the city manager to
allow the city to change, maintain, repair, improve or eliminate a public
thoroughfare. Nothing in this article shall prevent licensee from seeking and
obtaining reimbursement from sources other than the city.



      (6)   In public rights-of-way where electrical and telephone
utility wiring are located underground, either at the time of initial
construction or subsequently, the cable must also be located underground at
the licensee’s expense. Between the public right-of-way and subscriber’s
residence, the cable must be located underground if both electrical and
telephone utility wiring are located underground. If either electric or
telephone are aerial, licensee may install aerial cable except where a
property owner requests underground installation at the sole cost of the
licensee.



      (7)   A licensee must obtain any required permits before doing
any excavation or causing disturbance to public thoroughfares or private
property as a result of its construction or operations and must restore to
their former condition such private property and public thoroughfares, the
latter in a manner consistent with all applicable rules, regulations and
resolutions relative to construction, repair or maintenance in public
rights-of-way. If such restoration is not satisfactorily performed within a
reasonable time in the opinion of the city manager, the city manager may,
after prior notice to licensee, cause the repairs to be made at the expense
of the licensee. The city manager may inspect ongoing construction and
require a licensee to halt construction where the city manager finds the
construction to be in non-compliance with the requirements of this chapter,
the license agreement or a permit.



      (8)   Prior to commencement of underground construction, a
licensee must have complied with the following requirements:



         (a)   Have received a permit from the city for
construction on public property or public rights-of-way; and



         (b)   Have complied with Blue Stake requirements in the
area of construction;



      (9)   At the request of any person holding a valid building
moving permit and upon sufficient notice, the licensee must temporarily
raise, lower or cut its wires as necessary to facilitate such move upon not
less than 72 hours advance notice. The direct expense of the temporary move
must be paid by the permit holder, and the licensee may require payment in
advance.



   (G)   System services and capability.



      (1)   The following minimum requirements for facilities and
services apply to licenses. The council may require that a licensee exceed
these minimum requirements.



         (a)   Except as provided in a negotiated license
agreement, a cable TV system must have a minimum analog capacity of 82 video
channels available for immediate or potential use. Two-way capability shall
be designed into the system. Upon request, this minimum channel capacity may
be modified by the council, provided the licensee demonstrates that it would
be commercially impracticable to comply with the requirement. A licensee
shall have the burden of demonstrating, by clear and convincing evidence,
that compliance with the minimum channel capacity would be commercially
impracticable for its Apache Junction cable TV system.



         (b)   Standard installation and basic service to public
buildings may be required without charge as set forth in the license
agreement. Licensee may be required to make available, 1 service outlet to a
conveniently accessible point in each city building or other facility or
building located within the license area and used for public purposes as may
be designated by the city manager. The installation charge to each occupant,
if any, would not exceed licensee’s direct cost (time and material).



         (c)   A licensee must design its system to allow the
city manager to interrupt audio portions of the cable service in an emergency
to deliver information to subscribers.



         (d)   Licensee must provide standby power for the
headend so as to be able to operate some channels during a power outage for a
minimum of 48 hours or as provided for in the license agreement.



      (2)   The following requirements apply to PEG access channels:



         (a)   PEG channel capacity shall be made available to
city and its designated PEG providers without charge within 180 days after
Licensee begins offering cable service in the city, licensee will provide the
city with up to two public, educational, and governmental access channels
(“PEG channels”) as determined in the city’s sole discretion. The two
PEG channels shall be on the basic cable service tier of the system and two
other channels of non-commercial government programming, at least one of
which may be programmed by the federal government in the digital programming
tier of the system, as provided for in A.R.S. § 9-506(D)(1). Channels shall
be reserved for this capacity with a logo approved by the city. All costs
associated with the obligations in this section to commence PEG signals at
the point of origination back to the headend and transmitted to subscribers
with the same quality, functionality and identification as other channels on
the system, shall be borne by licensee. Except as provided in this chapter.
Licensee shall have no responsibility for the management, operation or
administration of PEG channels and shall have no editorial control pursuant
to A.R.S. § 9-506(D)(l).



         (b)   PEG channels located on the basic cable service
tier shall be grouped together and located on the system in reasonable
proximity to other commercial video channels on the system. Licensee will
deliver the PEG channels to subscribers at the same visual and audio quality,
same functionality and at the same bit rate as licensee delivers the primary
signal of local television network broadcast stations on its cable TV system
(“Network TV”), such that the PEG channels are indistinguishable from
Network TV in video and audio quality and functionality. Should licensee
convert the basic cable service tier to digital format, subscribers must be
able to continue to receive PEG channels free of charge except for the
standard rate applicable for the basic cable service tier. PEG channels must
be receivable by subscribers without special expense, other than the expense
required to receive basic cable service or digital service, as applicable.
Licensee must maintain PEG channels consistent with FCC technical standards.
If no FCC standards for PEG channels exist, licensee must maintain PEG
channels using FCC technical standards for local over-the-air television
channels. The city recognizes that licensee is unable to improve the
technical quality of PEG channels but licensee must not degrade the technical
quality once it is received by licensee. Licensee agrees not to encrypt PEG
channels any differently than other commercial channels available on the
system unless the city and licensee mutually agree in writing to a
non-traditional format that is not similar to those of broadcast channels.



         (c)   Upon 180 day advance written notice to licensee,
the city shall have the right to require that licensee carry one of the PEG
channels in both SD and HD format consistent with the manner and tier
placement in which licensee delivers the primary signal of Network TV. City
shall have the sole discretion to determine which of its PEG channels migrate
to HD without the addition of mandates or content restrictions. HD resolution
will be the same resolution used in licensee’s HD tier, such that the PEG
HD channels are indistinguishable from Network TV in video and audio quality
and functionality. Licensee will continue to carry the city PEG channels in
SD format in addition to HD format as long as there are SD channels in
licensee’s basic channel lineup.



         (d)   Licensee must permit the city to operate a
production studio (the “Studio”) located in city buildings at a site
determined by the city. Licensee, at its sole cost, will design build and
maintain all PEG upstream feeds, connections and distribution facilities
between its video channel aggregation point and the Studio in a manner so
that no degradation in signal quality or content as



originated by city shall occur. Licensee must furnish a new state-of-the-art
digital fiber optic transmission system consisting of transmitters and
receivers. Transmitters and receivers must be of the type consistent and
compatible with current industry standards for the application of continuous
conversion of broadcast quality audio and video to date for transport over
fiber optic cable. Licensee must interconnect at its sole cost the Studio to
the headend or other main distribution point of the system for distribution
of the programming of the PEG channels with the above-mentioned fiber optic
cable to a point designated by the city. At the request of the city, licensee
at licensee’s cost shall provide timely and reliable advice regarding
acquisition, maintenance and use of any Studio and production equipment that
may be obtained for that purpose by the city.



   (H)   System physical design process. Licensee shall provide city
with detailed design maps defining the geographical and technical physical
design of the system, showing all areas of the city to be served by each hub,
as well as the construction and energization schedule by hub area for the
upgraded systems. Maps shall be provided at least 60 days prior to the
release for construction. The city may review the design and accompanying
maps and submit comments to licensee for review within 15 days of the date
each map is provided to the city for review. Licensee shall integrate and
implement city’s comments into the construction plan.



   (I)   Interconnection. A licensee shall interconnect its cable TV
system with other systems located in the city, in nearby cities, or counties
upon the request of the council, where the Apache Junction cable TV system
and the adjacent system are both owned by the same cable operator, where the
cable operator’s share a common controlling parent or affiliate or where
economically feasible.



   (J)   Local broadcast channels. Each cable TV system shall carry as
part of the basic local channels broadcast in its service area as required
and defined in FCC regulations as amended.



   (K)   Technology review and technical amendments.



      (1)   The city and licensee shall meet to discuss changes in
cable TV system laws, regulations, technology, competing services, the needs
of the community and other factors impacting cable systems. As a result of
these discussions, this license may be modified by the city and the licensee
to respond to the change in laws, regulations, technology, competing
services, the needs of the community or other factors impacting cable TV
systems.



      (2)   If any of the following conditions occur, and upon
written request of either licensee or city, the city manager and licensee may
agree to meet and discuss in good faith the terms of a mutually agreeable
license amendment:



         (a)   Cable service similar to cable service offered by
licensee is provided by any entity using the public rights-of-way, which is
not subject to similar licensing requirements of the city.



         (b)   The cable act is amended to allow licensee to
provide intrastate or interstate telecommunication and any regional
communications company to provide cable service.



         (c)   Any other significant event occurs, including but
not limited to a final non-appealable order or judgment by a court of
competent jurisdiction, which either licensee or city believes may impact the
current terms and conditions of the license.



         (d)   The purpose of the meeting and discussion is to
use best efforts to reach mutually acceptable agreement for recommendation to
the council for proposed council action within ninety days of such written
request, on how to amend the license to relieve the city or the licensee from
any commercial impracticability, which arises from the condition in question.
This provision shall not require that the license be amended, however it is
intended to facilitate a process whereby the parties may reach a mutually
acceptable agreement.



   (L)   Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy.



      (1)   General construction practices. Licensee’s
construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable federal,
state and local laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to the
federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration Regulations, as adopted
by the State of Arizona. All installation of electronic equipment shall be of
a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the provisions
of applicable codes.



      (2)   General operational practices.



         (a)   The construction, operation and maintenance of
licensee’s system, including but not limited to the headend and
distribution network, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire,
cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and practices, shall be performed by
appropriately licensed and qualified maintenance and construction personnel.



         (b)   The system shall be kept in a safe and suitable
condition and shall be in compliance with, maintained, repaired and
constructed in accordance with the applicable standards, procedures and
practices contained in the National Electric Code and the National Electrical
and Safety Code, as those codes may, from time to time, be amended; and shall
additionally be maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with
improvements the city may deem necessary, or to unlawfully interfere in any
manner with the rights of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or
obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on public rights-of-way.



      (3)   Safety. Licensee shall at all times employ the standard
of care attendant to the risks involved and shall install and maintain in use
commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failure and accidents
which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public, including
public employees.



      (4)   Testing of RF Radiation Cumulative Leakage Index
(“CLI”). Licensee shall at all times comply and perform all testing in
accordance with FCC rules and regulations. Licensee shall have the right to
discontinue its service to any premises where RF radiation which licensee
cannot control is originating from inside the premises. Once a year, licensee
shall provide notice to the city of its schedule of RF leakage monitoring and
testing. Upon the city’s request, licensee shall furnish the city with
copies of the monitoring and testing data and results following licensee’s
performance of scheduled RF leakage monitoring and testing.



      (5)   Underground. In all areas of the city where the cables,
wires and other like facilities (electric and telephone) of public utilities
exist underground, or are required by the city to be placed underground,
licensee shall also place its cables, wires or other facilities underground.



      (6)   Pole attachments. Licensee shall use the poles and other
properties of the city pursuant to any pole attachment agreements or public
utility companies operating within the city, and licensee shall not
construct, erect or maintain any support poles or other properties in the
public rights-of-way within the city for the operation of its system except
upon the express permission of the city, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld upon a showing of need by licensee. In all areas of the
city where the cables, wires and other facilities of licensee are attached to
any city-owned utility poles, licensee shall maintain those attachments
subject to payment to the city in an amount determined by written agreement
between the city and licensee.



   (M)   Placement of facilities.



      (1)   This license agreement does not alter the city’s
governmental power to establish regulations of general applicability on the
erection, construction or installation of any facilities which may be
constructed, maintained or operated by a person authorized to use and occupy
the streets and other public rights-of-way, including a cable TV system
operator.



      (2)   Licensee shall comply with those requirements, including
obtaining permits prior to excavation and providing maps showing where
construction or excavation is planned, and upon completion, providing maps
showing actual construction if any changes are authorized.



      (3)   The city retains the right to designate where licensee
may place its facilities within the streets and other public rights-of-way.



   (N)   Relocation for public improvements; request of the city;
governmental powers. Whenever because of public necessity or the welfare of
the public generally, the city shall elect to change the grade of any street,
or to sell or vacate any street, easement, or other public rights-of-way, or
to construct or reconstruct any water lines, sanitary or storm sewers,
watercourses, drainage ditches, conduits, playgrounds, traffic control
devices or other public improvements, licensee shall, after 30 days written
request from the city, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cable, conduits
and other fixtures at its own expense.



   (O)   Transaction privilege taxes.



      (1)   Licensee shall obtain a city business license, which
will be the mechanism for assessing all transaction privilege taxes.



      (2)   Licensee shall pay all required taxes in a timely manner
and shall allow access to its sales and construction records upon reasonable
request of the city at the centrally located business office during regular
business hours.



      (3)   If audited, licensee shall comply with all requests of
the city, and shall pay all applicable arrearages and or fees.



      (4)   Failure to pay the assessed tax or failure to make a
timely appeal of such assessment pursuant to the city tax code is considered
a violation of the terms and conditions of the license agreement, which may
result in liquidated damages set forth herein.



      (5)   A licensee must obtain a transaction privilege tax
license to conduct business in the corporate limits of the city. In addition,
licensee shall notify the city clerk of any and all construction agreements
it has with any independent contractors and their subcontractors for any work
to be performed within the city, who shall also be licensed in the State of
Arizona and shall also obtain a transaction privilege tax license to conduct
business within the city limits, Licensee is responsible for ensuring such
tax license is obtained by its independent contractor and subcontractors.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-9  FEES, BONDS, LETTERS OF CREDIT, LIQUIDATED DAMAGES AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Application fee. Each application for a license to be granted
under the authority of this chapter shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
filing fee in the amount specified below, by certified or cashier’s check
made payable to the “City of Apache Junction”:



      (1)   For an initial license or renewal: $2,500;



         (a)   An amount determined by the City to be used to
offset all direct, reasonable costs incurred by the City in granting the
license not defrayed from fees forthcoming from the provisions of division
(A) of this section.



      (2)   For consent to transfer or change ownership: $2,000; and



      (3)   For license modifications $2,500.



   (B)   License fee.



      (1)   In consideration of the fact the public right-of-ways of
the city will be used by a licensee in the operation of its cable system
within the boundaries of the city and the public rights-of-way are valuable
properties acquired and maintained by the city at great



expense to its taxpayers, and in consideration of the costs incurred by the
city in regulating and administering each cable license, the licensee shall
pay annually to the city 5% of the licensee’s gross revenue.



      (2)   This payment shall be computed quarterly, for the
preceding quarter, as of March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of
each year. Each quarterly payment shall be due and payable no later than 30
days after the relevant computation date. Each payment shall be accompanied
by a financial report showing in detail the gross revenues of the licensee
related to that quarter.



      (3)   Except as provided in division (B)(8) below and subject
to 47 U.S.C. § 542, the payment required pursuant to this article shall be
in addition to any other tax or payment owed to the city pursuant to any
other applicable ordinance or chapter of the city code, regulation or law of
the county, state or federal government.



      (4)   A license fee not received in full by the city within 30
days of its due date shall be deemed delinquent and subject to a late fee of
2% of the amount overdue plus interest at the prime rate as reported in the
Wall Street Journal.



      (5)   Where the licensee fee is based on gross revenues, the
licensee shall file, with each license payment, a statement of the gross
revenues for the period on which the fees are based. Such a licensee must
file within 3 months of the end of its fiscal year a statement of gross
revenues for the preceding year, which is either audited or certified as
accurate by an officer of the licensee. Any payment of license fees to adjust
for a shortfall in the quarterly payments for the preceding year must be made
not later than the filing date for the audited annual statement of gross
revenues. Adjustments for any overpayment will be credited to subsequent
quarterly payments. Interest and late charges (as specified above) will not
be imposed for any payment necessary as a result of the yearly adjustment if
the payment to correct the shortfall does not exceed 10% of the total
payments made during the preceding year. In the event the payment exceeds
10%, the licensee is liable for interest and late charges for the entire
amount due.



      (6)   The city manager shall have the right, upon reasonable
notice, to inspect or audit during normal business hours a licensee’s
records showing the gross revenues and other relevant underlying data and
information. Upon examination of the information, the city manager has the
right to recompute any and all amounts paid under a license. Any additional
amounts due the city as a result of an audit shall be paid by the licensee
within 30 days following written notice to the licensee by the council, which
shall include a copy of the inspection or audit report. In the event that an
inspection or audit results in additional monies owed the city in excess of
5% of the total paid, the licensee shall bear the total cost of the audit,
and late charges and interest on the additional amount due.



      (7)   No acceptance by the council of any payment shall be
construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount nor
shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the
council may have.



      (8)   There shall be allowed as an offset against the license
fee due under this article any amounts licensee paid to the city during the
prior quarter in privilege license (sales) taxes; provided, however, that
there shall be no offset to the extent that licensee made payments of
privilege license (sales) taxes of any gross income (within the meaning of
the privilege license [sales] tax ordinance) which is not included in gross
revenues under this chapter. The license shall provide for suitable
procedures and methods for audit of this offset.



   (C)   Performance bond and irrevocable letter of credit generally.
Licensee shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of the license, and
any renewal or extensions thereof, a performance bond in the amount of
$100,000 to ensure the licensee’s faithful performance of its obligations
under the cable law and this agreement, as well as an irrevocable letter of
credit in the amount of $25,000, both being provided to the city attorney
within 30 days after execution of the license agreement and prior to any
construction work in the public rights-of-way.



   (D)   Components of performance bond. The performance bond shall
provide the following:



      (1)   There shall be recoverable by the city jointly and
severally from the principal and surety, any and all fines and penalties due
to the city, and any and all damages, losses, costs and expenses suffered or
incurred by the city resulting from failure of the licensee after notice and
opportunity to cure to faithfully comply with:



         (a)   The material provisions of this agreement, the
cable law and other applicable law;



         (b)   All orders, permits and directives of the city;



         (c)   Payment of fees due to the city; or



         (d)   Payment of any claims or liens due to the city



      (2)   (a)   The losses, costs and expenses shall include
but not be limited to attorney fees and other associated expenses.



         (b)   The total amount of the performance bond shall be
forfeited in favor of the city in the event the licensee abandons the system
at any time during the term of the license or extension period.



      (3)   The performance bond shall be issued by a surety
licensed to do business in the State of Arizona and with an A+9 or better
rating for financial conditions and financial performance in Best’s Key
Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, and shall be in a form approved by
the city with the following endorsement:



         “This bond may not be canceled or allowed to lapse, until
60 days after receipt by the city by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to
cancel or not renew.”



      (4)   At such time as 95% of planned construction in the city
is complete, as specified in license agreement, the council may, at
licensee’s request, reduce or eliminate the performance bond requirement.



      (5)   The rights reserved by the Council with respect to the
bonds required are in addition to all other rights and remedies the Council
may have under this chapter, the license agreement or any other law.



   (E)   Irrevocable letter of credit. Licensee shall provide an
irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of $25,000 from a financial
institution licensed to do business in the State of Arizona to secure its
performance of all its obligations under this agreement and the cable law.



      (1)   (a)   The form and content of the letter shall be
approved by the city attorney and contain the following endorsements:



         “This letter of credit may not be canceled or allowed to
lapse until 30 days after receipt by the city manager, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the letter
of credit of its intent to cancel or not to renew.”



         (b)   In the event the letter of credit is insufficient
to pay the city for any compensation, damages, penalties, costs or expenses
owed it pursuant to this chapter or the license agreement, the licensee’s
performance bond may be drawn upon by the city manager for any amount due the
city over and above the amount of the letter of credit.



      (2)   The rights reserved to the city manager with respect to
the letter of credit are in addition to all other rights it may have under
this chapter, the license agreement and any other law.



      (3)   Failure to maintain the letter of credit as required
shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   The city may withdraw an appropriate amount from such
funds including interest and penalties as applied against the letter of
credit amount if in compliance with division (H) below.



      (5)   Within 15 days after the city gives notice that an
amount has been withdrawn from the letter of credit amount, the licensee must
deposit a sum of money equal to the amount withdrawn. If licensee fails to
deposit such amount, the entire letter of credit amount remaining shall be
forfeited. In addition, the failure may be grounds to revoke the license or
take any other enforcement action.



   (F)   Liquidated damages. Because licensee’s failure to comply
with the provisions of the license and this agreement will result in injury
to the city, and because it will be difficult to estimate the extent of such
injury, the licensee agrees to pay to the city liquidated damages for the
following violations of the license which represent both parties’ best
estimate of the damages resulting from the specified violation. To maintain
that estimate, the parties agree that liquidated damage amounts shall be
increased each year in accordance with the CPI:



      (1)   Failure to provide government and economic development
channels and failure to make PEG capacity available; failure to construct
required links to PEG facilities; $1,000 per day for each day the violation
continues, in addition to any monetary payment under this agreement or the
cable law.



      (2)   Failure to submit required plans indicating expected
dates of installation of various parts of the system, and failure to supply
information, reports or filings lawfully required under the license agreement
or applicable law or by the city: $400 per day for each day the violation
continues.



      (3)   Failure, unless such failure is beyond the licensee’s
control, of the EAS to perform in the event of a public emergency or vital
information situation: $250 per occurrence.



      (4)   Failure to test, analyze and report on the performance
of the system following a request from the city manager to do so, and failure
to pay for consultant fees pursuant to this license agreement: $200 per day
for each day the violation continues.



      (5)   For a violation of customer service standards: $200 per
violation.



      (6)   Failure to render required payment for reimbursement of
any license expenses, or liquidated damages or failure to pay any required
taxes to city: $100 per day, in addition to any monetary payment due under
this agreement or the cable law.



      (7)   Failure to file, obtain or maintain any required
performance bond or letter of credit amount: $100 per day.



      (8)   Failure to restore damaged property: $50 per day, in
addition to the cost of the restoration as required elsewhere herein.



      (9)   For violation of technical standards established by the
FCC: $50 per day.



      (10)   For failure to comply with reasonable order of the city
manager: $50 per day.



      (11)   Failure to properly install facilities (e.g. conduit at
less than minimum depths, lines laying on top of ground, fences, and walls):
$50 per day.



      (12)   For failure to remedy any other violation of this
chapter or violation of the license agreement: $50 per day.



   (G)   Remedies. If the licensee violates any provision of law or of
this license agreement, the city may have one or more of the following
actions:



      (1)   Impose liquidated damages provided herein;



      (2)   Reduce the duration of the license period on any basis
the city determines is reasonable and affords licensee reasonable due process;



      (3)   Require licensee to pay its subscribers or classes of
subscribers in an amount and on a basis the city determines is necessary to
cure the breach or default, or equitably compensates for the violation; or



      (4)   Seek legal or equitable relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (H)   Procedure for correcting license violations.



      (1)   Notice of violation. Should the city determine that
licensee has violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this
license agreement, a written notice shall be given to licensee informing it
of an alleged violation (a “violation notice”). The city manager shall
set forth in such violation notice at a minimum, the following:



         (a)   Amount to be assessed;



         (b)   Factual basis for such assessment; and



         (c)   Specific license provision alleged to have been
violated.



            1.   Licensee shall have 14 days from the date the
violation notice is given to inform the city manager in writing of the action
licensee will take to correct the violation (a “correction notice”) and
to begin corrective action, or to dispute that a violation has occurred (a
“notice of dispute”).



            2.   If corrective action is undertaken, it shall
be completed within 30 days of the date the violation notice is given, unless
licensee’s correction notice shows that the corrective action cannot be
completed within 30 days with the exercise of all due speed or diligence, in
which case licensee shall have a reasonable extension of time in which to
complete the corrective action.



            3.   Any notice of dispute shall specify the
matter disputed by licensee and shall stay the running of any performance or
corrective deadlines pertaining to the matter in dispute, and shall stay any
other action the city may be permitted to take under this license agreement
or applicable law.



      (2)   Appeals.



         (a)   In the event that licensee contests the city
manager’s assessment of liquidated damages, or fails to respond to the
above-mentioned notices, within 14 days the city manager shall convene an
administrative hearing.



         (b)   Licensee may pay the fine, proceed with this
hearing or waive its rights to this administrative hearing and proceed
directly to the public hearing before the council.



            1.   There shall be an administrative hearing
conducted by the city manager, and licensee shall be afforded procedural due
process, including an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence. Within
14 days after the conclusion of such administrative hearing, the city manager
shall issue a determination. In that determination the city manager may:



               a.   Find that licensee is not in violation
of this chapter or the license agreement;



               b.   Find that the licensee is in violation
of this chapter or the license agreement, but that violation was with just
cause and waive any penalty that might otherwise be imposed;



               c.   Find that licensee is in violation of
this chapter or of the license agreement, assess liquidated damages, take
corrective action and foreclose on all or any appropriate part of the letter
of credit or performance bond provided for in this chapter; or



               d.   Find that licensee is in material
violation of this chapter and the license agreement and recommend the council
declare the licensee in violation and recommend termination of the license
agreement to the council, provided the council may consider such action only
after a public hearing as set forth below.



            2.   If a public hearing before the council is
requested by licensee or is held otherwise, it shall be de novo and it shall
convene within 30 days of the request thereof. Licensee shall be afforded
full due procedural process, including without limitation, an opportunity to
be heard, to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The council’s
decision, which shall include findings of fact and conclusions, shall be made
not later than 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing. In that decision,
the council may:



               a.   Find that licensee is not in violation
of this chapter or the license agreement;



               b.   Find that licensee is in violation of
this chapter or the license agreement, but that violation was with just cause
and waive any penalty that might otherwise be imposed;



               c.   Find that licensee is in violation of
this chapter or of the license agreement, assess liquidated damages, take
corrective action and foreclose on all or any appropriate part of the letter
of credit and/or performance bond provided for elsewhere in this chapter; or



               d.   Find that licensee is in material
violation of this chapter and the license agreement and declare the licensee
in violation and revoke the license agreement.



      (3)   Licensee’s options.



         (a)   If after the hearing the disputed claim is upheld
by the council, licensee shall have 30 days from the date of the mailing of
the decision to remedy the violation or failure, unless corrective action
cannot be completed within 30 days with the exercise of all due speed and
diligence, in which case licensee shall have a reasonable extension of time
in which to complete corrective action.



      (b)   Alternatively, licensee retains its right to seek review
of the disputed matter under applicable law. The submission of a matter to
mediation or to a court of competent jurisdiction shall stay the running of
the above-described correction period.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-10  TERMINATION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Termination. The license shall terminate, upon the expiration
of the term thereof, unless renewal is successfully applied per applicable
laws.



      (1)   If a licensee is in material violation of this chapter
or in default of the terms of its license agreement, the city manager may
make written demand that the licensee come into compliance with said
requirements within a reasonable period of time, as specified in this
chapter. If, after the cure period provided for in this chapter has run, the
licensee is unwilling or unable to do so, the city manager may recommend the
revocation, alteration or suspension of the license to the council,
specifying the reasons for such action.



      (2)   A copy of any such recommendations shall be served by
certified mail, return receipt requested upon the licensee, and the licensee
shall be given at least 14 days notice prior to the date of a public hearing
before the council to consider such action, and the licensee will be given an
opportunity to present evidence and make argument at such meeting.



      (3)   The council shall consider the recommendations, the
response of the licensee and hear from any other interested persons, and
shall determine whether or not the licensee is in violation or default of its
obligations and, if so, whether such failure was with just cause.



      (4)   If the council finds that the failure by the licensee
was with just cause, the council shall direct the licensee to comply with
such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.



      (5)   If the council determines that the licensee’s failure
was without just cause, the council may declare the license revoked, altered
or suspended. The council may provide a specified period of time for the
licensee to come into compliance before the revocation takes effect.



      (6)   A license may be revoked, altered or suspended by the
council on the following grounds, among others, and taking into account any
aggravating or mitigating circumstances:



         (a)   Fails to comply with any material provision of
this chapter or the license agreement;



         (b)   Makes willful and material false or misleading
statements in any application;



         (c)   Engages in the practice of any fraud or deceit
upon the city or subscribers;



         (d)   Fails to abide by the privacy provision of this
chapter;



         (e)   Fails to make timely payment of any monies due the
city pursuant to this chapter;



         (f)   Unless otherwise provided in the license
agreement, fails to commence construction in the license area within three
months and to commence basic service within six months from the effective
date of the license agreement;



         (g)   Fails to file and maintain the bonds, insurance,
records, failure to pay license fees or assessed property taxes;



         (h)   For repeated material failure to maintain service
quality under the standards prescribed for which the licensee receives notice
and fails to cure; or



         (i)   Fails to restore service after 24 consecutive
hours after notice to the licensee of interrupted service to the entire
system, except when such interruption is beyond the control of the licensee.



   (C)   System disposal.



      (1)   In the event of termination or revocation of a license,
the licensee involved shall offer to sell the cable TV system, at the fair
market value, to a new licensee or applicant for a license.



      (2)   The fair market value shall be determined in accordance
with generally accepted appraisal procedures. The original cost of all
tangible and intangible property, as well as salvage value, book value,
replacement cost, cash flow and other factors will be considered.



      (3)   Under no circumstances shall any valuation be made for
any right or privilege granted by license. Should the licensee fail to
negotiate a sale, as described above, the city may purchase the system at the
fair market value for the purpose of leasing to qualified operator until a
buyer can be found, pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-509.



   (D)   Continuity of service.



      (1)   Licensee shall provide continuous service for the entire
term of the license agreement to all subscribers and users in return for
payment of the established rates, fees and charges.



      (2)   If licensee seeks to sell or transfer, or if the city
revokes or fails to renew the license, licensee shall continue to operate the
system as trustee for its successor in interest until an orderly and lawful
change of operation is affected.



      (3)   This period of operation shall not exceed 120 days from
the occurrence of any of the above events. Revenues accrued during that
period of time shall be received by the operator.



      (4)   During that time, the cable system shall be operated
under terms and conditions consistent with the most recent license agreement
and this chapter.



   (E)   Revocation for cause. In addition to all other rights, powers
and remedies available to the city, the city shall have the additional,
separate and distinct right to revoke this license agreement and all rights,
authority, power, privileges and permissions granted licensee by this license
agreement if licensee substantially fails to cure or correct a material
violation of this license agreement within the applicable time periods
following compliance within this agreement, absent licensee’s pursuit of
further remedies as provided for in this agreement or following a final
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction reviewing the disputed matter.



   (F)   Revocation by ordinance.



      (1)   Revocation of the license shall be accomplished by
passage of an ordinance at a properly noticed public hearing.



      (2)   An ordinance revoking the license shall include the
reason for the council to justify revocation. The effective date of the
revocation shall be stated in the ordinance. The license agreement shall
terminate on the effective date of the revocation.



      (3)   An ordinance revoking the license shall not be passed
without 30 days written notice to licensee that an ordinance to revoke the
license will be considered by the council. Licensee shall retain the
privilege to be heard by the council or any council committee regarding the
proposed revocation ordinance.



      (4)   Licensee may request a review of the revocation findings
and conclusions pursuant to applicable law and shall retain any other remedy
which may be available to it under law.



   (G)   Continuance of service after revocation. The city may require
licensee to continue operating its system after revocation until operation of
the system can be transferred to a new owner or the city exercises its rights
herein.



   (H)   Removal after revocation.



      (1)   Upon revocation of the license and after a review of the
revocation findings and/or conclusions by a court of competent jurisdiction,
if review is sought by licensee, the city may require licensee to remove, at
licensee’s expense, any above-ground portion of its system from any street
or other public right-of-way.



      (2)   In removing its underground system, licensee shall
refill and compact, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made,
and shall leave all streets and other public rights-of-way, and private
property, in reasonable condition, and without affecting, altering or
disturbing in any way electric, telephone, gas, steam or water utilities or
other cable system operator cables, wires or attachments.



      (3)   The insurance, indemnity and damage provisions of this
license agreement shall remain in full force and effect during the entire
term of removal.



   (I)   Failure to remove system. If licensee fails to commence
removal of its system, or the part that was designated, in accordance with
this section, within 60 days after written notice of the city’s demand for
removal is given, or if licensee fails to complete removal without one year
after removal has begun, the city shall have the right to exercise one of the
following options:



      (1)   Assumption of ownership.



         (a)   Declare all right, title and interest to the
system to be in the city or its designee with all right of ownership
including, but not limited to, the right to operate the system or transfer
the system to another for operation.



         (b)   Upon that declaration by the city, licensee shall
be entitled to receive an equitable price from the city for the value of the
system.



      (2)   Abandonment of the system. Declare the system abandoned
and cause the system, or that portion designated by the city, to be removed.
The cost of the removal shall be recoverable pursuant to the insurance and
indemnity provisions of this license agreement, or from licensee directly.



   (J)   Additional duty to remove property. The city may require
licensee to remove any above-ground portion of the system if licensee ceases
to use that part of the system in the city for a continuous period of 12
months.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-11  RENEWAL.



   The procedures for renewal of any cable license shall be governed by
federal and state law, as of the time the license is in effect. However,
should there be no active renewal provisions, council may amend this chapter
with renewal procedures which shall govern all licenses in effect or
thereafter granted by city.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-12  TRANSFERS AND CHANGE OF CONTROL.



   (A)   General restrictions. No sale, transfer, assignment or lease
of the license, or sale, transfer, assignment, lease or fundamental corporate
change of or in licensee, including, but not limited to, a fundamental
corporate change in licensee’s parent corporation or any entity having a
controlling interest in licensee, the sale of a controlling interest in the
licensee’s assets, a merger, including the merger of a subsidiary and
parent entity, consolidation, or the creation of a subsidiary or affiliate
entity, shall take place until a written request has been filed with city
requesting approval of the sale, transfer or corporate change and such
approval has been granted or deemed granted; provided, however, that the
approval shall not be required where licensee grants a security interest in
its license and/or assets to secure an indebtedness.



   (B)   Controlling interest restrictions.



      (1)   Any sale, transfer, exchange or assignment of stock in
licensee, or licensee’s parent corporation or any other entity having a
controlling interest in licensee, so as to create a new controlling interest
therein, shall be subject to the requirements of this section.



      (2)   The term controlling interest as used herein is not
limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in
whatever manner exercised.



      (3)   In any event, as used herein, a new controlling interest
shall be deemed to be created upon the acquisition through any transaction or
group of transactions of a legal or beneficial interest of 15% or more by one
person. Acquisition by one person of an interest of 5% or more in a single
transaction shall require written notice to city.



   (C)   Filing requirements. The licensee shall file, in addition to
all documents, forms and information required to be filed by applicable law,
the following:



      (1)   All contracts, agreements or other documents that
constitute the proposed transaction and all exhibits, attachments or other
documents referred to therein which are necessary in order to understand the
terms thereof;



      (2)   A list detailing all documents filed with any state or
federal agency related to the transaction including, but not limited to, the
PUC, the FCC, the FTC, the FEC, the SEC or any applicable state agency. Upon
request, licensee shall provide city with a complete copy of any such
document; and



      (3)   Any other documents or information related to the
transaction as may be specifically requested by the city.



   (D)   Time limit. City shall have such time as is permitted by
federal law in which to review a transfer request.



   (E)   Costs and filing fees. The licensee shall reimburse city for
all legal, administrative and consulting costs and fees associated with
city’s review of any request to transfer. Nothing herein shall prevent
licensee from negotiating partial or complete payment of such costs and fees
by the transferee. Licensee may not itemize any such reimbursement on
subscriber bills, but may recover such expenses in its subscriber rates.
Licensee shall also pay a $2,000 fee for a sales, transfer, assignment or
lease request pursuant to A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 14-1-9 (A)(2).



   (F)   Guarantees. In no event shall a sale, transfer, corporate
change or assignment of ownership or control pursuant to this section be
approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to this license and
assuming all rights and obligations thereunder, and assuming all other rights
and obligations of the current licensee to the city including, but not
limited to, any adequate guarantees or other security instruments provided by
the license.



   (G)   City’s right to purchase.



      (1)   In the event of any proposed sale, transfer, corporate
change or assignment pursuant to this chapter, city shall have the right to
purchase the system for the value of the consideration proposed in such
transaction.



      (2)   City’s right to purchase shall arise upon city’s
receipt of notice of the material terms of an offer or proposal for sale,
transfer, corporate change or assignment, which licensee has accepted. Notice
of such offer or proposal must be conveyed to city in writing and separate
from any general announcement of the transaction.



   (H)   Waiver of rights by city. City shall be deemed to have waived
its right to purchase the system pursuant to this section only in the
following circumstances:



      (1)   If city does not indicate to licensee in writing, within
60 days of receipt of written notice of a proposed sale, transfer, corporate
change or assignment as contemplated above, its intent to exercise its right
of purchase; or



      (2)   It approves the assignment or sale of the license as
provided within this section.



   (I)   City right of refusal. No license may be transferred if city
determines licensee is in noncompliance of the license unless an acceptable
compliance program has been approved by city. The approval of any transfer or
ownership pursuant to this section shall not be deemed to waive any rights of
city to subsequently enforce noncompliance issues relating to this license
even if such issues predated the approval, whether blown or unknown to city.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-13  INDEMNITY AND INSURANCE.



   (A)   Indemnification of city officials. Licensee shall indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the city, the members of the council, including the
mayor, and all other officials, employees and agents, boards or commissions,
when acting in their capacity as municipal officials, employees or agents,
boards or commissions, from and against any and all claims, suits and
actions, liability and judgment for damages or otherwise:



      (1)   Damage to person or property. For actual or alleged
injury or death to individuals, or damage to property, in any way arising out
of or through, or alleged to arise out of or through, any act or omission of
licensee or its officers, agents, employees or contractors, or to which
licensee or its officers, agents, employees or contractors acts or omissions
in any way contribute;



      (2)   Violation of rights or interests. Arising out of or
alleged to arise out of any claim for damages, with respect to licensee’s
operation of a cable TV system, for invasion of the right of privacy,
defamation of any person, or the violation or infringement of any copyright,
trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any other right of any
person; or



      (3)   Statutory violations. Arising out of or alleged to arise
out of licensee’s failure to comply with the provisions of any statute,
regulation or ordinance of the United States, the State of Arizona or the
city.



   (B)   Defense of actions.



      (1)   Nothing in this license agreement shall prevent a party
indemnified and held harmless by another from participating in the defense of
any litigation by its own counsel at its sole expense.



      (2)   That participation shall not under any circumstances
relieve the indemnifying party from its duty defending against liability or
paying any judgment entered against that party.



   (C)   City’s negligence or willful misconduct. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in this section, the city shall not be
indemnified or reimbursed in relation to any matter, in any action, suit or
proceeding:



      (1)   Arising out of the operation, use or distribution of
programming or services over the Government, Economic Development and PEG
Channels facilities or access funding; or



      (2)   In which the city, its officials, employees or agents,
is negligent in the performance of its obligations under this license
agreement, or has engaged in willful misconduct or criminal acts; provided,
however, that licensee shall provide a defense even though, in good faith, it
believes at the commencement of any action, that the city may have engaged in
that conduct. If the city, its officials, employees or agents, is found to
have engaged in that conduct, licensee shall be reimbursed by the city for
all amounts paid and expenses incurred by licensee in connection with that
action, suit or proceeding, including reasonable attorney fees.



   (D)   Indemnity for construction, maintenance and operation.



      (1)   The licensee shall at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its officials, boards,
commissions, agents and employees by providing immediate defense with counsel
approved by the council, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action,
proceedings and judgments for damages arising out of construction,
maintenance or operation of the cable TV system.



      (2)   City shall provide 30 days’ notice of any claim or
potential claim and shall provide copies of any summons and complaint.



   (E)   Required insurance. The licensee, upon acceptance of the
license agreement, shall provide the city with and maintain in full force
throughout the term of the license agreement, insurance issued by a company
duly authorized to do business in the State of Arizona, insuring with respect
to the installation, construction, operation and maintenance of the system as
follows:



      (1)   Comprehensive general and automobile liability coverage
including, but not limited to, blanket contractual liability, completed
operations liability, broad form property damage including but not limited to
coverage for explosion, collapse, underground hazard and automobile
non-ownership liability. This insurance shall be written in the following
minimum amounts:



         (a)   Comprehensive general liability: $2,000,000
combined single limit, bodily injury and property damage;



         (b)   Comprehensive automobile liability: $2,000,000
combined single limit, bodily injury and property damage; and



         (c)   Excess umbrella liability, covering all the above
mentioned hazards, in the minimum amount of $5,000,000.



      (2)   Workers’ compensation coverage as required by the laws
and regulations of the State of Arizona.



      (3)   All insurance policies required herein shall include the
city as a named insured party.



      (4)   Licensee shall be solely responsible for all premiums
due and payable for insurance required herein. Licensee shall provide to the
city a certificate of insurance evidencing compliance with the coverage
requirements listed above.



      (5)   All insurance policies required herein shall be in a
form approved by the City Attorney and shall include a 60 day notice of
cancellation or modifying endorsement.



   (F)   Self insurance. The provisions of this article, in the
discretion of the city, may be satisfied by proof of self insurance.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-14  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Inspection of records. The council reserves the right during
the term of the license agreement and during normal business hours and upon
the giving of reasonable notice to examine, audit and review licensee’s
contracts, engineering plans, accounting, financial data and, subject to
subscriber privacy laws, service records relating to the property and
operations of the licensee and to all other records required to be kept
pursuant to this chapter. The records shall be treated as confidential by
city and shall not be released, either orally or in any written form
whatsoever, without the express written permission of the licensee, provided
however that release shall be permitted in order for city to comply with the
Arizona Public Records Act pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 39-101 et seq. and as
amended.



   (B)   Licensee rules and regulations. Copies of the rules,
regulations, terms and conditions adopted by the licensee for the conduct of
its business shall be provided to the city manager, upon request of the city
manager.



   (C)   City Manager.



      (1)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall have
responsibility for the day-to-day administration of cable operations within
the city as governed by this chapter and the applicable license agreements.



      (2)   The city manager shall be empowered to take all
administrative actions on behalf of the council except those actions
specified herein which are reserved to the council or another city office or
officer.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-15  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Non-discrimination. Licensee shall not deny service, access or
otherwise discriminate against subscribers, users or residents of the city.
Licensee shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and
city laws, rules and regulations, executive and administrative orders
relating to non-discrimination and equal employment opportunities and
requirements.



   (B)   Laws and codes. Licensee shall comply fully with all
applicable local, county, state and federal laws, codes, ordinances, rules
and regulations.



   (C)   Cumulative rights and remedies. Except as specified herein,
all rights and remedies of the city manager and the council in this chapter
are cumulative and may be exercised singly or cumulatively at the discretion
of the city manager or the council.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



§ 14-1-16  RIGHTS RESERVED TO COUNCIL.



   Without limitation upon the rights which the council may otherwise
have, the council does hereby expressly reserve the right to amend any
article or provision of this chapter for any reason determined to be
desirable by the council including, but not limited to:



   (A)   New developments in the state of technology of cable systems;
and



   (B)   Any changes in federal or state laws, rules or regulations.



(Ord. 1413, passed 2-3-2015)



CHAPTER 15: PUBLIC PARK REGULATIONS



      Article



         15-1.   PARK REGULATIONS



ARTICLE 15-1:  PARK REGULATIONS



Section



   15-1-1   Definitions



   15-1-2   Park operations



   15-1-3   Prohibited activities



   15-1-4   Enforcement and penalty



§ 15-1-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning,



   CAMP.



      (1)   To use real property controlled or owned by the city for
living accommodation purposes such as:



         (a)   Sleeping;



         (b)   Making preparations to sleep, including the laying
down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping;



         (c)   Storing personal belongings;



         (d)   Making any fire;



         (e)   Using any tents or shelter or other structure or
vehicle for sleeping;



         (f)   Doing any digging or earth breaking;



         (g)   Using items associated with camping;



         (h)   Regularly cooking or preparing meals; or



         (i)   Living in a parked vehicle.



      (2)   The above listed activities constitute camping when it
reasonably appears, in light of all circumstances, that the participants, in
conducting these activities, are in fact using the area for living
accommodations regardless of the intent of the participants or the nature of
any other activities in which they may also be engaged.



   CITY.  The City of Apache Junction.



   DIRECTOR.  The director of the parks and recreation department for the
City of Apache Junction, or his or her designee.



   PARK.  Includes all city parks, trails, swimming pools, buildings,
playgrounds, skate park and/or any other public property under management and
control of the parks and recreation department, owned or leased by the city
for the public benefit including but not limited to leased Bureau of Land
Management property and Arizona State Land Department property.



   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR.  Includes alcohol, brandy, whisky, rum, tequila,
mescal, gin, vodka, wine, porter, ale, beer, malt liquor, malt beverage or
absinthe, or compound or mixture of any of them or of any with vegetables or
other substances, alcohol bitters, bitters containing alcohol, and any liquid
mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, fruits preserved in
ardent spirits, and beverages containing more than ½ of 1% of alcohol by
volume, which produces intoxication or any increase in a person’s blood
alcohol level.



   UNMANNED AIRCRAFT.  Includes all unmanned aircraft as defined in
A.R.S. § 13-2729(F)(7), as amended.



   UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEM (“UAS”).  Includes all unmanned aircraft
systems as defined in A.R.S. § 13-2729(F)(7), as amended.



(Ord. 1442, passed 2-7-2017)



§ 15-1-2  PARK OPERATIONS.



   (A)   Hours.



      (1)   Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks
shall be open to the public during posted hours, as determined by the
director.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for a person to remain in a park or
to enter a park except during the posted hours unless a permit is obtained
pursuant to division (C) below.



   (B)   Closed areas.



      (1)   Any section or part of any park may be declared closed
to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals and either entirely or
for specific uses, as the director shall find reasonably necessary.



      (2)   No person shall enter any closed areas of a park if the
entry is prohibited, nor shall any person utilize any portion of a park if
that utilization is prohibited.



   (C)   Permits and scheduling.



      (1)   Park activities sponsored or co-sponsored by the city
shall have first priority over any other use.



      (2)   Any person or group of persons may use any park for any
recreational purposes not otherwise prohibited within this chapter.



      (3)   A written permit shall be obtained from the director
whenever any person or group desires to reserve any portion of a park for any
activity. Reservations shall be made in accordance with reservation and
facility use guidelines as established by the director.



      (4)   Any person or group aggrieved by the denial of a permit
shall have the right to appeal the decision of the director to the city
manager or his or her designee. Any appeal to the city manager shall be
served with the city clerk’s office within 5 working days if a notice of
disapproval is received from the director. The city manager or his or her
designee shall act upon the appeal within 5 working days following receipt
thereof. The city manager’s decision is final and binding on both parties.



      (5)   A park use permit may be revoked by the director upon
determining that the park is being used contrary to: any representation made
by the applicant; any conditions of the permit; or any city ordinances or
state law.



      (6)   Continuous use of facilities shall be limited to
city-sponsored or co-sponsored activities or affiliate groups as approved by
the director. Continuous use shall be interpreted to be any regularly
scheduled or reoccurring activity.



      (7)   Facility use fees will be established by the director as
set forth in Chapter 4 of the city code and may be amended on an as needed
basis.



   (D)   Insurance and indemnification; hold harmless.



      (1)   Any person or group reserving a park shall defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the city and its elected officials and employees
and for any and all damages to the facility caused by any person or persons
attending the activity, and all liability and damages to any person for
injuries, including but not limited to, death or serious bodily harm.



      (2)   Adequate insurance as determined by the director shall
be provided naming the city, its elected officials and employees as
“additional insured parties.”



      (3)   Responsibility for loss, breakage or need for repair of
any piece of furniture, equipment or portion of the facility or areas shall
be upon the individual signing the permit application.



(Ord. 1442, passed 2-7-2017)



§ 15-1-3  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Amplified sound or music. A permit from the director is
required for amplified sound or music in city parks and public recreation
areas. Music with language designed to incite violence is prohibited. Nothing
in this division is intended to prohibit first amendment expression or speech.



   (B)   Animals. Except with respect to horses as provided in division
(O) of this section, no person shall bring or allow to enter into a park, any
animal owned or under control of such person, unless 1) it is a service
animal as defined under A.R.S. § 11-1024(J)(5), as amended, or 2) it is
restrained at all times (except when participating in an organized program
authorized by the city) on a reasonably adequate leash not greater than 10
feet in length. The person in control of any such animal shall dispose of
their animal waste in a trash receptacle. Animals are not allowed in areas of
the park where posted as prohibited (except when participating in an
organized program authorized by the city). Wild or exotic animals or reptiles
are not allowed to be brought into any park without the written permission of
the director. Owners are responsible for the aggressive actions of their
animals and may be asked to leave the park if the director considers such
animal to be a safety risk to persons and other animals based on their
behavior.



   (C)   Unauthorized water usage. No person shall swim, bathe or wade
in any waters or waterways, splashpads, sinks, toilets, or drinking water
fountains in, or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such
places as are provided in such parks, and in compliance with the regulations
as are adopted by the director. No person shall enter any waters or places
customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate
therein when the activity is prohibited by the director. No person shall use
any water source at any city park for swimming, animal swimming or bathing,
washing clothes, or cleaning fish, except at places designated for those
activities.



   (D)   Camping. Camping is prohibited in parks, except with the
express written permission of the director. Campers, trailers or motor homes
shall not connect to any electrical supply, water supply or waste service
without the written permission of the director.



   (E)   Climbing. No person shall climb on any fence, tree, art
feature, or other structure other than playground equipment designed for such
purpose.



   (F)   Commercial activity. No person shall advertise, solicit goods
or services or engage in any commercial activity within a park without prior
authorization from the director.



   (G)   Compliance with laws. All persons shall comply with all
federal, state, county and city laws, rules and regulations when visiting
city parks.



   (H)   Compressed gas cylinders. No person shall bring into any park
a compressed gas cylinder (such as helium to fill balloons) without obtaining
prior written permission from the director. Propane containers used in
connection with barbeque equipment are exempt from this prohibition.



   (I)   Damaging facilities. No person shall graffiti, vandalize,
damage or remove any park property such as tables, benches, ramadas,
lighting, steps, ramps, railings, fencing, barbeque grills, playground
equipment, drinking fountains, plants, court surfacing, curbs or paving, or
other structures of any kind. This shall include: applying adhesive stickers
to any park property equipment, signs or any other surfaces; standing on
table tops; swinging from ramada roof beams; skateboarding or bicycling on
any railing, bench, table, wall, step or other structure; wastefully or
improperly using the restroom or water facilities, or cause the lighting
facilities or electrical appliances to be turned on or used without the
written permission of the director.



   (J)    Endangerment of wildlife. No person shall commit any act in a
park so as to endanger the health or safety of area wildlife, to include but
not limited to: rabbits, snakes, birds or any wildlife in violation of A.R.S.
§ 13-2910, Cruelty to Animals, as amended.



   (K)   Debris, junk, trash, Utter and garbage. No person shall bring
into or dump, deposit or leave any debris, junk, trash, litter or garbage as
defined in Apache Junction City Code, Vol.1, Chapter 9: Health and
Sanitation, Article 9-1: Property Maintenance Standards, § 9-1-2 Definitions
within any city park. Debris, junk, trash, litter and garbage may not be
placed in any waters in any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof,
but shall be placed in the trash receptacles; where receptacles are not
provided, all debris, junk, trash, litter and garbage shall be carried away
from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere. No person shall bring debris, junk, trash, litter and
garbage into or upon park premises except refuse or trash generated at the
park while using the park. In no circumstances may a person dump or leave in
the park furniture, appliances, construction material, bio-hazard waste or
chemical waste.



   (L)   Food, gum, drinks and personal props. No person shall bring
food, gum, drinks or personal props such as traffic cones, skateboard
stacking, makeshift jumps, obstacles or ramps into the skate park.



   (M)   Glass containers. It is unlawful for any person to possess a
glass container in any park. No person shall throw, toss or otherwise propel,
or break any glass object in any park or any street or alley adjacent to such
park.



   (N)   Golfing. No person in a park shall use any portion of the park
for golfing purposes, or make use of any golf club or ball in any park,
except at places designated for golfing by the director.



   (O)   Horses. No person shall bring a horse or other equine into a
park, or ride one in any location in a park or landscaped area, except on
designated bridle trails or paths or with the written permission of the
director. Where permitted, horses or other equine shall be ridden with
reasonable due care and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended.



   (P)   Interference with park activities. No person shall interfere
or disrupt the reasonable use of the park by other patrons.



   (Q)   Model toys and unmanned aircraft systems. No person in a park
shall bring into or use any remote controlled or self-propelled model toy or
unmanned aircraft, including but not limited to model airplanes, drones,
model rockets, model boats, model cars or other models, except in the areas
designated by the director or with written permission from the director.



   (R)   Motorized vehicles. No person shall bring into or operate in a
park any motor vehicle of any type, including but not limited to, any
automobiles, motorcycles, motor bikes, motorized skateboards or 3-wheeled
scooters, except in those areas or on roads or paths designated for such
vehicular use by the director. Inoperable motorized vehicles must be removed
from the park within a 24-hour time period or the vehicles will be towed away
at the owner’s expense to a storage facility. No portion of a park is to be
used as a place to repair vehicles.



   (S)   Non-motorized vehicles. No person in a park shall operate or
ride a skateboard, roller skates, a bicycle, scooter or tricycle-type three
wheeled scooter (also known as a “Trike”) on grass, landscaped areas,
ramada areas, basketball, tennis and racquetball courts or on structures and
fixtures, including tables, benches, playground equipment, railings, steps,
ramps, buildings or where such activity is specifically posted as prohibited,
or in such a manner which creates a serious safety risk to themselves or to
other park users.



   (T)   Projectile devices. No person shall use any portion of a city
park for archery, firearm practice or other projectile activities.



   (U)   Public nudity/indecency. No person shall engage in sexual
intercourse or expose or display their genitals or private parts in a public
park. Nothing in this division is intended to prohibit protected First
Amendment expression.



   (V)   Public profanity. No person may use language designed to
incite violence. Nothing in this division is intended to prohibit protected
first amendment expression and speech.



   (W)   Spirituous liquors. It is unlawful for any person to consume
spirituous liquors in a municipal park except that beer and wine is permitted
in areas designated for such use by the director. Individuals consuming beer
and wine shall do so only having first obtained a permit issued by the
director.



   (X)   Smoking. The act of smoking any substance, and including the
use of e-cigarettes in any park facility shall only be allowed in designated
areas.



   (Y)   Use of restroom facilities. No person shall urinate or
defecate in a park except within a toilet or urinal provided inside a
restroom facility.



(Ord. 1442, passed 2-7-2017)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 15-1-4  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.



   (A)   Enforcement. The director, park rangers and police officers
shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Requests from park rangers must be strictly
adhered to in the interest of public safety. Park rangers have authority to
issue citations to any park user in violation of any provision of this
chapter.



   (B)   Ejection for violations. The director, park rangers and police
officers have the authority to eject any person from any park for violating
any provision of this chapter. Following ejection, it is unlawful for any
person to enter or reenter any park during the ejection period.



   (C)   Confiscation of property. The director, park rangers and
police officers have the authority to seize and confiscate any property,
thing or device in the park, used contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
including but not limited to glass bottles, cigarettes, skateboards,
bicycles, skates, motorized skateboards, weapons of any type, model toys, and
unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft systems.



   (D)   Interference with official duties. It is unlawful for any
person to interfere with the official duties of a park ranger.



   (E)   Penalty. A person convicted of a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor and shall be punished
as authorized under Apache Junction City Code, Vol I, Chapter 1: General,
Article 1-1: General, § 1-1-11(A) Penalty.



(Ord. 1442, passed 2-7-2017)



CHAPTER 16: SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS



      Article




         16-1.   SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS




ARTICLE 16-1:  SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   16-1-1   Legislative intent



   16-1-2   Definitions



   16-1-3   Alarm user permit required



   16-1-4   Prohibition of automatic dialing devices



   16-1-5   False alarms; nuisance declared; administrative penalties
and permit revocation



   16-1-6   General regulations



   16-1-7   Appeal procedures



   16-1-8   Penalty



§ 16-1-1  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.



   (A)   This article is intended to regulate the activities and
responsibilities of those persons who purchase, lease or rent and those
persons who own or conduct the business of selling, leasing, renting,
installing, servicing, maintaining or monitoring alarm systems, devices or
services.



   (B)   It is further intended to encourage the improvement in
reliability of those systems, devices and services and to ensure that Police
Department personnel will not be unduly diverted from responding to actual
criminal activity as a result of responding to false alarms.



   (C)   This article specifically encompasses burglar alarms,
robbery/holdup alarms, panic alarms, fire alarms and medical assistance
alarms both audible and inaudible (silent). The provisions of this article
shall not apply to alarm systems owned by the city when the systems are
utilized on premises owned or operated by the city. The provisions of this
article shall not apply to audible alarms affixed to automobiles, unless the
vehicle alarms are affixed to a central monitoring system.



(Prior Code, § 16-1-1)



§ 16-1-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT OF NATURE.  An unusual, extraordinary, sudden and unexpected
manifestation of the forces of nature, which cannot be prevented by
reasonable human care, skill or foresight.



   ALARM or ALARM SYSTEM.  Any mechanical or electrical device(s) which
is used to detect unauthorized entry into buildings or onto premises or to
warn or alert others of an emergency or of the commission of an unlawful act
within buildings or on premises or perimeter of premises.



   ALARM AGENT.  Any person who is self-employed or employed by an alarm
business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the
following: selling, maintaining, servicing or repairing any alarm or alarm
system in or on any building, place or premises. Any person whose duties
consist solely of resetting an alarm following activation shall not be deemed
to be an ALARM AGENT.



   ALARM BUSINESS.  The business by an individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm or
alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.



   ALARM USER.  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or business
leasing, renting, purchasing or using any monitored or proprietor alarm,
alarm system, device or service.



   AUDIBLE ALARM.  A device designed for the detection of an unauthorized
entry of premises and which, when activated, generates an audible sound on
the premises.



   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE.  A device which is interconnected to a
telephone line, cellular telephone service or radio link and is programmed to
select a predetermined telephone number and transmit an emergency message
indicating a need for emergency response either by voice methods or coded
signals or by maintaining an open line with emergency services.



   COORDINATOR.  The Chief of Police of the Apache Junction Police
Department or the individual designated by the Chief of Police to enforce the
provisions of this article.



   DAYS.  Calendar days based on a 365-day year.



   FALSE HOLDUP ALARM.  Any signal which indicates a robbery or holdup
but is not the result of a robbery or holdup.



   MONITORED ALARM.  A device designed for the detection of an
unauthorized entry into premises and which, when activated, generates an
inaudible signal to a monitoring station. A monitored alarm may also generate
an audible sound on the premises.



   NOTICE, NOTIFY, NOTIFICATION.  Writing evidencing pertinent
information by means of first class, prepaid certified mail, return receipt
requested. NOTICE is considered issued on date it is placed in the United
States Postal Service mail.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity.



   PROPRIETOR ALARM.  Any alarm or alarm system which is not leased or
rented from or owned or maintained under contract by an alarm business.



   ROBBERY/PANIC ALARM or ALARM SYSTEM.  Any mechanical or electrical
device designed so that a person may intentionally activate it to summon
police assistance or medical assistance.



(Prior Code, § 16-1-2)



§ 16-1-3  ALARM USER PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user permit from the
city for each alarm system. Such a permit shall be obtained within ninety
(90) days from the effective date of this article or prior to the use of an
alarm system which is installed subsequent to the expiration of ninety (90)
days from the effective date of this article .



   (B)   The application for an alarm user’s permit shall be made on
a form approved by the coordinator and shall be accompanied by a permit fee
as set forth in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4: Fees, Article
4-7, Public Safety Fee Schedule, § 4-7-1(J), Security Alarm Permit Fees.
Items on the form shall include, among other things, personal, business and
alarm information, as well as the names of three responsible parties and
their telephone numbers, provided, however, all alarm systems that have been
installed prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days from the effective date
of the article shall not be charged a permit fee if application for a permit
is made within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this article.



   (C)   Permits are not transferable from one user to another or from
one address to another. Permits are valid for 365 days from the date of
issuance. Renewal fees are due with the alarm permit update within 30 days
prior to expiration of the alarm permit.



   (D)   The coordinator shall mail an alarm user permit verification
form to an alarm user permit holder once every year, requiring the alarm
permit holder to complete the form and return it with the renewal fee to the
coordinator to verify that the alarm system is still in use and the permit
information is current.



(Prior Code, § 16-1-3) (Am. Ord. 1434, passed 1-17-2017)  Penalty, see Vol.
I, § 16-1-8



§ 16-1-4  PROHIBITION OF AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall use or cause to be used any automatic dialing
device that:



      (1)   Automatically selects a public safety or emergency
services telephone line of the Apache Junction Police Department;



      (2)   Prevents termination of a call by public safety or
emergency services personnel; or



      (3)   Is programmed for transmission directly to any public
safety facility.



   (B)   Within 60 days after the effective date of this article all
prohibited automatic dialing devices described in the above division shall be
disconnected.



(Prior Code, § 16-1-4)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 16-1-8



§ 16-1-5  FALSE ALARMS; NUISANCE DECLARED; ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES AND
PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   Nuisance declared. The permitting of three or more false
alarms for a residential property and two or more false alarms for a
commercial property in a 365-day period shall constitute a public nuisance, 
punishable under this chapter.



   (B)   Grace period.



      (1)   Newly leased, rented, purchased and/or monitored alarms
or alarm systems shall not be subject to provisions of the article relating
to the counting and assessment of false alarms for a period of thirty (30)
days from the date the alarm or alarm system becomes operational.



      (2)   The grace period provided in division (B)(1) of this
section shall apply only if the alarm user notifies the coordinator in
writing within 10 days of the completion of installation or reinstallation.
The written notice shall specify the date the system was installed or
reinstalled. For reinstalled alarm systems, the  notice  shall  also 
describe  the  nature  and  extent  of the reinstallation.



   (C)   Police review of false alarms.



      (1)   Any residential alarms system which has three or more
false alarms or any commercial alarm system which has two or more false
alarms within the permit year shall be subject to an assessment as provided
below in division (C)(2)(e) of this section.



      (2)   If the police department records two  or more false
alarms within the permit year:



         (a)   The coordinator shall notify the alarm user of the
fact and direct that a report be submitted to the coordinator within ten (10)
days from the date of the notice. The report shall contain a description of
the action taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the
false alarm, and specific defenses, if any, why the alleged false alarms
should not be considered false alarms. Evidence that a false alarm was caused
by an act of nature, common cause, cancellation of alarm dispatch request
from the alarm company, or action of the telephone or utility company, shall
constitute affirmative defenses to an assessment for a false alarm.



         (b)   If the report above is not timely received by the
coordinator, any notified party shall be deemed to have waived the right to
any further review or hearing as provided herein, and the alarm user
operating the alarm system generating the false alarms will be assessed
pursuant to division  (C)(2)(e) of this section.



         (c)   If the report required by division (C)(2)(a) of
this section is submitted, the coordinator shall review the corrective action
taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms
and the specific defenses, if any, set forth in the report. If it is
determined that the corrective action taken or to be taken will substantially
reduce the likelihood of false alarms or that a valid defense to the initial
determination of false alarm has been accepted, the coordinator will send a
notice within thirty (30) days that no assessment will be made at that time.
The notice shall specifically set forth the conclusions of the coordinator
with respect to the review of the report submitted.



         (d)   If the coordinator determines that the action
taken or to be taken will not substantially reduce the likelihood of false
alarms or that a defense to the initial determination of false alarms has not
been alleged or accepted, a notice shall be sent to the alarm user that the
alarm user will be assessed a false alarm assessment pursuant to division
(C)(2)(e) of this section. The  notice of decision shall contain the
specific findings and conclusions of the coordinator.



         (e)   An alarm user shall be assessed a fee for each
false alarm, pursuant to the fee schedule set forth in Apache Junction City
Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4: Fees, Article 4-7, Public Safety Fee Schedule, §
4-7-1(J), Security Alarm Permit Fees. The alarm user will not, however, be
assessed any fee amounts for the first two false alarms for a residential
property and the first false alarm for a commercial property.



         (f)   If the alarm user fails to pay the assessment
within the time provided after receipt of written notification from the
coordinator as provided in this section, the coordinator may summarily revoke
the alarm user permit.



         (g)   An alarm user whose permit has been revoked shall
be furnished written notification of the revocation and shall within three
days after the issuance of the written notification discontinue the use of
the alarm system with respect to which a permit has been revoked.



         (h)   An alarm user whose alarm user permit has been
revoked may have it reinstated by paying all overdue assessments, submit a
corrective report detailing the corrective action taken with proof of
inspection for malfunctions, and pay a reinstatement fee as set forth in
Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4: Fees, Article 4-7, Public
Safety Fee Schedule, § 4-7-1(J) , Security Alarm Permit Fees.



         (i)   Any non-registered alarm user shall be assessed
false alarm fees pursuant to the fee schedule as set forth in Apache Junction
City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4: Fees, Article 4-7, Public Safety Fee Schedule,
A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 4-7-1(J), Security Alarm Permit  Fees. For each
subsequent false alarm beyond two, the police department will not respond and
alarm user may be subject to criminal and/or civil charges,  penalties and
fees pursuant to A.J.C.C., Vol. I, § 16-1-8.



(Prior Code, § 16-1-5) (Am. Ord. 1434, passed 1-17-2017)  Penalty, see Vol.
I, § 16-1-8



§ 16-1-6  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally
activate any alarm or alarm system for any reason other than to warn of an
actual emergency.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to the testing of alarms or
alarm systems when the testing has been done in accordance with the
prescribed guidelines set by the Police Department and when the Police
Department has been given advance notice of the testing.



   (B)   No alarm user shall allow an audible alarm to sound in excess
of 15 minutes.



   (C)   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the Chief of
Police may, whenever he or she shall have knowledge of the use of any device
or attachment not operated or maintained in accordance with the provisions of
this article, order the deactivation of the device or attachment until the
requirements are met.



(Prior Code, § 16-1-6)  Penalty, see Vol. I, § 16-1-8



§ 16-1-7  APPEAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   (1)   A party may appeal any decision made by the
coordinator under this article to a hearing officer so designated by the City
Manager by filing the appeal with the City Clerk's office.



      (2)   The request for an appeal shall set forth the specific
objections to the decision of the coordinator.



      (3)   The hearing officer shall set a time and place for the
hearing within 10 days of receipt of the appeal.



   (B)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be based upon the
evidence presented. If the hearing officer affirms the decision of the
coordinator, the imposed assessment and/or permit revocation shall remain in
effect. If the hearing officer overrules the decision of the coordinator, in
whole or part, no assessment shall be imposed, and the permit shall
immediately be reinstated.



   (C)   The decision of the hearing officer is final. The losing party
may initiate the appropriate action in Pinal County Superior Court.



(Prior Code, § 16-1-7)



§ 16-1-8  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor, and shall be subject to
the penalty and multiple charging provisions set forth in Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



      (2)   Revocation of a permit shall not be a defense against
prosecution.



   (B)   Conviction under this chapter shall not relieve the person
from paying the permit fee or false alarm fees which have been assessed. The
city may also pursue all violations of this chapter civilly.



   (C)   (1)   Any unpaid amounts assessed pursuant to this chapter
shall also be deemed a civil debt to the city and shall be collected by the
city through the civil process, in a court of competent jurisdiction.



      (2)   All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of 1 or
more remedies shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-1-8)



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Arizona Revised Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES



 

A.R.S. Section
 
Code Section




1-211 - 1-215
 
1-1-3


3-201
 
9-1-2


3-1311
 
6-3-8


4-101
 
10-1-22


9-27-1(B)(3)(a)
 
3-2-3


9-302
 
2-1-7


9-411 - 9-419
 
2-7-1


9-411 - 9-420
 
3-11-2


9-500.21
 
9-1-4


9-500.32
 
6-1-8


9-505 et seq.
 
14-1-4


9-506(D)(1)
 
14-1-8


9-507(B)
 
14-1-6


9-509
 
14-1-10


9-581 - 9-583
 
13-4, App. B


9-591 - 9-599
 
13-4, App. B


9-591(13)
 
13-4, App. A


9-591(19)
 
4-6-2, 13-4, App. B


9-591(19)(a)
 
13-4, App. A


9-591(19)(b)
 
13-4, App. A


9-591(21)
 
13-4, App. A


9-592(1)
 
13-4, App. A


9-592(J)
 
13-4, App. A


9-594
 
4-6-2, 13-4, App. B


9-821.01
 
2-3-1


11-1024
 
6-1-8


11-1024(J)(5)
 
15-1-3


Title 12
 
3-7-7


12-124
 
9-1-4


12-901 et seq.
 
9-1-5, 13-2-3


12-981 et seq.
 
3-13-5


Title 13
 
5-1-8, 10-1-31


13-803
 
8-11-12


13-1401 - 13-1424
 
8-11-5


13-1504
 
9-1-4


13-1802
 
10-4-3


13-1807
 
10-4-3


13-2729(F)(7)
 
15-1-1


13-2910
 
6-1-7, 6-1-8, 6-3-5, 15-1-3


13-2910.01
 
6-1-7, 6-1-8


13-3101
 
3-14-1


13-3201 - 13-3214
 
8-11-5


13-3401
 
8-12-6


13-3401 - 13-3424
 
8-11-5


13-3401.01 et seq.
 
8-12-1


13-3551 - 13-3559
 
8-11-5


13-2301(D)(4)
 
8-11-5


Title 13, Chapter 39
 
10-3-4


Title 15
 
8-1-1


15-802
 
10-1-29


15-802(D)(1)-(7)
 
10-1-29


Title 16
 
1-1-19


16-101
 
1-1-23


16-204
 
2-3-6


Title 19
 
1-1-17 - 1-1-21


19-111
 
1-1-17, 1-1-20


21-331
 
5-1-9


Title 22
 
5-1-8


23-214(A)
 
13-4, App. B


26-301 et seq.
 
2-16-2, 2-16-3


26-307
 
2-16-2


26-307(C)
 
2-16-2


26-307(D)
 
2-16-2


26-311
 
2-16-2


26-312
 
2-16-3


26-314
 
2-16-5


Title 28
 
10-7-2


Title 28, Ch. 6, Art. 20
 
1-1-11


Title 28, Ch. 6, Art. 21
 
1-1-11


Title 28, Ch. 8, Art. 5
 
12-3-6


28-627
 
12-5-3


28-886
 
12-5-4


28-958(G)
 
3-5-5


28-1099
 
12-4-2


28-1100
 
12-4-2


28-1101
 
12-4-8


28-1103
 
12-4-6


28-1144
 
12-4-6


Title 28, Ch. 20, Art. 8
 
13-2-4


28-2409
 
12-3-8


Title 32
 
8-5-5, 8-8-4, 8-8-6


Title 32, Ch. 18
 
8-12-3


Title 32, Ch. 42
 
8-1-1, 8-5-2, 8-5-5


32-4201.5
 
8-5-1


38-260
 
2-1-7


Title 36, Art. 4
 
8-1-3


38-452 et seq.
 
2-13-2


38-503
 
3-7-9


38-841 et seq.
 
2-21-3


38-847(A)
 
2-21-3


38-847(B)
 
2-21-3


39-101 et seq.
 
14-1-14


39-204
 
3-7-2


41-1346 et seq.
 
3-9-3


41-4401
 
13-4, App. B


42-09(B)
 
8-11-2


42-6201 et seq.
 
13-4, App. B


42-6206
 
13-4, App. B


Title 44, Ch. 11, Art. 3
 
8-4-2


44-6852
 
4-2-1


45-312
 
7-1-7


Title 48, Ch. 4
 
13-2-6


49-901 et seq.
 
13-4, App. B


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2009 Code Section




Art. 1-1
 
1-1-1


Art. 1-2
 
1-1-2


Art. 1-3
 
1-1-3


Art. 1-5
 
1-1-8


Art. 1-6
 
1-1-9


Art. 1-7
 
1-1-10


Art. 1-8
 
1-1-11


Art. 1-10
 
1-1-14


Art. 2-14
 
2-14-2


Art. 3-10
 
3-10-1


Art. 4-7
 
4-7-1


Art. 4-8
 
4-8-1


1-4-1
 
1-1-4


1-4-2
 
1-1-5


1-4-3
 
1-1-6


1-4-4
 
1-1-7


1-9-1
 
1-1-12


1-9-2
 
1-1-13


1-11-1
 
1-1-15


1-11-2
 
1-1-16


1-11-3
 
1-1-17


1-11-4
 
1-1-18


1-12-1
 
1-1-19


1-12-2
 
1-1-20


1-12-3
 
1-1-21


1-13-1
 
1-1-22


1-13-2
 
1-1-23


2-1-1
 
2-1-1


2-1-2
 
2-1-2


2-1-5
 
2-1-5


2-1-6
 
2-1-6


2-1-7
 
2-1-7


2-2-1
 
2-2-1


2-2-2
 
2-2-2


2-2-3
 
2-2-3


2-2-4
 
2-2-4


2-2-5
 
2-2-5


2-2-6
 
2-2-6


2-2-7
 
2-2-7


2-2-8
 
2-2-8


2-3-1
 
2-3-1


2-3-2
 
2-3-2


2-3-3
 
2-3-3


2-3-4
 
2-3-4


2-3-5
 
2-3-5


2-4-1
 
2-4-1


2-4-2
 
2-4-2


2-4-3
 
2-4-3


2-4-4
 
2-4-4


2-4-5
 
2-4-5


2-4-6
 
2-4-6


2-4-7
 
2-4-7


2-4-8
 
2-4-8


2-5-1
 
2-5-1


2-5-2
 
2-5-2


2-5-3
 
2-5-3


2-5-4
 
2-5-4


2-5-5
 
2-5-5


2-5-6
 
2-5-6


2-5-7
 
2-5-7


2-7-1
 
2-7-1


2-7-2
 
2-7-2


2-7-3
 
2-7-3


2-7-4
 
2-7-4


2-7-5
 
2-7-5


2-7-6
 
2-7-6


2-7-7
 
2-7-7


2-7-8
 
2-7-8


2-8-1
 
2-8-1


2-8-2
 
2-8-2


2-8-3
 
2-8-3


2-8-4
 
2-8-4


2-8-5
 
2-8-5


2-8-6
 
2-8-6


2-8-7
 
2-8-7


2-8-8
 
2-8-8


2-10-1
 
2-10-1


2-10-2
 
2-10-2


2-10-3
 
2-10-3


2-10-4
 
2-10-4


2-10-5
 
2-10-5


2-10-6
 
2-10-6


2-10-7
 
2-10-7


2-10-8
 
2-10-8


2-10-9
 
2-10-9


2-10-10
 
2-10-10


2-10-11
 
2-10-11


2-11-1
 
2-11-1


2-11-2
 
2-11-2


2-11-3
 
2-11-3


2-11-4
 
2-11-4


2-11-5
 
2-11-5


2-11-6
 
2-11-6


2-11-7
 
2-11-7


2-11-8
 
2-11-8


2-13-1
 
2-13-1


2-13-2
 
2-13-2


2-13-3
 
2-13-3


2-15-1
 
2-15-1


2-15-2
 
2-15-2


2-15-3
 
2-15-3


2-15-4
 
2-15-4


2-15-5
 
2-15-5


2-16-1
 
2-16-1


2-16-2
 
2-16-2


2-16-3
 
2-16-3


2-16-4
 
2-16-4


2-16-5
 
2-16-5


2-16-6
 
2-16-6


3-1-1
 
3-1-1


3-1-2
 
3-1-2


3-1-3
 
3-1-3


3-1-4
 
3-1-4


3-1-5
 
3-1-5


3-1-6
 
3-1-6


3-1-7
 
3-1-7


3-1-8
 
3-1-8


3-1-9
 
3-1-9


3-1-10
 
3-1-10


3-1-11
 
3-1-11


3-2-1
 
3-2-1


3-2-2
 
3-2-2


3-2-3
 
3-2-3


3-2-4
 
3-2-4


3-2-5
 
3-2-5


3-2-6
 
3-2-6


3-3-1
 
3-3-1


3-3-2
 
3-3-2


3-3-3
 
3-3-3


3-5-1
 
3-5-1


3-5-2
 
3-5-2


3-5-3
 
3-5-3


3-5-4
 
3-5-4


3-5-5
 
3-5-5


3-5-6
 
3-5-6


3-5-7
 
3-5-7


3-6-1
 
3-6-1


3-6-2
 
3-6-2


3-6-3
 
3-6-3


3-6-4
 
3-6-4


3-6-5
 
3-6-5


3-6-6
 
3-6-6


3-7-1
 
3-7-1


3-7-2
 
3-7-2


3-7-3
 
3-7-3


3-7-4
 
3-7-4


3-7-5
 
3-7-5


3-7-6
 
3-7-6


3-7-7
 
3-7-7


3-7-8
 
3-7-8


3-7-9
 
3-7-9


3-7-10
 
3-7-10


3-9-1
 
3-9-1


3-9-2
 
3-9-2


3-9-3
 
3-9-3


3-9-4
 
3-9-4


3-9-5
 
3-9-5


3-9-6
 
3-9-6


3-11-1
 
3-11-1


3-11-2
 
3-11-2


3-13-1
 
3-13-1


3-13-2
 
3-13-2


3-13-3
 
3-13-3


3-13-4
 
3-13-4


3-13-5
 
3-13-5


10-1-2
 
10-1-2


10-1-3
 
10-1-3


10-1-4
 
10-1-4


10-1-5
 
10-1-5


10-1-6
 
10-1-6


10-1-7
 
10-1-7


10-1-9
 
10-1-9


10-1-11
 
10-1-11


10-1-12
 
10-1-12


10-1-13
 
10-1-13


10-1-14
 
10-1-14


10-1-15
 
10-1-15


10-1-16
 
10-1-16


10-1-17
 
10-1-17


10-1-18
 
10-1-18


10-1-19
 
10-1-19


10-1-20
 
10-1-20


10-1-21
 
10-1-21


10-1-22
 
10-1-22


10-1-23
 
10-1-23


10-1-24
 
10-1-24


10-1-25
 
10-1-25


10-1-26
 
10-1-26


10-1-27
 
10-1-27


10-1-28
 
10-1-28


10-1-29
 
10-1-29


10-2-1
 
10-2-1


10-2-2
 
10-2-2


10-2-3
 
10-2-3


10-2-4
 
10-2-4


10-2-5
 
10-2-5


10-3-1
 
10-3-1


10-3-2
 
10-3-2


10-3-3
 
10-3-3


10-3-4
 
10-3-4


10-4-1
 
10-4-1


10-4-2
 
10-4-2


10-4-3
 
10-4-3


10-4-4
 
10-4-4


10-5-1
 
10-5-1


10-5-2
 
10-5-2


10-5-3
 
10-5-3


10-5-4
 
10-5-4


10-5-5
 
10-5-5


10-5-6
 
10-5-6


10-5-7
 
10-5-7


10-6-1
 
10-6-1


10-6-2
 
10-6-2


10-6-3
 
10-6-3


10-6-4
 
10-6-4


10-6-5
 
10-6-5


10-6-6
 
10-6-6


10-6-7
 
10-6-7


10-6-8
 
10-6-8


10-6-9
 
10-6-9


10-6-10
 
10-6-10


10-7-1
 
10-7-1


10-7-2
 
10-7-2


10-7-3
 
10-7-3


10-7-4
 
10-7-4


10-7-5
 
10-7-5


10-7-6
 
10-7-6


10-7-7
 
10-7-7


11-1-1
 
2-22-1


11-1-2
 
2-22-2


11-1-3
 
2-22-3


11-1-4
 
2-22-4


11-1-5
 
2-22-5


11-1-6
 
2-22-6


11-1-7
 
2-22-7


12-1-1
 
12-1-1


12-1-2
 
12-1-2


12-1-3
 
12-1-3


12-1-4
 
12-1-4


12-1-5
 
12-1-5


12-2-1
 
12-2-1


12-2-2
 
12-2-2


12-2-3
 
12-2-3


12-2-4
 
12-2-4


12-2-5
 
12-2-5


12-2-6
 
12-2-6


12-2-7
 
12-2-7


12-2-8
 
12-2-8


12-2-9
 
12-2-9


12-2-10
 
12-2-10


12-2-11
 
12-2-11


12-2-12
 
12-2-12


12-2-13
 
12-2-13


12-2-14
 
12-2-14


12-2-15
 
12-2-15


12-3-1
 
12-3-1


12-3-2
 
12-3-2


12-3-3
 
12-3-3


12-3-4
 
12-3-4


12-3-5
 
12-3-5


12-3-6
 
12-3-6


12-3-7
 
12-3-7


12-3-8
 
12-3-8


12-3-9
 
12-3-9


12-4-1
 
12-4-1


12-4-2
 
12-4-2


12-4-3
 
12-4-3


12-4-4
 
12-4-4


12-4-5
 
12-4-5


12-4-6
 
12-4-6


12-4-7
 
12-4-7


12-4-8
 
12-4-8


16-1-1
 
16-1-1


16-1-2
 
16-1-2


16-1-3
 
16-1-3


16-1-4
 
16-1-4


16-1-5
 
16-1-5


16-1-6
 
16-1-6


16-1-7
 
16-1-7


16-1-8
 
16-1-8


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




659
 
11-3-1998
 
2-14-1


869
 
- -
 
12-4-2


1253
 
1-3-2006
 
8-12-1 - 8-12-7


1255
 
1-3-2006
 
9-1-1 - 9-1-4, 9-2-1 - 9-2-4, 9-3-1 - 9-3-3, 9-4-1 - 9-4-7, 9-5-1 - 9-5-8,
9-6-1, 9-6-2


1263
 
4-4-2006
 
4-7-1


1267
 
5-2-2006
 
2-4-1 - 2-4-8, 2-5-1 - 2-5-7


1273
 
9-5-2006
 
7-1-1 - 7-1-13, 7-2-1 - 7-2-8, 7-3-1 - 7-3-9


1274
 
9-5-2006
 
4-4-1 - 4-4-9, 4-4-11, 4-4-12


1278
 
10-3-2006
 
4-4-1, 4-4-3


1285
 
2-20-2007
 
3-14-1


1292
 
3-20-2007
 
7-4-1


1296
 
5-1-2007
 
8-3-1 - 8-3-3, 8-4-1 - 8-4-3, 8-5-1 - 8-5-4, 8-5-6, 8-5-7, 8-6-1 - 8-6-5,
8-7-1 - 8-7-3, 8-11-1 - 8-11-12


1302
 
2-19-2008
 
9-1-5


1316
 
2-19-2008
 
9-1-3, 10-1-30 - 10-1-32


1311
 
4-15-2008
 
4-3-1


1321
 
6-17-2008
 
3-6-3


1328
 
10-27-2008
 
2-7-2, 2-8-2, 2-11-2, 2-15-2, 2-21-1 - 2-21-3, 2-22-2, 7-1-2


1329
 
4-7-2009
 
9-5-4, 9-6-2


1332
 
1-20-2009
 
4-8-1


1333
 
1-20-2009
 
4-7-1


1342
 
7-7-2009
 
2-4-6


1356
 
4-6-2010
 
12-1-1 - 12-1-5, 12-2-1 - 12-2-15, 12-3-1 - 12-3-11, 12-4-1 - 12-4-9, 12-5-1
- 12-5-7


1357
 
2-16-2010
 
4-8-1


1360
 
4-6-2010
 
3-5-1 - 3-5-7


1365
 
9-7-2010
 
9-1-5


1366
 
8-3-2010
 
4-8-1


1367
 
10-5-2010
 
8-3-1, 8-5-3, 8-5-8, 8-11-13, 8-11-14


1370
 
1-4-2011
 
2-7-4


1374
 
4-19-2011
 
3-14


1380
 
4-3-2012
 
12-3-8, 12-5-7


1386
 
11-6-2012
 
3-7-4


1392
 
7-2-2013
 
3-6-3


1395
 
11-19-2013
 
4-2


1400
 
5-6-2014
 
5-1-1 - 5-1-10


1403
 
5-20-2014
 
9-4-4


1413
 
2-3-2015
 
14-1-1 - 14-1-16


1414
 
6-16-2015
 
6-1-1 - 6-1-11, 6-2-1 - 6-2-8, 6-3-1 - 6-3-9, 6-4-1, 6-5-1 - 6-5-3, 6-6-1 -
6-6-3, 6-7-1 - 6-7-8, 6-8-1 - 6-8-5, 6-9-1, 6-9-2


1415
 
6-16-2015
 
4-1-1 - 4-1-7


1416
 
6-16-2015
 
4-3-1


1421
 
11-3-2015
 
8-5-5, 8-9-1 - 8-9-5


1422
 
4-5-2016
 
4-4-10


1424
 
5-19-2016
 
13-3-1 - 13-3-13


1425
 
5-19-2016
 
4-6-1


1434
 
1-17-2017
 
16-1-3, 16-1-5


1435
 
1-17-2017
 
4-7-1


1438
 
10-18-2016
 
2-1-3, 2-3-1


1442
 
2-7-2017
 
15-1-1 - 15-1-4


1445
 
4-4-2017
 
2-3-5


1450
 
9-19-2017
 
8-1-1 - 8-1-4, 8-2-1 - 8-2-12, 8-8-1 - 8-8-8, 8-10-1 - 8-10-5


1453
 
12-5-2017
 
13-4-1, 13-4 Appendix A, 13-4 Appendix B


1454
 
12-5-2017
 
4-6-2


 
 
 
 
 




 


Apache Junction, AZ Land Development Code


APACHE JUNCTION CITY CODE
VOLUME II
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE



Contains 2017 S-5, current through
Ordinance 1452, passed - -2017



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CHAPTER 1:  ZONING ORDINANCE



   Article



      1-1.   INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS



      1-2.   TYPES OF USES



      1-3.   DESIGNATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS, ZONING MAP AND
BOUNDARIES



      1-4.   ZONING DISTRICTS



      1-5.   ZONING BULK AND USE REGULATIONS



      1-6.   SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS



      1-7.   PARKING, LOADING AND CIRCULATION REGULATIONS



      1-8.   LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS



      1-9.   MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE REGULATIONS



      1-10.   OUTDOOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS



      1-11.   SIGN REGULATIONS



      1-12.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND STORMWATER REGULATIONS



      1-13.   DESIGN STANDARDS



      1-14.   ENGINEERING REGULATIONS



      1-15.   GREEN BUILDING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



      1-16.   ADMINISTRATION



      1-17.   DEFINITIONS



ARTICLE 1-1:  INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS



Section



   1-1-1   Title and authority



   1-1-2   Intent



   1-1-3   Applicability



   1-1-4   Interpretation, language rules and measurement rules



   1-1-5   Consistency with the General Plan



   1-1-6   Transitional provisions



   1-1-7   General penalty



   1-1-8   Severability



§ 1-1-1  TITLE AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Chapter 1 of the Apache Junction City Code, Volume II, Land
Development Code shall be known and cited as the "City of Apache Junction
Zoning Ordinance", "Zoning Ordinance", "Zoning Code", "this Ordinance", "the
Ordinance" or "this Chapter". Whenever reference is made to any portion of
this Ordinance, or of any other law or ordinance, the reference applies to
all amendments and additions to this Chapter made hereafter.



   (B)   The City of Apache Junction ("city") is authorized under the
Arizona Revised Statutes ("A.R.S.") to exercise broad powers in the
regulation of zoning, planning, land subdivision and building. This Chapter
intends to use all powers set forth in A.R.S. §§ 9-462, et seq.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-1-2  INTENT.



   This Chapter is intended to be consistent and harmonious with the
city's current General Plan ("General Plan"), to enable the city to respond
uniformly and consistently to development proposals and to protect and
promote the public health, safety and general welfare.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-1-3  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Applicability to property. This Chapter shall apply, to the
extent permitted by law, to all property within the city, including all uses,
structures and land owned by any private person, firm, corporation or
organization, or local, state or federal agencies.



   (B)   Compliance with regulations. No land shall be used, and no
structure shall be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered, demolished or
moved except in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.



   (C)   Minimum requirements. In interpreting and applying the
provisions of this Chapter, the applicant shall meet or exceed the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare.



   (D)   Relation to other regulations. The regulations of this Chapter
and requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not
supersede any other regulations or requirements adopted or imposed by the
State of Arizona, or any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over
uses and development authorized by this Chapter. All uses and development
authorized by this Chapter shall comply with all other such regulations and
requirements. Unless otherwise specified, where conflict occurs between the
provisions of this Chapter and any other city ordinance, chapter, resolution,
guideline or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall control.



   (E)   Relation to private agreements. In the event this Chapter, or
any permit, approval or development agreement authorized by this Chapter, is
more restrictive than any agreement between private parties, this chapter or
development agreement shall apply. Otherwise, this Chapter shall not
interfere with, affect or annul any recorded easement, covenant, or other
agreement between private parties.



   (F)   Effective date. This Chapter shall become effective 30
calendar days after adoption.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-1-4  INTERPRETATION, LANGUAGE RULES AND MEASUREMENT RULES.



   (A)   Intent. This section of the Chapter is intended to describe
the rules of interpretation and the rules of measurement relative to planning
and zoning regulations.



   (B)   Rules for construction of language. In interpreting the
various provisions of this Chapter, the following rules of construction shall
apply:



      (1)   The particular controls the general. Whenever a general
provision in a rule shall be in conflict with a particular provision in the
same or another rule, the two shall be construed, if possible, so that effect
may be given to both. If the conflict between the two provisions is
irreconcilable, the particular provisions shall prevail and shall be
construed as an exception to the general provision.



      (2)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the
following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:



         (a)   The word AND indicates that all connected words or
provisions shall apply.



         (b)   The word AND/OR indicates that the connected words
or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.



         (c)   The word OR indicates that the connected words or
provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.



         (d)   The word EITHER/OR indicates that the connected
words or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.



      (3)   In case of conflict between the text and a diagram or
graphic, the text controls.



      (4)   All references to departments, committees, commissions,
boards, or other public agencies are to those of the city, unless otherwise
indicated.



      (5)   All references to public officials are to those of the
city, and include designated deputies, assistants, and appointees of such
officials, unless otherwise indicated.



      (6)   All references to DAYS are to calendar days, unless
otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, or a day
when the city offices are closed, it shall be extended to the next working
day. The end of a time period shall be the close of business on the last day
of the period. The CLOSE OF BUSINESS means the time of day that city offices,
as determined by the City Manager, are closed.



      (7)   All references to SECTION, CHAPTER, or ARTICLE shall
refer to those sections, chapters or articles under this Chapter unless
another meaning is clear from the context of the reference.



      (8)   The words SHALL, WILL and MUST, are always mandatory and
not discretionary. The words SHOULD and MAY are permissive.



      (9)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses,
and the future tense includes the past.



      (10)   The singular number includes the plural, and the
plural, the singular.



      (11)   The term DIRECTOR shall refer to the Development
Services Department Director or his/her designee.



      (12)   Sections and section headings contained herein shall
not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope,
meaning, or intent of any section; they are merely presented for
organizational clarity and guidance.



   (C)   Rules for measurement. The purpose of this section is to
explain how the following measurements referred to in this Chapter are to be
calculated.



      (1)   Applicant's responsibility. The applicant shall be
responsible for supplying drawings illustrating the measurements that apply
to a project, which shall be drawn to scale and of sufficient detail to allow
easy verification upon inspection by the Development Services Director
("Director") or authorized designee.



      (2)   Fractions. Unless otherwise stated, whenever a required
arithmetical calculation contains a fraction of a whole number, fractions of
½ or greater shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number and fractions
of less than ½ shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.



      (3)   Measurements. The following describes how measurements
are determined for certain zoning requirements. If there is a question
regarding measurements, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
interpretation, clarification and final determination of measurement methods.



         (a)   Minimum distance. When measuring a required
distance, such as the minimum distance between a structure and a lot line,
the measurement is made at the closest or shortest distance between the two
objects.



         (b)   Horizontal distance. When determining distances
for setbacks and structure dimensions, all distances are measured along a
horizontal plane from the appropriate line, edge of building, structure,
storage area, parking area, or other object. These distances are not measured
by following the topography or slope of the land.



         (c)   Shortest distance. Measurements involving a
structure, such as required yards, separations between buildings, or
distances between structures, are made to the closest support wall, post or
column of the structure. Structures or portions of structures that are
entirely underground are not included in measuring required distances, but
shall not encroach over the property line.



         (d)   Vehicle stacking or travel areas. Measurement of a
minimum travel distance for vehicles, such as garage entrance setbacks and
stacking lane distances, are measured down the center of the vehicle travel
area. For example, curving driveways and travel lanes are measured along the
center arc of the driveway or traffic lane.



         (e)   Underground structures. Structures or portions of
structures that are entirely underground are not included in measuring
required zoning setback distances, but shall not encroach over the property
line.



         (f)   Radius. When a specified land use is required to
be located a minimum distance from another land use, the minimum distance is
measured in a straight line.



         (g)   Height. Height is measured as the vertical
distance from the finished grade adjacent to the structure to the highest
point of any portion of a structure, unless excepted by Vol. II, § 1-6-2.
The Zoning Administrator shall determine height measurements for sloping
properties.



            1.   Fences and walls. When measuring fence/wall
heights on properties which are characterized by notable topographical
features, such as properties with slopes, elevation deviations, washes,
swales, rock outcrops and other like features, building and code officers
and/or inspectors shall look for reasonable compliance with fence/wall height
standards. On these properties, some variations in fence/wall heights are
expected.



            2.   Retaining walls. The height of a fence that
is on top of a retaining wall is measured from the ground level on the
highest side of the fence and wall.



            3.   Decks. Deck height is determined by measuring
from the grade immediately under the deck to the top of the floor of the deck.



         (h)   Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width is the
distance between side lot lines measured perpendicular to the lot depth at
the front setback line. Minimum lot width measurement for flag lots shall be
interpreted by the Zoning Administrator.



         (i)   Lot depth. Lot depth is measured along an
imaginary straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line of
the lot to the midpoint of the rear property line or to the most distant
point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line. Lot depth for
new parcels shall not be more than four times the lot width unless waived by
the Zoning Administrator due to unique environmental or geographic conditions.



         (j)   Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be
calculated as net land area, with the exception of the RS-GR, RS-54 and
RS-54M zoning districts, which shall be calculated as gross land area. The
minimum lot size requirements are identified in Vol. II, Tables 5-2 and 5-4.



         (k)   Floor area. For zoning purposes, floor area is the
sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several stories of the building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center



line of party walls. Included shall be any basement floor, mezzanines,
elevator shafts, and stair wells and enclosed porches. The floor area of
accessory uses and of accessory buildings on the same lot shall be included.



         (l)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio ("FAR") is
the ratio of the floor area of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot
to the lot area. To calculate FAR, floor area is divided by lot area, and
typically expressed as a decimal. For example, if the floor area of all
buildings on a lot totals 20,000 square feet, and the lot area is 10,000
square feet, the FAR is expressed as 2.0.



         (m)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage is the ratio of the
total footprint area of all structures on a lot to the net lot area,
typically expressed as a percentage. The footprints of all principal and
accessory structures, including garages, carports, covered patios and
porches, shall be added together in order to calculate lot coverage. The
calculation excludes the following structures:



            1.   Decks, patio slabs, porches, landings,
balconies and stairways when unenclosed, unroofed, and/or uncovered;



            2.   Eaves and roof overhangs projecting up to 2½
feet from a building wall;



            3.   Trellises and similar structures that do not
have solid roofs;



            4.   Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not
enclosed in roofed structures or decks.



         (n)   Lot frontage. The front side of the lot subject to
front setback requirements. For corner lots with multiple frontage, the
narrowest dimension of the lot with street frontage shall generally be
designated as the front of the lot. In the case of uncertainty, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine which lot frontage shall be used for front
setback purposes.



         (o)   Through lot frontage (double frontage lot). The
front yard borders the street primarily used as frontage by neighboring lots.
If both street fronts of the through lot are adjacent to lots that also front
onto the same street, both street fronts of the through lot shall be
considered as required front yards for the purpose of determining building
setbacks and fence height requirements. In the case of uncertainty, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine which lot frontage(s) shall be used for
front setback purposes.



         (p)   Front setbacks. The minimum front setback shall be
measured as the distance between any building and the road right-of-way
fronting the property. For properties fronting a private street, the front
setback shall be measured from the edge of the private access way.



         (q)   Side setbacks. The minimum required distance
between any buildings and the side lot line(s) or road right-of-way(s) on the
side of the property. Side setbacks along a public street (i.e., street side
setbacks) may be different than side setbacks along an interior lot (i.e.,
interior side setbacks). Side setbacks along a private street shall be
measured from the edge of the private access way.



         (r)   Rear setbacks. The minimum required distance
between any buildings and the rear lot line(s) or road right-of-way(s) at the
rear of the property, whichever is less.



         (s)   Setbacks from alleys. Setbacks from a dedicated
alley shall be treated the same as a side or rear setback from an interior
lot line. In computing the minimum setback for any lot abutting an alley, no
part of the width of the alley may be considered as part of the required
setback.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-1-5  CONSISTENCY WITH THE GENERAL PLAN.



   (A)   This Chapter is intended to implement the goals, objectives
and policies of the General Plan and is hereby deemed to be consistent,
harmonious and in accordance with the adopted General Plan. Any amendments to
or actions pursuant to the Chapter shall also be consistent with the General
Plan.



   (B)   An amendment to the text of the Chapter is consistent and in
accordance with the General Plan if it complies with the goals and policies
stated in the General Plan, as it may be amended from time to time. An
amendment to the Zoning Map is consistent with the General Plan if the map
amendment is consistent with the Land Use Plan Map contained in the General
Plan, as amended from time to time. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for interpreting zoning compliance with the General Plan.



   (C)   Unless otherwise specified, where conflict occurs between the
provisions of this Chapter and the General Plan, the Chapter provisions shall
apply.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-1-6  TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Continuation of violations. Any violation of the chapter
previously in effect will continue to be a violation under this Chapter after
adoption and shall be subject to penalties and enforcement unless the use,
development, construction or other activity complies with the provisions of
this Chapter.



   (B)   Approved projects. A project that was approved prior to the
effective date of this Chapter shall be deemed approved after the effective
date of this Chapter and the property owner may file an application for a
building permit in compliance with the approved plan and plan conditions.
Upon approval of the construction plans, a building permit may be issued.



   (C)   Approved preliminary subdivision plats. A project that has a
preliminary plat approved prior to the effective date of this Chapter may be
processed by city staff for final subdivision plat and improvement plan
consideration, even if the subdivision does not fully comply with the
provisions of this Chapter. If a final plat application is not filed within 1
year of the date of preliminary plat approval (unless extended as provided by
the subdivision regulations) the preliminary plat shall expire.



   (D)   Approved conditional use permits. An applicant's project that
has received a conditional use permit approval prior to the effective date of
this Chapter may be granted a building permit, even if the project does not
fully comply with the provisions of this Chapter. If a building permit
application is not filed within 1 year of the date of the conditional use
permit approval, the conditional use permit shall expire.



   (E)   Approved building permits. An applicant who has filed a
complete building permit application prior to the effective date of this
Chapter may be issued a building permit if such permit complies with the
previous ordinance. If construction has not commenced in compliance with the
applicable permit terms, the Building Official may grant an extension
pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code. If the building, structure,
or sign has not been completed in conformance with the building permit and
any extension thereof, then the building, structure, or sign shall be
constructed, completed or occupied only in compliance with this Chapter.



   (F)   Previously filed building permit applications. Any building,
structure, or sign for which a completed building permit application is filed
prior to the effective date of the this Chapter may be issued a building
permit and constructed in compliance with the building permit and other
applicable approvals, permits and conditions, even if the building, structure
or sign does not fully comply with this Chapter. If construction has not
commenced in compliance with the applicable permit terms, the Building
Official may grant an extension pursuant to the provisions of the Building
Code. If the building, structure, or sign has not been completed before the
building permit or any extension of the permit expires, then the building,
structure, or sign shall be constructed, completed or occupied only in
compliance with this Chapter.



   (G)   Previously filed planning applications. Complete applications
for site plan approval, conditional use permit approval or preliminary plat
approval submitted prior to the effective date of this Chapter may be
approved under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in place prior to the
effective date of this Chapter. If a building permit application is not filed
within two years of the date of site plan approval, or one year after the
conditional use permit approval, the approval shall expire. No time
extensions shall be permitted, unless approval of the preliminary plat is
extended, based on the requirements of the subdivision regulations.



   (H)   Previously filed rezoning or variance applications. Complete
rezoning or variance applications filed prior to the effective date of this
Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in place
prior to the effective date of this Chapter. The applicant may elect to
comply with this Chapter by submitting a written preference when filing the
application for rezoning with the city, but in that case shall comply with
all provisions of this Chapter. If a building permit application is not filed
within two years of the effective date of this Chapter, the approval to use
the provisions of the previous Zoning Ordinance shall expire. If the building
permit application expires, or once issued, the building permit expires, then
any plans adopted as part of the approved rezoning shall be modified to
comply with the provisions of this Chapter. No time extensions shall be
permitted.



   (I)   Prior nonconformities. Any legal nonconformity under the
previous Zoning Ordinance also will be a legal nonconformity under this
Chapter, so long as the situation that resulted in the legal nonconforming
status under the previous Zoning Ordinance continues to exist. If a legal
nonconformity under the previous Zoning Ordinance becomes conforming because
of the adoption of this Chapter, then the use or structure will no longer be
considered a nonconformity.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-1-7  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person or entity found guilty of violating any provision of this
Chapter shall be punished in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-16 of this
Chapter.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-1-8  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The city
hereby declares that it would have passed this Chapter, and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, regardless of the fact that
any or one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases was
declared invalid or unconstitutional.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-2:  TYPES OF USES



Section



   1-2-1   Uses permitted by right



   1-2-2   Prohibited uses



   1-2-3   Conditioned uses



   1-2-4   Administrative uses



   1-2-5   Nonconforming uses, structures and lots



   1-2-6   Uses not listed



§ 1-2-1  USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT.



   Uses permitted by right are those uses that are specifically allowed or
uses analogous to those specifically allowed by interpretation of the Zoning
Administrator. A permitted use by right may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts, provided that they conform to all
requirements of the regulations for the district in which such uses are
located. See Vol. II, Tables 5-1 and 5-3.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-2-2  PROHIBITED USES.



   Prohibited uses are those uses that are not specifically permitted by
right, by conditional use permit or by administrative use permit, and also
include those uses that are listed as expressly prohibited in Vol. II, Tables
5-1 and 5-3.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-2-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Conditional uses are those uses that are generally compatible with the
land uses permitted by right in a zoning district, but which require
individual Planning and Zoning Commission review and conditional use permit
("CUP") approval for their location, design, operation and configuration
along with the imposition of conditions in order to ensure the
appropriateness of the use at a particular location. See Vol. II, Tables 5-1
and 5-3. The administrative process required for CUPs is provided in Vol. II,
§ 1-16-12(D).



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-2-4  ADMINISTRATIVE USES.



   Administrative uses are those uses that are generally compatible with
the land uses permitted by right in a zoning district, but which require
Zoning Administrator review and issuance of an administrative use permit
("AUP") to ensure the use complies with Zoning Code standards. Uses requiring
an AUP include, but are not limited to, temporary uses, cargo containers,
fences, signs, outdoor events and home occupations. See Vol. II, Tables 5-1
and 5-3. The administrative process required for administrative use permit
requests is provided in Vol. II, § 1-16-12(C).



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-2-5  NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS.



   (A)   Establishment and applicability. Legal nonconforming uses,
structures and lots are those uses, structures and lots that were legally in
compliance before the adoption or amendment of this Chapter or previously
adopted city ordinances or annexations into the city, but which are
prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the terms of this
Chapter or future amendments to the Chapter or the Zoning Map.



      (1)   Nonconforming status may result from any inconsistency
with the requirements of this Chapter including, but not limited to, land
use, setbacks, lot size, location, density, floor area, height, usable open
space, buffering, screening, landscaping, provision of parking, performance
standards, or the lack of an approved use permit or other required
authorization.



      (2)   Any legally established use, structure or lot, or legal
nonconforming use, structure or lot that is in existence on the effective
date of this Chapter, or any subsequent amendment, but does not comply with
all of the standards and requirements of this Chapter shall be considered
legally nonconforming. Legally nonconforming uses, structures, and lots may
only be continued subject to the following requirements of this Chapter.



   (B)   Legal nonconforming uses.



      (1)   Expansion of legal nonconforming uses. A legal
nonconforming use shall not expand within an existing structure and shall not
expand into any other structure or lot that it did not previously occupy, or
within a federal patented easement.



      (2)   Abandonment of legal nonconforming uses. No legal
nonconforming use may be resumed, reestablished, or reopened after it has
been abandoned, vacated or ceased to be used for a period of 12 or more
continuous months, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The
owner/operator of the use may provide evidence of continual operation of the
use, such as monthly business receipts or tax returns showing business
activity during the time period in question. In cases of providing tax
returns, the owner/operator shall waive all confidentiality rights set forth
in Arizona law.



      (3)   Termination of legal nonconforming use. Failure of a
nonconforming use to follow the regulations as prescribed in this Chapter
shall be prima facie evidence of termination of the legal nonconforming use.



   (C)   Legal nonconforming structures.



      (1)   Expansion of legal nonconforming structures.
Nonconforming structures shall only be enlarged, expanded or extended in
accordance with the terms of this Chapter, or if the Zoning Administrator
determines it necessary to meet city or state requirements and/or to meet
current requirements of the zone in which the structure is located.



      (2)   Structural alterations to nonconforming structures (50%
rule). Structural elements of nonconforming structures and buildings may be
modified, altered, repaired or replaced subject to the cost not exceeding 50%
of the value of the building or structure as determined by two competent
Arizona certified/registered appraisers chosen by and at the expense of the
owner/operator. Structural modifications, alterations, repairs or
replacements shall not enlarge or expand the nonconforming structure or
building. This paragraph does not include nonconforming signs which are
separately regulated in Vol. II, § 1-11-11.



      (3)   Damaged or partially destroyed structures (50% rule).



         (a)   A legal nonconforming building or structure that
is damaged or partially destroyed may be restored or rebuilt if the cost of
repair or reconstruction does not exceed 50% of the current construction
value, exclusive of the foundation, of the building or structure as
determined by two independent competent Arizona certified/registered
appraisers chosen by and at the expense of the owner/operator. Replacement or
restoration of the damaged portions of the building shall not exceed the
size, extent, and configuration that previously existed, and shall be subject
to Building Code requirements.



         (b)   If the cost of repair or reconstruction of a legal
nonconforming building or structure exceeds 50% of the construction value,
exclusive of the foundation, of the building or structure replacement, the
land and building shall be subject to all of the requirements of this Chapter.



   (D)   Legal nonconforming lots. Legal nonconforming lots shall be
allowed to exist and continue but shall not be reduced in size.



   (E)   Certificate of legal nonconformity.



      (1)   No permit or license shall be issued for a nonconforming
use or structure until a certificate of legal nonconformity ("certificate")
has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.  It shall be the burden of the
property owner to provide the following information and evidence to establish
legal nonconformity:



         (a)   Such non-conforming use or structure did legally
exist on the adoption date of this Chapter;



         (b)   Such use or structure was not used, operated or
maintained in violation of any local, state or federal law; and



         (c)   Such use or structure is in compliance with
applicable federal, state or local laws, regulations or the other
requirements, and has not, as of the effective date of this Chapter, been
abandoned or vacated for a period of 12 or more continuous months.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review and examine the
information and evidence provided by the property owner in support of the
certificate. If the Zoning Administrator believes that any information set
forth by the property owner is incorrect, does not contain substantial
competent evidence that the non-conformity was legally established and
lawfully maintained prior to the effective date of this Chapter or any
amendment thereto creating the non-conformities, the Zoning Administrator may
deny the certificate along with a statement of the reasons for the denial. In
order that the exact nature and extent of such non-conforming use, structure
or lot may be determined, the Zoning Administrator may require at the expense
of the owner/operator a survey map prepared by an Arizona registered engineer
or registered surveyor showing the location of structures, buildings and
property lines. The surveyor or engineer may be chosen by the property owner.



      (3)   Upon a showing of necessary and sufficient evidence, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of legal nonconformity which
shall be proof that the use, structure and/or lot described therein is lawful
and may continue subject to the regulations of this Chapter.



      (4)   An appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be taken
pursuant to Vol. II, § 1-16-5 by any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-2-6  USES NOT LISTED.



   Determination. A land use that is not listed as a permitted use,
conditional use or administrative use in the tables and text of the Zoning
Code shall not be allowed within the city unless the Zoning Administrator
determines that a non-listed proposed use is similar to and compatible with a
listed use. Such determination shall be based on the following findings:



   (A)   The characteristics of, and activities associated with the use
are similar to one or more of the listed uses, and will not involve a greater
intensity than the uses listed in the zone.



   (B)   The use will be consistent with the purposes of the applicable
zone.



   (C)   The use will be consistent with the General Plan.



   (D)   The use will be compatible with the other uses allowed in the
zone.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-3:  DESIGNATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS, ZONING MAP AND BOUNDARIES



Section



   1-3-1   Zoning districts



   1-3-2   Zoning Map



   1-3-3   Determination of zoning district boundaries



§ 1-3-1  ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The city shall be classified into zoning districts or zones, the
designation and regulation of which are set forth in this Chapter. Vol. II,
Article 1-4, Zoning Districts identify and briefly describe the different
zoning districts within the city. Uses and dimensional requirements for each
zoning district are illustrated in Vol. II, Tables 5-1, 5-2, 5-3 and 5-4.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-3-2  ZONING MAP.



   (A)   Zoning Map. The boundaries of the zoning districts established
by this Chapter are illustrated on the Zoning Map maintained by the city. The
Zoning Map, together with all legends, symbols, notations, references, zoning
district boundaries and other information on the map, are hereby incorporated
into this Chapter by reference.



   (B)   Location and access to Zoning Map. The official Zoning Map
shall be located in the Development Services Department and accessible for
viewing during normal business hours. Any change thereto shall be identified
as an amendment to the Zoning Map (i.e., rezoning) and shall be filed in
accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-6 of this Chapter.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-3-3  DETERMINATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Uncertainty of boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of any zoning district shown on the Zoning Map, the following
rules shall apply:



   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following property or
land parcel lines, street or alley rights-of-way, city boundary lines, shall
be construed as following such lines, limits or boundaries.



   (B)   Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot and no
dimensions or dividing lines are indicated, the location of such boundary
shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Official Zoning
Map. In the case of any remaining uncertainty, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine the location of boundaries based on the original Zoning Ordinance
exhibit(s) that created the change.



   (C)   Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or
abandoned, the land underlying the street or alley will be added to abutting
lots as required by state law. The regulations that applied to the abutting
parcel or parcels before the vacation or abandonment shall apply to the
entire new larger parcel or parcels that result from such vacation or
abandonment.



   (D)   Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad,
railway, transportation or public utility company is vacated, extinguished or
abandoned, the land underlying the right of way or easement shall be added to
abutting lots as required by state law. If the zoning for abandoned,
extinguished or vacated property is unclassified, the property shall be
automatically classified as being in the same zone of the abutting land to
which it is added.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-4:  ZONING DISTRICTS



Section



   1-4-1   Zoning districts



   1-4-2   Master Planned Community (MPC) District



   1-4-3   Planned Development (PD) Overlay District



§ 1-4-1  ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Table 4-1 below describes and summarizes the city’s zoning
districts.  If there is any inconsistency between these summaries and the
specific regulatory provisions in Tables 5-1, 5-2, 5-3 and 5-4 of this
Chapter (see Vol. II, §§ 1-5-1 through 1-5-4), the specific regulatory
provisions shall prevail.



TABLE 4-1: LIST OF ZONING DISTRICTS



 

ZONING DISTRICTS
 
ZONING DISTRICT DESCRIPTION




RS-GR
 
General Rural Low Density Single-Family Detached Residential.  Minimum lot
size of 1.25 acres.  Allows both conventional and manufactured housing.


RS-54
 
Low Density Single-Family Detached Residential.  Minimum lot size of 1.25
acres.  Allows only conventional housing.


RS-54M
 
Low Density Single-Family Detached Residential.  Minimum lot size of 1.25
acres.  Allows both conventional and manufactured housing.


RS-20
 
Medium Density Single-Family Detached Residential. Minimum lot size of 20,000
square feet.  Allows only conventional housing.


RS-20M
 
Medium Density Single-Family Detached Residential. Minimum lot size of 20,000
square feet.  Allows both conventional and manufactured housing.


RS-10
 
Medium Density Single-Family Detached Residential.  Minimum lot size of
10,000 square feet.  Allows only conventional housing.


RS-10M
 
Medium Density Single-Family Detached Residential. Minimum lot size of 10,000
square feet.  Allows both conventional and manufactured housing.


RS-7
 
Medium/High Density Single-Family Detached Residential.  Minimum lot size of
7,000 square feet.  Allows only conventional housing.


RS-7M
 
Medium/High Density Single-Family Detached Residential.  Minimum lot size of
7,000 square feet.  Allows both conventional and manufactured housing.


RS-5
 
Medium/High Density Single-Family Detached Residential.  Minimum lot size of
5,000 square feet.  Allows only conventional housing.


RM-1
 
High Density Multiple-Family Residential.  Maximum density of 13 units/acre
(i.e., 3,350 square feet per unit) and minimum development parcel size of
7,000 square feet.


RM-2
 
High Density Multiple-Family Residential.  Maximum density of 22 units/acre
(i.e., 1,980 square feet per unit) and minimum development parcel size of
7,000 square feet.


RM-3
 
Very High Density Multiple-Family Residential.  Maximum density of 40
units/acre (i.e., 1,089 square feet per unit) and minimum development parcel
size of 7,000 square feet.


MHP
 
Manufactured Home Park.  Maximum density of 14 units/acre and minimum
development parcel size of 10 acres.


RVP
 
Recreational Vehicle Park.  Maximum density of 20 units/acre max and minimum
development parcel size of 10 acres.


B-1
 
General Commercial. Generally intended for commercial uses that serve a local
and regional market.


B-2
 
Old West Commercial. Generally intended for commercial uses located within
the Downtown Transition Area.


B-3
 
City Center.  Generally intended for commercial, recreational and/or
multi-family residential land uses located within the Core Downtown Area.


B-4
 
Business Park. Generally intended for commercial and/or light industrial land
uses.


B-5
 
Industrial.  Generally intended for light industrial uses permitted by
right, and heavy industrial uses permitted as conditional uses.


PI
 
Public and Institutional.  Generally intended for public, quasi-public and
institutional uses.


MPC
 
Master Planned Community.  Generally intended for large-scale, unified and
comprehensively planned developments in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-4-2.


PD
 
Planned Development Overlay. Generally intended for site and building design
flexibility in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-4-3.




 



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-4-2  MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY (MPC) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent and purpose. The MPC District is generally intended to
accommodate large-scaled, unified and comprehensively planned developments. 
This zoning district is reflected in the General Plan's Land Use Plan Map as
Master Planned Community.



   (B)   This district is more specifically intended to provide an
alternative zoning district and development process to accommodate
substantial mixed-use developments requiring planning and development
flexibility not otherwise attainable under conventional zoning districts, in
accordance with the following:



      (1)   To promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare.



      (2)   To provide a combination of land uses, which may include
a variety of residential types, commercial, industrial, public and
semi-public areas that are arranged and designed in accordance with sound
site planning principles and development techniques, and that are
functionally integrated into the planned transportation system, water and
sewer systems, parks, schools and utilities.



      (3)   To encourage a more creative approach in the utilization
of land in order to accomplish an efficient, aesthetic, and desirable
development.



      (4)   To establish planning and development control parameters
tailored to the opportunities and constraints of the property.



      (5)   To provide reasonable assurances to the city and
developer that the proposed development may be planned and carried out in one
or more phases over an extended period of time, in accordance with the
approved MPC Zoning and Development Plan.



      (6)   To assure that the MPC District is developed in
accordance with a MPC Zoning and Development Plan. The MPC Zoning and
Development Plan shall be designed to fulfill the goals established by the
General Plan, provide development standards promoting an appropriate balance
of land uses, and promote the planning of public facilities designed to serve
the projected population.



   (C)   General provisions.



      (1)   MPC Zoning and Development Plan. Prior to receiving MPC
zoning approval from the city, the property owner/developer shall submit a
MPC Zoning and Development Plan in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-4-2(E).
Following review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
the City Council shall review and either approve, modify and approve or deny
the proposed MPC zoning request.



      (2)   Claim waiver. The Development Services Director
("Director") or designee shall not recommend approval of any MPC District
rezoning and/or MPC Zoning and Development Plan unless the Director has
received a claim waiver under A.R.S. §§ 12-1131, et seq., from the owner or
owners of the property that is the subject of the MPC District.



      (3)   Minimum MPC District area. The minimum area required for
the MPC District is 100 contiguous acres. Areas within rights-of way and
easements may be included in the computation of the minimum 100 acres.



   (D)   Zoning and development standards.



      (1)   Uses. The Council shall establish and approve a specific
pallet of permitted, conditional and temporary uses as part of a MPC
rezoning. The approved pallet of uses shall be incorporated into the MPC
Zoning and Development Plan.



      (2)   Dimensional zoning standards. The Council shall
establish and approve minimum and/or maximum zoning standards for setbacks,
building height, density, intensity, lot sizes, lighting, landscaping,
signage and parking as part of an MPC rezoning. These approved standards
shall be incorporated into the MPC Zoning and Development Plan.



      (3)   Building and site design. The Council shall establish
and approve site and building design guidelines as part of a MPC rezoning.
These approved design guidelines shall be incorporated into the MPC Zoning
and Development Plan.



   (E)   Application procedures. The following application procedures
shall apply:



      (1)   The applicant shall meet with the Director or designee
prior to making an application for the MPC District to discuss the
development concept, the review and approval process, and the submittal
requirements.



      (2)   The applicant shall submit a complete application form,
required fees and a draft MPC Zoning and Development Plan to the Development
Services Director or designee.



      (3)   If the application request requires an amendment of the
2010 General Plan and/or a previously approved MPC Zoning and Development
Plan, the applicant shall submit an application to amend the General Plan or
previously adopted MPC Plan prior to or simultaneously with the application
for the MPC District zoning.



      (4)   The Planning Division shall distribute the MPC
application and supporting materials to each responsible department for
review and comment.



      (5)   Written responses shall be obtained from public or
quasi-public agencies identified by the Director or designee as being
stakeholders in the outcome of the development proposal. The Director or
designee shall compile all of the comments and recommendations and submit a
written report to the applicant.



      (6)   If necessary, the applicant shall revise the MPC Zoning
and Development Plan based on comments received and shall resubmit to the
Planning Division for further evaluation by the city and the reviewing
agencies.



      (7)   Once the application is deemed complete by the Director
or designee, the application shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for review and recommendation, and then the City Council for final
review and decision.



   (F)   MPC Zoning and Development Plan. The MPC Zoning and
Development Plan shall describe the purpose, nature and characteristics of
the proposed master planned community by including the following:



      (1)   Contact list of key project team representatives
including the land owner, developer, and agents.



      (2)   Vicinity map illustrating the property location.



      (3)   Legal description of the MPC boundary.



      (4)   A statement by the applicant demonstrating compliance
with the General Plan.



      (5)   Existing conditions map showing the present use and
general condition of the MPC property and adjacent lands within 1/2 mile of
the MPC property. The map will provide the total gross acreage, gross density
proposed and a delineation of major physical constraints or opportunities
including major environmental features, topography, existing roads, trails,
utilities, generalized location of any 100-year floodway and major drainage
elements.



      (6)   The delineation of development units including the
approximate development unit acreage, proposed allocation and description of
land uses within the development unit, maximum number of dwelling units
within the development unit, and the maximum square footage of
non-residential floor area within the development unit. A development unit
may be defined as an approximate subarea within a specifically defined MPC
boundary containing singular or multiple designated land uses and zoning
classifications. Multiple classifications or mixed-use classifications may be
permitted in the MPC District in conformance with the General Plan. A
development unit in text or table format is the same area as referenced on a
map but describes the area in more specific detail. The City Council may
approve a particular definition of subarea or development unit for any
individual MPC District.



      (7)   Land use plan map illustrating the planned location,
density and/or intensity for future residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, recreational, open space and mixed use development.



      (8)   Conceptual design images representing the type and
quality of proposed housing design, non-residential design, lighting, signage
and landscaping features.



      (9)   General location of any significant historical, cultural
and archaeological features of the site, including proposed methods to
incorporate and preserve such features into the proposed project.



      (10)   A circulation system concept plan that is consistent
with the goals and policies of the General Plan, which shall include the
approximate location of all proposed arterial and collector streets, proposed
connections to existing streets, and proposed trails and bikeways.



      (11)   Proposed public schools, parks and open space areas.



      (12)   Preliminary drainage and hydrology report, prepared by
an Arizona registered engineer.



      (13)   Preliminary water and sewer system report, prepared by
an Arizona registered engineer.



      (14)   Preliminary traffic impact analysis report, prepared by
an Arizona registered engineer.



      (15)   Such additional information as the Director or designee
may prescribe as necessary, to facilitate review and action on the
application by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.



   (G)   Development schedule. The following shall be submitted with
the MPC District application:



      (1)   A schedule, indicating to the best of the applicant's
knowledge, the approximate timeframe in which construction or development is
expected to begin and the duration of time required for completion of the
development; and



      (2)   Proposed phasing plan if the project will not be
developed as one unit/phase, including a plan for the interim use and
management of the undeveloped phase or phases.



   (H)   MPC District approval.



      (1)   Approval of a MPC District rezoning shall be subject to
the procedural requirements for rezoning in Vol. II, § 1-16-6.



      (2)   At the time the MPC District is approved by the City
Council, the associated MPC Zoning and Development Plan shall become an
integral part of the Apache Junction zoning regulations for the rezoned
property. All future development within the MPC district shall thereafter be
in conformity with the MPC Zoning and Development Plan.



   (I)   Development agreement. A development agreement between the
city and the owner/developer shall be required and may be processed and
adopted concurrently with or subsequent to the MPC District.



   (J)   Findings. Before approval of a MPC District, the City Council
shall find that:



      (1)   The development proposed is in conformance with the
General Plan.



      (2)   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are in harmony
and conformance with the General Plan.



      (3)   The proposed development will be compatible with the
character of the surrounding area.



      (4)   The conceptual site locations proposed for public
facilities such as schools, fire protection, law enforcement, water,
wastewater, streets, public services and parks, are adequate to serve the
anticipated population within the MPC District.



   (K)   MPC District amendments and adjustments.



      (1)   Changes to the approved MPC Zoning and Development Plan
may be requested by the applicants or their successors and shall be
delineated as either City Council approved amendments or City staff approved
adjustments.



      (2)   Criteria for distinguishing between amendments and
adjustments shall be provided as part of a development agreement and/or
approved MPC Zoning and Development Plan.



      (3)   Any administrative adjustment decision made by the
Director or the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be in accordance with
the development agreement and/or approved MPC zoning and development plan and
may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council within 7 calendar days
from the date of the Director or Planning and Zoning Commission's decision,
subject to the following:



         (a)   Appeals shall be in writing on a form provided by
the Development Services Department and shall include the specific items
being appealed and the nature upon which the decision was in error.



         (b)   The Director or designee shall transmit to the
City Council a report and any background material regarding the appeal to the
City Council for its next regularly scheduled meeting within 30 calendar days
of receipt of any appeal.



   (L)   Administration and enforcement.



      (1)   While ownership of a project may subsequently be
transferred (in whole or in part), MPC District zoning will continue to be
implemented and maintained on the total acreage of the MPC District zoned
project. It is the responsibility of the owner to notify all prospective
purchasers of the existence of the MPC District and the MPC Zoning and
Development Plan. It is also the responsibility of the owner to initiate a
dialogue with the Director to ensure the program of development can be
administered to comply with all of the processing time frames and hearing
schedules required.



      (2)   In the event that the applicant has failed to comply
with the conditions adopted by the City Council in conjunction with the
approved MPC District and the MPC Zoning and Development Plan, the city may
enforce noncompliance as a violation of the Apache Junction City Code.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-4-3  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent and purpose. The Planned Development Overlay District
("PD") is intended allow site and building design flexibility which may not
otherwise be allowed through conventional base zoning. The intent of this
district is to enable the following:



      (1)   Provide opportunity for mixed-use development that may
include a combination of different dwelling types and/or a variety of land
uses which complement each other and which are compatible with existing and
proposed land uses in the vicinity.



      (2)   Promote the most appropriate land use.



      (3)   Facilitate adequate and economical provision of streets
and utilities.



      (4)   Facilitate flexible building design, site design, and
amenities that create a unique and more sustainable alternative to
conventional development.



   (B)   General provisions. The PD overlay district may be used in
conjunction with one or more base zoning districts. The Council's conditions
of approval associated with adoption of a PD ordinance shall be memorialized
in the PD ordinance and shall run with the land unless otherwise stated.



   (C)   Development standards.



      (1)   Minimum site area. There is no minimum site area for use
of the PD overlay district.



      (2)   Modified zoning and development standards. Zoning and
development regulations regarding setback, attached versus detached
residences, building height, lot coverage, parking, lighting, landscaping and
signage may be modified by the Council as conditions of the PD approval
subject to the Council's determination of the following criteria:



         (a)   A better design can be achieved by not applying
the strict provisions of the zoning district.



         (b)   Adherence to the strict provisions of the zoning
district is not required in order to ensure health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the development.



         (c)   Adherence to the strict provisions of the zoning
district is not required in order to ensure that property values of adjacent
properties will not be reduced.



      (3)   Land uses. In approving a PD ordinance, the Council may
restrict the types of uses otherwise allowed in the base zoning district by
requiring a limited pallet of uses as a condition of approval.



      (4)   Mixed-uses. The Council may approve a PD ordinance that
allows a mixture of multi-family residential and non-residential uses with
modified zoning and development standards. Mixed-use development is intended
to integrate office, commercial, recreational, civic, institutional and/or
residential uses to promote a broader range of service, employment and
housing options.



      (5)   Residential density.



         (a)   Density (i.e., units per acre) for residential
development shall not exceed the residential base district's maximum density
identified in Tables 5-2 and 5-4 (see Vol. II, §§ 1-5-2 and 1-5-4), nor
exceed densities provided in the General Plan's Land Use Plan Map.



         (b)   If the planned development is proposed for more
than one zoning district, the number of allowable dwelling units must be
separately calculated for each portion of the planned development that is in
a separate zone, and must then be combined to determine the number of
dwelling units allowable in the entire planned development.



   (D)   Application and approval. Requests for PD overlays shall
follow the same procedures specified for zoning amendments in Vol. II, §
1-16-6. In addition, applications requesting PD overlays shall follow the
same procedures specified for preliminary development review and approval in
Vol. II, § 1-16-8.



   (E)   PD plan changes.



      (1)   Minor modifications or alterations of the approved PD
development plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Director or designee.
Major modifications or alterations require Council approval and shall be
processed in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-6.



      (2)   The Director or designee shall interpret the proposed
modification to be major if, in the Director's opinion, the modified project
density (i.e., units per acre), setbacks or height is proposed to be
increased by more than 10%, the quality of project design is diminished, the
types of proposed land uses are significantly altered and/or the overall
character of the project is contrary to the intent and spirit of the original
City Council PD ordinance approval.



   (F)   Phased development. An approved development plan may be built
in phases as part of the project's plan, if the construction and provision of
all necessary elements, including parking, drainage, common open spaces, and
public and recreational facilities, which are shown on the approved plan,
proceed at a rate commensurate with the construction of buildings.



   (G)   Dedication and maintenance of facilities. The city may
require, as a condition of approval, those portions of the tract under
consideration be set aside, improved, conveyed or dedicated for the following
uses:



      (1)   Streets. That the rights-of-way widths as designated on
the city's Street Classification Plan be dedicated for streets and utility
purposes. Other streets necessary for access or development of adjacent
properties may also be required.



      (2)   Easements. That the owner shall grant to the city such
easements as will be required to ensure the necessary and orderly extension
of public utilities, including easements over all non-dedicated private
streets over which the city may need ingress or egress for the purpose of
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public, and for the
provision of municipal services.



      (3)   Underground utilities. All electric and telephone
facilities, cable, streetlight wiring and other wiring, conduits and similar
utilities and facilities shall be placed underground by the developer.



      (4)   Recreation facilities. The city may require that
suitable area for parks and playgrounds be set aside, improved or permanently
reserved for the public, owners, residents, employees or patrons of the
development.



   (H)   Transfer and assignments. If, during any stage of the
development, the property under application or any portion thereof is
assigned to another, then the assignee shall be bound to the requirements and
design of the approved development plan.



   (I)   Revocation for non-compliance. Failure to comply with the
approved final development plan or any prescribed condition of approval shall
constitute a violation of this Article. The Commission may, after giving
notice, hold a public hearing and recommend revocation of a base zoning
district to the City Council who may consider the recommendation and act in
the same manner as in considering any zoning request.



   (J)   Reversion. Approval of rezoning constitutes authorization for
the development of property under granted zoning. PD rezoning approval is
valid for a period of 24 months from the date of the City Council decision or
for the period of time approved by the City Council as a condition of
rezoning. If approval expires prior to substantial development upon the
rezoned property, the zoning may be subject to reversion to its former zoning
classification.



   (K)   Termination. An approved planned development may not revert to
any base district upon completion unless, and until, all requirements of the
base district are satisfied. Should the applicant of an approved planned
development wish to discontinue the planned development use upon completion,
including the continuation of the Planned Development Zoning District
designation, the process shall follow the procedure required for zoning
amendments in Vol. II, § 1-16-6.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-5:  ZONING BULK AND USE REGULATIONS



Section



   1-5-0   Introduction



   1-5-1   Residential Use Regulations



   1-5-2   Residential Bulk Regulations



   1-5-3   Non-Residential Use Regulations



   1-5-4   Non-Residential Bulk Regulations



§ 1-5-0  INTRODUCTION.



   The following tables illustrate and describe the use, structure and
bulk requirements (e.g. setbacks, density, lots size, lot coverage, building
height and lot width) for each zoning district.  The Zoning Administrator
shall be responsible for interpreting these zoning requirements.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-5-1  RESIDENTIAL USE REGULATIONS.



   Table 5-1 illustrates the use regulations for all residential zoning
districts:



TABLE 5-1: RESIDENTIAL USE REGULATIONS



 

USE/STRUCTURE TYPE
 
RS- GR
 
RS- 54
 
RS- 54M
 
RS- 20
 
RS- 20M
 
RS- 10
 
RS- 10M
 
RS-7
 
RS- 7M
 
RS-5
 
RM-1
 
RM-2
 
RM-3
 
MHP
 
RVP




Single-Family Detached Conventional Housing
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Single-Family Detached Manufactured Housing
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
CUP


Multi-Family Residential Housing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


HUD Certified Park Model Alternative
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES


Recreational Vehicle as Primary Residence16
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES


Boarding House
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO


Bed & Breakfast and Resorts
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Child Care Homes1
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO


Airports and Heliports2
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Personal Caretaker Unit3
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Property Caretaker/ Ranch Hand Unit4
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Accessory Dwelling Unit5
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Temp. Living Quarters During Construction6
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Public/Private Schools K to 1215
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Religious Institutions
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Civic Uses and Structures
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP


Above Ground Utilities7
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP


Telecom Facilities
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Lodges/Clubs
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP


Model Homes8
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP


Detached Garages9
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Accessory Structures9 (except cargo cont.)
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Equestrian Activities (private)10
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Equestrian Activities (commercial)10
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Commercial Agriculture11
 
YES
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Non-commercial Agriculture11
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Produce Sales11
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Feed Lots11
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Recreational (Indoor and Outdoor)
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Solar Panels12
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Alternate (non-solar) Energy Technologies12
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Guest Ranch
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Commercial Recycling Bins
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES


Animal Keeping
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-17


Temporary Uses and Structures
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-23


Home Occupations
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-6


Signs
 
See Vol. II, Article 1-11


Fences/Walls
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-3


Swimming Pools and Sports Courts
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-11


Cargo Containers
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-8


Outdoor Storage
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-9


Group Care Homes
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-10


Subdivision and HOA Activities
 
See Footnote # 14




 



   YES = Permitted use by right.  A YES indicates that the listed use is
permitted by-right within the respective zoning district.  Permitted uses
are subject to all other applicable standards (see Vol. II, Article 1-6,
Supplemental Regulations).



   CUP = Conditional use permit.  A CUP indicates that the listed use is
permitted within the respective zoning district only after review and
approval of a conditional use permit, in accordance with the review and
approval procedure of Vol. II, § 1-16-12(D).



   AUP = Administrative use permit.  An AUP indicates that the use and/or
structure is permitted within the respective zoning district following review
and approval of an administrative permit by the Development Services Director
or designee in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-12(C).



   NO = Prohibited uses.  A NO indicates that the listed use type is
expressly not allowed within the respective zoning district.



Footnotes from Table 5-1:



1.   This classification includes home based nursery schools, preschools,
and day care facilities for children through the age of 12 licensed by the
State of Arizona.  The maximum amount of non-resident children allowed
on-site is 6 or less.



2.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-14 for airports and helipads regulations.



3.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-20 for personal caretaker unit regulations.



4.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-7(D)(7) for property caretaker/ranch hand
regulations.



5.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-19 for accessory dwelling unit regulations.



6.   A travel trailer, motor home or fifth wheel may be parked and used as
a temporary living quarters, or an existing legal manufactured home located
on the premises may be used as a temporary residence, for up to 8 months
while a home is being constructed on a single-family residentially zoned
property subject to compliance with the main building’s setback
requirements.  The temporary quarters may be temporarily connected to
utilities subject to proper permitting (see Vol. II, § 1-6-23, Table 6-3).



7.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-21 regarding regulations for utility
installations.



8.   See Vol. II, Article 1-17 regarding model home definition and
restriction.



9.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-5 for accessory structure regulations.



10.   The keeping of horses for private use requires a minimum of 1.25
grass acres.  See Vol. II, § 1-6-7 for further equestrian regulations.



11.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-18 for agriculture use regulations.



12.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-16 for alternative energy technologies
regulations.



13.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-21 for utility installation regulations.



14.   Ancillary retail sales and special events/activities intended for
subdivision residents only.  Homeowner’s Associations shall apply for and
obtain an AUP from the Zoning Administration prior to conducting or allowing
ancillary retail sales (e.g., market days, craft/art sales, fundraisers and
temporary food vendors).  If approved, the Zoning Administrator shall issue
an AUP with written conditions of approval in accordance with the following:



   a.   All proprietors and vendors shall possess valid business
licenses and permits as required by the City Code, and comply with required
sales tax administration and collection processes.



   b.   The application for an administrative permit shall contain a
description of the ancillary retail sales activity, maximum number and type
of vendors, days and hours of operation and a site plan illustrating the
location and parking associated with the retail sales.



   c.   All signs that describe or relate to ancillary retail
activities shall not be visible from beyond the boundaries of the subdivision.



   d.   Ancillary retail sales shall be conducted indoors within the
recreational/social center or outdoors within a common area.



   e.   Parking for approved retail uses shall be accommodated within
established and approved parking areas, or with on-street parking approved by
the Zoning Administrator.



   f.   Ancillary retail sales shall be directed to and be for the
benefit of subdivision residents and their guests only.



   g.   Ancillary retail sales shall not exceed more than 3 days per
week and shall operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   h.   The administrative permit may be valid for multiple events.



   i.   Failure to comply with the conditions of approval established
in the administrative permit may result in the revocation of the permit, and
prohibition on issuing future retail sales permits to the subdivision.



Ancillary Retail Sales and Special Events/Activities Intended for Subdivision
Residents and Non-Subdivision Residents. Special events and/or activities
hosted or sponsored by the subdivisions (e.g., concerts, fund raisers,
lectures, seminars, workshops, educational classes, recreation, food/beverage
sales, sporting events and meetings) or ancillary retail uses (e.g.,
restaurants, personal care services, specialty retail and professional
offices) shall only be allowed subject to approval of a CUP or, if
applicable, compliance with Chapter 8, Vol. I of the City Code regarding
special events.



15.   Conditional use permit approval shall be required for public and
private schools unless pre-empted by state law. Charter schools located on
single-family zoned properties less than 1-acre in size shall be prohibited.



16.   See Vol. II, § 1-9-3 for recreational vehicle and manufacture home
park regulations.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-5-2  RESIDENTIAL BULK REGULATIONS.



   Table 5-2 illustrates the bulk regulations for all residential zoning
districts:



TABLE 5-2: RESIDENTIAL BULK REGULATIONS



 

USE TYPE
 
RS-GR
 
RS-54 & RS-54M
 
RS-20 & RS-20M
 
RS-10 & RS-10M
 
RS-7 & RS-7M
 
RS-5
 
RM-1
 
RM-2
 
RM-3
 
MHP
 
RV




Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 1
 
1.25 acres
 
1.25 acres
 
20,000 sf.
 
10,000 sf.
 
7,000 sf.
 
5,000 sf.
 
3,350 sf.
 
1,980 sf.
 
1,089 sf.
 
3,111 sf.
 
2,178 sf.


Maximum Density (dwelling units per acre) 3
 
0.80 units/ac
 
0.80 units/ac
 
2.18 units/ac
 
4.36 units/ac
 
6.22 units/ac
 
8.71 units/ac
 
13 units/ac
 
22 units/ac
 
40 units/ac
 
14 units/ac
 
20 units/ac


Minimum Development Area
 
Not Applicable
 
Not Applicable
 
Not Applicable
 
Not Applicable
 
Not Applicable
 
Not App- licable
 
7,000 sf.
 
7,000 sf.
 
7,000 sf.
 
10 acres
 
10 acres


Minimum Lot Width 2
 
100 ft.
 
100 ft.
 
80 ft.
 
70 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
50 ft./ space
 
30 ft./ space


Minimum Front Setback Setback (main structure)
 
40 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
8 ft.
 
3 ft.


Minimum Front Setback (accessory structure) 4
 
40 ft.
 
30 ft.8
 
25 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
8 ft.
 
3 ft.


Minimum Interior Side Setback 5 (main structure)
 
20 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
7 ft.
 
7 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
3 ft.


Minimum Street Side Setback 5 (all structures)
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
8 ft.
 
3 ft.


Minimum Side Setback (accessory structure > 120 sf.) 4
 
5 ft.
 
10 ft.9
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
3 ft.


Minimum Rear Setback (main structure)
 
40 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft.


Minimum Rear Setback (accessory structure > 120 sf.) 4
 
5 ft.
 
10 ft.9
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
3 ft.


Max. Lot Coverage6
 
30%
 
20%
 
30%
 
40%
 
50%
 
60%
 
50%
 
50%
 
70%
 
NA
 
NA


Maximum Size for Accessory Structure 7
 
No limit
 
2,000 sf. 7
 
See #7 below
 
See #7 below
 
See #7 below
 
See #7 below
 
See #7 below
 
See #7 below
 
See #7 below
 
See #7 below
 
See #7 below


Maximum Height for Main Structure
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
40 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.


Maximum Height for Accessory Structure > 120 sf.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.8
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.


Accessory Structure < 120 sf.10
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below
 
See #10 below


Accessory Dwelling Units 11
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below
 
See #11 below




 



Footnotes from Table 5-2:



1.   Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be calculated as net land
area, with the exception of the RS-GR, RS-54 and RS-54M zoning districts,
which shall be calculated as gross land area.



2.   Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width is the distance between side lot
lines measured perpendicular to the lot depth at the front setback line.
Minimum lot width measurement for flag lots shall be interpreted by the
Zoning Administrator. Lot width, as measured at the front setback line, shall
not be less than 25% of the lot depth, unless waived by the Zoning
Administrator due to unique environmental or geographic conditions.



3.   Maximum density calculation. Maximum density shall be calculated as
the total number of dwelling units/net land area, with the exception of the
RS-GR, RS-54 and RS-54M zoning districts, which shall be calculated as the
total number of dwelling units/gross land area.



4.   Setbacks for accessory structures housing livestock. Accessory
structures allowed to house large livestock (excluding equine) shall maintain
a minimum side, rear and front setback of 50 feet.  Accessory structures
allowed to house small livestock and foul shall maintain a minimum side and
rear setback of 15 feet. Structures housing equine shall be subject to the
standard accessory structure setback requirements in Vol. II, Table 5-2
above. See Vol. II, § 1-6-5 of this Chapter regarding detailed regulations
for accessory buildings, and Vol. II, § 1-6-17 of this Chapter regarding
additional regulations for housing of livestock. In no case shall an
accessory structure (excluding equine horse shades) be located between the
main building and the front lot line.



   Side and rear street setbacks for accessory structures. Side and rear
setbacks for accessory structures located along a street shall comply with
the side and rear setback requirements for the district in which the
accessory structures are located.



5.   Setback measurement. Interior side setbacks are measured from an
interior side lot line that is not abutting a public road right-of-way.
Street side setbacks are measured from a street side lot line abutting a
public road right-of-way.



6.   Lot coverage. Lot coverage is the ratio of the total footprint area
of all structures on a lot to the gross land area, typically expressed as a
percentage. The footprints of all principal and accessory structures,
including garages, carports, covered patios, and covered porches, shall be
added together in order to calculate lot coverage.



7.   Maximum size for accessory structures in the RS-GR district. There is
no size limit on accessory structures in the RS-GR district.



   Maximum size for accessory structures in the RS-54 and RS-54M district.
The maximum accessory structure size of 2,000 square feet for RS-54 and
RS-54M zoned properties may be increased to 5,000 square feet if 100% of the
property owners of adjacent properties and 50% of the property owners of
those properties within 80 feet of the adjacent properties agree with the
proposed increase through a petition that is drafted, signed and acknowledged
in accordance with Development Services Department standards. Adjacent
properties shall be defined as property adjoining the subject property and/or
property directly across the street, private road or road easement from the
subject property (see Vol. II, § 1-6-5).



   Maximum size for accessory structures in all residential districts not
zoned RS-GR and RS-54 and RS-54M. Maximum size of individual accessory
structures in all residential zoning districts, except RS-GR and RS-54, is
limited to the floor area of the main building's first floor for zoning
districts indicated in Vol. II, Table 5-2 above.



8.   Maximum height for accessory structures in the RS-54 and RS-54M
district. The maximum accessory structure height of 20 feet for RS-54 and
RS-54M zoned properties may be increased to 25 feet if 100% of the property
owners of adjacent properties and 50% of the property owners of those
properties within 80 feet of the adjacent properties agree with the proposed
increase(s) through a petition that is drafted, signed and acknowledged in
accordance with Development Services Department standards. Adjacent
properties shall be defined as property adjoining the subject property and/or
property directly across the street, private road or road easement from the
subject property (see Vol. II, § 1-6-5).



9.   Setbacks for metal sided accessory structures in RS-54 and RS-54M
district. Accessory structures with metal siding located within the RS-54 and
RS-54M zoning districts shall comply with the following unique setback
limitations:



      Metal sidewalls up to 12 feet in height shall be allowed if the
front, side and rear setbacks are at least 30 feet.



      Metal sidewalls up to 10 feet in height shall be allowed if the
side and rear setbacks are at least 20 feet, and the front setback is at
least 30 feet.



      Metal sidewalls up to 8 feet in height shall be allowed if the
side and rear setbacks are at least 10 feet, and the front setback is at
least 30 feet.



      The metal sidewall height established above may be increased to
15 feet, with a minimum 10 foot side and/or rear setback, if 100% of the
property owners of adjacent properties and 50% of the property owners of
those properties within 80 feet of the adjacent properties agree with the
proposed increase(s) through a petition that is drafted, signed and
acknowledged in accordance with Development Services Department standards.
Adjacent properties shall be defined as property adjoining the subject
property and/or property directly across the street, private road or road
easement from the subject property (see Vol. II, § 1-6-5).



10.   Accessory structures < 120 square feet. Accessory structures less
than 120 square feet in size shall not be located between the main structure
(home) and the front property line, and shall have a minimum side and rear
setback of 3 feet except that one accessory structure < 120 square feet may
be located within the side or rear setback area in the MHP and RVP districts.
See Vol. II, § 1-6-5 of this Chapter regarding additional regulations for
accessory buildings.



11.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-19 of the Chapter for regulations regarding
accessory dwelling units.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-5-3  NON-RESIDENTIAL USE REGULATIONS.



   Table 5-3 illustrates the use regulations for all non-residential
zoning districts.



TABLE 5-3: NON-RESIDENTIAL USE REGULATIONS



 

USE CATEGORY
 
SPECIFIC USE TYPE1
 
B-1
Gen.
 
B-2
Old West
 
B-3
City Cen.
 
B-44
Bus Park
 
B-54
Ind.
 
PL
Pub/Inst.




Retail Trade (NAICS Code 44- 45)
 
New Vehicle Sales/Service/Repair
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Used Vehicle Sales/Service/Repair
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


RV Sales/Service/Repair
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Manufactured/Mobile Home Sales
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
NO


Boat, ATV & Motorcycle Sales/Service
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Semi-Truck Service/Repair
 
CUP
 
YES
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Semi-Truck Stop
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Automotive Parts and Accessory Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Furniture and Home Furnishing Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Electronics and Appliance Sales/Repair
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Retail Trade (NAICS Code 44- 45)
 
Building Materials and Supplies Sales (Indoors)
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Building Materials and Supplies Sales (Indoors and/or Outdoors)
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
NO


Lawn and Garden Equipment/Supply Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Feed and Fertilizer Sales
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
NO


Nursery/Greenhouses with On-Site Sales
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Grocery, Convenience, Department Stores
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Shopping Centers
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Specialty Retail Stores
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Beer, Wine and Liquor Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Health, Pharmacy and Personal Care Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Gasoline Stations
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Gasoline Stations with Convenience Store
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Clothing and Accessories
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Jewelry, Luggage and Leather Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Retail Trade (NAICS Code 44- 45)
 
Sporting Goods, Hobby, Books and Music Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Department Stores and Warehouse Clubs
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Florist and Novelty Gift Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Office Supply Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Used Merchandise Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Pet and Pet Supply Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Art and Craft Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES


Tobacco Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Electronic Shopping and Mail- Order Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Vending Machine Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Bottled Gas Dealers
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Coal, Firewood and Biofuel Sales
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
NO


Bakery Sales (baking for store sales only)
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Medical Marijuana Facilities
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Swap Meets and Farmers Markets
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
CUP


Retail Trade (NAICS Code 44- 45)
 
Pawn Shops
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Retail Carts and Kiosks
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
NO
 
AUP


Printing Shop
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Finance and Insurance (NAICS Code 52)
 
Finance and Insurance Office/Sales/Brokers
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Banks and Credit Unions
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Financing Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Securities/Commodities Office/Sales/Exchanges
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Check Casing Store
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Real Estate, Rental and Leasing (NAICS Code 53)
 
Real Estate Office, Agents and Brokers
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Vehicle Rental and Leasing
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Machinery and Equip. Rental (Indoor)
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Machinery and Equipment Rental (Indoor/Outdoor)
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Professional, Scientific and Tech. (NAICS Code 54)
 
Legal and Accounting
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Engineering/Surveying
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Architectural
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Planning and Design
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Consulting
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Scientific Research
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Advertising and Public Relations
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Photography
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Veterinary
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Education Services (NAICS Code 61)
 
All Types of Schools
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Educational Support Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Health Care and Social Assistance (NAICS Code 62)
 
Physicians, Dental and Health Practitioners
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Outpatient Care Centers
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Medical and Diagnostic Labs
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Home Health Care Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Ambulatory Health Care Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Blood and Organ Banks
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


General Medical and Surgical Hospitals
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Psychiatric & Substance Abuse Facilities
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Nursing and Residential Care Facilities
 
YES
 
YES
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Individual and Family Care Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Homeless Shelter
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Community Food and Relief Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Vocational Rehab Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Child Day Care Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Arts, Entertainment and Recreation (NAICS Code 71)
 
Performing Arts Facilities
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES


Spectator Sports Facilities
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Museums and Historical Sites
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
YES


Zoos, Nature Parks and Botanical Gardens
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
CUP


Amusement Parks
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
CUP


Indoor Arcades
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Gambling Facilities
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
CUP


Private Recreational Facilities (Outdoor)
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
CUP


Private Recreational Facilities (Indoor)
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
CUP


Public Recreational Facilities
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP


Public Outdoor Music Festivals/Events
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP
 
AUP


Private Outdoor Music Festivals/Events
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
CUP


Accommodation and Food Services (NAICS Code 72)
 
Hotels, Motels, and Bed & Breakfast Inns
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


RV Parks and Campgrounds
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO


Rooming and Boarding Houses
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Full Service Restaurants
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
CUP


Limited Service Restaurants
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
CUP


Delicatessen
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
CUP


Caterers
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Confectionary and Ice Cream Sales
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Drinking Places (serving alcohol)
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Restaurants/Bars/Clubs (With Amplified Outdoor Music)
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO


Other Services (NAICP Code 81)
 
General Automotive Repair
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Body Shops
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Car Washes
 
YES
 
YES
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Electronic Equipment Maintenance & Repair
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Business Equipment Maintenance and Repair
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Furniture Repair and Maintenance
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Footwear and Leather Goods Repair
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Personal and Household Goods Repair
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Laundry and Dry Cleaning Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Other Services (NAICP Code 81)
 
Hair, Nails and Skin Care Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Tattoo Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Death Care Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
NO


Cemeteries and Crematories
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
CUP


Linen and Uniform Supply
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Pet Care
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Animal Hospitals and Kennels
 
YES
 
YES
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Taxidermist
 
CUP
 
YES
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Photo Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Commercial Parking Lots and Garages
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Religious and Fraternal Organizations
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Social Advocacy Organizations
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Human Rights Organizations
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Conservation Organizations
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Business and Prof. Organizations
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Other Services (NAICP Code 81)
 
Labor Organizations
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Political Organizations
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Commercial Equestrian Boarding, Rentals, Arenas and Academies
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Public Admin. (NAICS Code 92)
 
Government Offices and Courts
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Detention/Correctional Facilities
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Correctional Institutions
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Mining, Quarrying Gas and Oil (NAICS Code 21)
 
Oil and Gas Extraction
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Mining
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Quarrying
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Utilities (NAICS Code 22)
 
Electric Power Generation 3
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Water and Sewerage Systems/Facilities
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Other Utilities
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-21


Alternative Energy Generation Facilities
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-16


Manufacturing (NAICS Code 31- 33)
 
Food Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Animal Slaughtering
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Beverage Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Tobacco Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Textile Mills
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Apparel Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Leather/Allied Product Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Wood Product Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Paper Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Printing and Publishing (Non- Retail)
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Chemical Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Plastics and Rubber Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Non-Metallic Mineral Product Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Primary Metal Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Manufacturing (NAICS Code 31- 33)
 
Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Foundries
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Machinery Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Computer & Electronic Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Elec. Equip./Appliance Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Transportation Equip. Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Miscellaneous Manufacturing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Ancillay Manufacturing 2
 
YES 2
 
YES 2
 
YES 2
 
NA
 
NA
 
YES


Wholesale Trade (NAICS Code 42)
 
Durable Goods
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Non-Durable Goods
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Construction (NAICS Code 23)
 
Contractors office, shop and/or storage (indoors)
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Contractors office, shop and/or storage (indoors and/or outdoors)
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
NO


Craftsman and Artisan (Indoors)
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Craftsman and Artisan (Indoors or outdoors)
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
CUP


Transportation and Warehousing (NAICS Code 48- 49)
 
Truck Transportation Terminal
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Bus Transportation Terminal
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Air Transportation Terminal
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Taxi and Limousine Service
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Towing Truck Parking and Storage
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
YES
 
NO


Scenic and Sightseeing Terminal/Parking
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Postal, Courier and Delivery Service
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
CUP


General Warehouse and Storage (Indoor)
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Mini-Warehouse
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Distribution Facilities
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Outside Storage Yards
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
CUP
 
YES
 
NO


Information (NAICS Code 51)
 
Newspaper, Periodical and Book Publishing
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Motion Pictures and Sound Recording Indus.
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Broadcasting and Recording
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Telecommunications
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Data Processing
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Waste Management and Remediation (NAICS Code 56)
 
Office Administration Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Employment Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Business Support Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Travel Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Investigation and Security Services
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Cleaning, Landscaping and Exterminating Serv.
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Waste Management and Remediation Serv.
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Agriculture (NAICS Code 11)
 
Crop Production
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Greenhouse and Nursery
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO


Beef, Dairy, Sheep, Goat and Hog Production
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
NO


Poultry and Egg Production
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Aquaculture
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Residential Uses
 
Single-Family Detached Residential
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


Multi-Family Residential
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP


Assisted Living Facility
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
NO
 
CUP


Group Care Home
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
YES


Live/Work Unit
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP


Misc. Uses, Structures & Installations
 
Solar Panels 3
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


Alternate Energy Production Facilities 3
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Waste Tire Collection and/or Storage
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Adult Oriented Uses
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
NO


Outdoor Activities
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Helipads
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Temp. Uses/Structures
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-23


Signs
 
See Vol. II, Article 1-11


Lighting
 
See Vol. II, Article 1-10


Landscaping
 
See Vol. II, Article 1-8


Parking
 
See Vol. II, Article 1-7


Solar Panels
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-16


Fences/Walls
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-3


Mobile Food Services
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-23


Cargo Containers
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-8


Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Activities
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-9




 



YES = Permitted use by right.  A Yes indicates that the listed use is
permitted by-right within the respective zoning district.



CUP = Conditional use permit.  A CUP indicates that the listed use is
permitted within the respective zoning district only after review and
approval of a conditional use permit, in accordance with the review and
approval procedures of Vol. II § 1-16-12(D).



AUP = Administrative use permit.  An AUP indicates that the use and/or
structure is permitted within the respective zoning district following review
and approval of an administrative permit by the Development Services Director
or designee in accordance with Vol. II § 1-16-12(C).



NO = Prohibited uses.  A No indicates that the listed use type is expressly
not allowed within the respective zoning district.



Footnotes from Table 5-3:



1.   Definitions and/or descriptions of these uses are provided in the
North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS").  The city will use
the NAICS classification system to assist with defining and interpreting
non-residential uses. Where NAICS definitions are not provided or unclear,
the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for interpretation.



2.   An ancillary manufacturing use is a subsidiary or secondary use or
operation connected to the main use of a building. Ancillary manufacturing
uses identified in manufacturing sectors 31-33 of the 2012 North American
Industry Classification System ("NAICS") shall be allowed in the B-1, B-2 or
B-3 zoning districts if incidental and subordinate to the primary retail,
office, public or quasi/public use, provided that not more than 50%, up to a
maximum of 1,500 square feet, of the floor area of the business is engaged in
these ancillary manufacturing activities. No outside manufacturing,
processing, repair or equipment/inventory storage shall be allowed for
ancillary uses (see Vol. II, § 1-6-26).



Ancillary manufacturing uses proposed to be greater than 1,500 square feet
and/or 50% of the total floor area may be approved as a conditional use by
the Planning and Zoning Commission (see Vol. II, § 1-6-26).



3.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-16 (B) for alternate energy production
regulations.



4.   Land uses listed in the B-4 and B-5 district that propose outdoor
assembly, repair, manufacturing, processing and/or storage shall require
conditional use permit approval even if identified in Vol. II, Table 5-3
above as a permitted use by right.



5.   See Vol. II, § 1-6-15 for adult oriented business regulations.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-5-4  NON-RESIDENTIAL BULK REGULATIONS.



   Table 5-4 illustrates the bulk requirements for all non-residential
zoning districts.



TABLE 5-4:  NON-RESIDENTIAL BULK REGULATIONS



 

USE TYPE4
 
B-1 General
 
B-2 Old West
 
B-3 City Cen.
 
B-4 Bus. Park
 
B-5 Industrial
 
PI Public/Inst.




Minimum Lot Area1
 
7,000 sf.
 
5,000 sf.
 
7,000 sf.
 
15,000 sf.
 
15,000 sf.
 
15,000 sf.


Minimum Lot Width2
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
75 ft.
 
75 ft.
 
75 ft.


Maximum Residential Density3
 
22 units/ac
 
22 units/ac
 
40 units/ac
 
Not Applicable
 
Not Applicable
 
22 units/ac


Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit
 
1,980 sf.
 
1,980 sf.
 
1,089 sf.
 
Not Applicable
 
Not Applicable
 
1,980 sf.


Minimum Front Setback (main structure)
 
20 ft.
 
0 ft.
 
0 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.


Minimum Front Setback (accessory structure)
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.


Minimum Interior Side Setback (accessory structure)
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.


Minimum Street Side Setback (all structures)
 
10 ft.
 
0 ft.
 
0 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.


Minimum Rear Setback (all structures)
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.


Minimum Front Setback (Parking)
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.


Maximum Size for Accessory Structure
 
No limit
 
No limit
 
No limit
 
No limit
 
No limit
 
No limit


Maximum Height for Main Structure
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.


Maximum Height for Accessory Structures
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.




 



Footnotes from Table 5-4:



1.   Minimum lot area shall be calculated as net land area.



2.   Minimum lot width is the distance between side lot lines measured
perpendicular to the lot depth at the front setback line. Minimum lot width
measurement for flag lots shall be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator.
Lot width, as measured at the front setback line, shall not be less than 25%
of the lot depth, unless waived by the Zoning Administrator due to unique
environmental or geographic conditions.



3.   Maximum density shall be calculated as the total number of dwelling
units/net land area.



4.   In addition to the standards listed in Vol. II, Table 5-4 above, the
following supplemental standards shall apply to Institutional and Business
Zoning Districts.



   Fences and Walls: See Vol. II, § 1-6-3.



   Landscaping and Screening: See Vol. II, Article 1-8.



   Lighting and Illumination: See Vol. II, Article 1-10.



   Parking and Loading: See Vol. II, Article 1-7.



   Outdoor Storage: See Vol. II, § 1-6-9.



   Cargo Containers: See Vol. II, § 1-6-8.



   Solar Panels and Alternative Energy: See Vol. II, § 1-6-16.



   Signs: See Vol. II, Article 1-11.



   Visibility at Intersections: See Vol. II, § 1-6-13.



   Temporary Use and Structures: See Vol. II, § 1-6-23.



   Design Guidelines: See Vol. II, Article 1-13.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-6:  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS



Section



   1-6-0   Introduction



   1-6-1   Setbacks



   1-6-2   Height exceptions



   1-6-3   Fences and walls



   1-6-4   Lot sizes



   1-6-5   Accessory structures



   1-6-6   Home based occupations



   1-6-7   Equestrian activities and uses



   1-6-8   Cargo containers



   1-6-9   Outdoor storage, display and activities



   1-6-10   Group care homes



   1-6-11   Swimming pools, water features and sports courts



   1-6-12   Medical marijuana



   1-6-13   Visibility at intersections



   1-6-14   Airports and helipads



   1-6-15   Adult oriented businesses



   1-6-16   Alternate energy structures and equipment



   1-6-17   Animal regulations



   1-6-18   Agriculture



   1-6-19   Accessory dwelling units



   1-6-20   Personal caretakers units



   1-6-21   Public and private utilities



   1-6-22   Gravel pits and quarries



   1-6-23   Temporary uses and structures



   1-6-24   Homeowners associations and common facility maintenance



   1-6-25   Model homes



   1-6-26   Ancillary manufacturing uses



   1-6-27   Stormwater management



§ 1-6-0  INTRODUCTION.



   Supplemental regulations shall be used in conjunction with the zoning
district standards identified in Vol. II, Article 1-5.  When a conflict
exists between zoning district standards, supplemental regulations, or an
approved PD (Planned Development) ordinance, or the MPC (Master Planned
Community) ordinance, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-1  SETBACKS.



   (A)   Averaging. Where a lot adjoins another lot(s) having existing
front setbacks less than the minimum required by the zoning district, the
minimum front setback for the lot shall be the average of the existing front
setback on the two adjoining lots, or if only one of the lots is built upon,
the front setback of the adjoining lot and the minimum front setback of the
zone, provided no such front setback shall be less than 10 feet.



   (B)   Undersized lots of record. Side setbacks for lots with legal
non-conforming widths that existed prior to the effective date of this
Chapter may be proportionately reduced in accordance with the average between
the required and the existing lot width. For example, if the required lot
width is 100 feet and the existing lot width is 80 feet, a required 10 foot
side setback may be adjusted to 8 feet (i.e., (80'/100') x 10 foot setback).



   (C)   Permitted encroachments. The following items may encroach into
the main structure setback areas subject to compliance with the Building Code:



      (1)   Decks and patio slabs less than 30 inches high may
encroach within the side or rear setback area, but shall maintain a minimum 3
foot setback from the property line or RV/manufactured home unit space line.



      (2)   Bay windows, chimneys, non-enclosed steps/stairs,
heating/cooling units, eaves, and gutters may encroach up to 2 feet into
setback areas, subject to compliance with the Building Code. No such
encroachment is allowed in the MHP (Manufactured Home Park) and RVP
(Recreational Vehicle Park) zoning districts.



   (D)   Exemptions. The following items are exempt from zoning setback
requirements but may be subject to Building Code or Health Code requirements:



      (1)   Septic systems, wells and underground utilities.



      (2)   Yard and service lighting fixtures or poles.



      (3)   Landscaping.



      (4)   Flagpoles.



      (5)   Mailboxes.



      (6)   Clotheslines if located to the side or rear of the house.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-2  HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.



   Zoning district height limits shall not apply to chimneys, flag poles,
observation towers, non-commercial radio or television antennas, silos,
smokestacks, transmission towers, windmills and power transmission poles,
water tanks, fire/hose towers, steeples, spires, bell towers, parapet walls
up to 4 feet above the maximum permitted building height and industrial
structures where the manufacturing process requires a greater height.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-3  FENCES AND WALLS.



   (A)   Fence and wall requirements. Table 6-1 below specifies the
requirements for fences and walls in residential zoning districts, and Table
6-2 below specifies the requirements in non-residential districts.



TABLE 6-1:  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR FENCES AND WALLS



 

Height of Fence or Wall
 
Setback Requirement
 
Design


0 to 4 feet
 
No minimum front, side or rear setback is required.
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-3(B)


4.1 to 6 feet
 
Front Setback.  No minimum front setback is required if the portion of the
fence or wall between 4 and 6 feet is transparent.  If the portion of the
fence or wall above 4 feet is not transparent, the zoning district's minimum
front setback for main structures is required.

Side and Rear Setback.  No minimum side or rear setback is required for
either transparent or non-transparent fences/walls between 4 and 6 feet in
height.
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-3(B)


6.1 to 8 feet
 
Subject to main structure's minimum front, side and rear setback.
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-3(B)


Above 8 feet
 
Fences and walls higher than 8 feet are not allowed.
 
See Vol. II, § 1-6-3(B)



 



TABLE 6-2: NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR FENCES AND WALLS



 

Type of Fence or Wall
 
Height of Fence or Wall
 
Setback Requirement
 
Design


Parking Screen Wall1
 
3 foot minimum to 4 foot maximum
 
Front Setback: 10 feet.
 
Decorative wall.


Patio Enclosure
 
4 foot maximum in front yard.

 

 

8 foot maximum in side and rear yard.
 
Front Setback. 10 feet in B-1 and B-4 districts; no minimum setback in B-2
and B-3 districts.

 

Side or Rear Setback.  No minimum required.
 
Decorative wall or fence.


Front Yard Screen Wall1
 
4.1 foot minimum to 8 foot maximum
 
Front Setback.  Subject to main structure's minimum requirements.
 
Decorative wall.


Side and Rear Yard Screen Wall1
 
6 foot minimum to 8 foot maximum

 

Higher than 8 feet
 
Side or Rear Setback.  No minimum required.

 

Side or Rear Setback.  Subject to main structure's minimum requirement.
 
Opaque wall shall be required and shall be painted or stained with an earth
tone color.



 



1   See Vol. II, § 1-8-6 for mandatory screen wall requirements.



   (B)   Non-decorative fences and walls. Non-decorative walls and
fences are required to be constructed of approved materials, which mean
materials normally manufactured for, used as, and recognized as, exterior
fencing or wall materials such as: wrought iron or other decorative metals,
ornamental aluminum and PVC, fired masonry, concrete, stone, chain link, wood
planks, split rail, vinyl slats or composite plastic manufactured
specifically as wall or fencing materials. Fence materials must be
manufactured for exterior use and shall be weather and decay-resistant.



      (1)   Alternative fence material may be approved by the
Director or designee upon a finding that the proposed material complies with
the intent of the provisions of this Code and that the fence material is at
least the equivalent of that prescribed in this section in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.



      (2)   Prohibited fence materials include: rope; string; wire
products including but not limited to chicken wire, wire fabric, and similar
welded or woven wire fabrics; chain; netting; dangerous cut or broken glass;
paper; unapproved corrugated metal panels; galvanized sheet metal; plywood;
or fiberglass panels in any fence or any other materials that are not
manufactured specifically as fencing materials. The Director may require the
applicant to provide the manufacturer's standards to establish the intended
use of a proposed fencing material.



   (C)   Decorative fences and walls.



      (1)   Decorative fences include wrought iron, picket, split
rail, post and rail, ornamental aluminum and ornamental plastic type fences,
but do not include wire, stockade or chain link type fences.



      (2)   Decorative walls include architectural block, brick,
split faced block, split faced veneer, stucco or slump block that is painted
or stained with an earth-tone color, but do not include standard concrete
block.



   (D)   Design standards for non-residential and multi-family zoning
districts. Fences and walls located between the main structure and the road
shall be designed as a decorative wall. Fences and walls located in the side
or rear yards shall be stained or painted with an earth tone color approved
by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Visibility at intersections. The location and height of fences
and walls shall comply with Vol. II, § 1-6-13 (i.e., visibility at
intersections).



   (F)   Entry gateway. One entry gateway, trellis, or other entry
structure is permitted in the front setback area of lots within the RS-GR,
RS-54 and RS-54M districts, provided the maximum height or width of the
structure does not exceed 16 feet.



   (G)   Nonconforming fences. Any fence which does not meet the
standards of this section but which was established prior to the effective
date of this Chapter may be eligible to be recognized as legal nonconforming,
provided the owner proves legal nonconforming status pursuant to the
procedures established in Vol. II, § 1-2-5 (i.e., nonconforming uses,
structures and lots) of this Chapter, and provided the fence is not expanded
or its nonconformance with these standards otherwise increased. Any fence
which is destroyed or damaged to the extent of more than 50% of its total
replacement value shall not be repaired, rebuilt or reconstructed except in
conformance with the standards of this section. Any future fence constructed
subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter, that does not comply with
this section shall be considered illegal and nonconforming.



   (H)   Dangerous fences.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain
within the city any fence which, by determination of the Director or
designee, is, or may be, dangerous to persons, children or animals due to
design, construction, materials, maintenance or placement.



      (2)   Barbed and razor wire fences. Fences with strands of
barbed and razor wire shall not be permitted, except as follows:



         (a)   Residential districts. Barbed wire fencing shall
be allowed for the keeping of livestock in those residential zoning districts
that allow livestock, and shall not be erected or maintained within 10 feet
of any public place or public right-of-way, public easement or reservation
for roadway purposes.



         (b)   Non-residential districts. Barbed wire, razor wire
or concertina wire shall be allowed subject to installation at least 6 feet
above the ground and only erected at the top of an approved fence or wall,
and shall only be allowed on buildings if non-visible from public view. If
the fence is inclined, it shall project over private property. Fences or
walls with barbed wire shall not be allowed within the front setback area.



         (c)   Spacing. Barbed wire fencing less than 6 feet high
shall be secured to posts or other supporting structure not more than 8 feet
from each other.



      (3)   Electric fences. Electrically charged fences shall not
be erected or allowed to remain except as follows:



         (a)   Electrically charged fences shall be permitted
only in the RS-GR, RS-54 and RS-54M zoning districts and shall be erected and
maintained only for the keeping of livestock.



         (b)   All electrically charged fences shall be
completely enclosed within another permitted fence.



   (I)   Measuring fence and wall height. Fence and wall height is
measured as the vertical distance from the grade immediately under the
structure to the top of the structure. When measuring fence and wall heights
on properties which are characterized by notable topographical features, such
as properties with slopes, elevation deviations, washes, swales, rock
outcrops and other like features, building and code officers and/or
inspectors shall look for reasonable compliance with fence/wall height
standards. On these properties, some variations in fence/wall heights are
expected and allowed.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-4  LOT SIZES.



   (A)   Reduction in lot size. No lot or parcel of land shall be
reduced in size below the minimum lot area or lot width required by the
zoning district in which it is located or be in conflict with an approved PD
ordinance; and no building permit shall be issued for such deficient parcel
unless said parcel was legally established prior to the effective date of
this Chapter.



   (B)   Reduction in lot size for public purpose. Lots reduced in area
by purchase, dedication or gift to a governing authority for the purposes of
providing public rights-of-way, or for conveying a portion of a lot to a
public governing authority for a publicly beneficial use, shall be allowed to
be less than the required minimum lot size subject to City Council approval.



   (C)   Increased density. No lot shall be divided in such a way that
any division of such lot shall contain more dwelling units than are permitted
by the zoning district in which such lot is situated.



   (D)   Minor land splits. The division of land into 2 or 3 parcels
shall require approval of a land split in compliance with Apache Junction
City Code, Vol. II, Chapter 2, Subdivision Regulations.



   (E)   Subdivisions. The division of land into 4 or more parcels
shall require approval of a subdivision in compliance with Apache Junction
City Code, Vol. II, Chapter 2, Subdivision Regulations.



   (F)   Buildings straddling lot lines. Where 2 or more lots are used
as a building site and where legal non-conforming buildings cross lot lines,
the entire area shall be considered 1 lot and may require a lot combination
process through Pinal County.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-5  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Zoning standards. Dimensional standards for accessory
structures are set forth in Tables 5-2 and 5-4 (see Vol. II, §§ 1-5-2 and
1-5-4). The information provided below establishes additional requirements
and standards that are not identified in the zoning tables.



   (B)   Accessory structures constructed prior to main building.



      (1)   An accessory structure may be constructed upon a lot
prior to the construction of the main building for the purpose of storing
tools, building materials or household goods, provided that construction of
the main building is commenced within 6 months after completion of the
accessory structure, and provided that no accessory structure shall be used
for dwelling purposes, including sleeping, living, or cooking activities. See
Vol. II, § 1-5-1, Table 5-1 for temporary living quarters regulations during
construction.



      (2)   Legally existing accessory structures may be permitted
to remain without the establishment of a main building at the time of
subdivision/land split/zoning approval subject to the following:



         (a)   The accessory structure is locked and made safe
with all openings being boarded up prior to the establishment of the main use.



         (b)   The accessory structure is not used for storage or
any other purpose prior to the securing of a permit for the establishment of
the main use.



         (c)   The accessory structure is in compliance with city
building and zoning codes.



         (d)   The accessory structure is not being used for
dwelling purposes, including sleeping, living, or cooking activities.



   (C)   Utility connections. Accessory structures may be connected to
utilities with the appropriate permits.



   (D)   Minimum distance requirement. Accessory buildings shall be
located a minimum of 6 feet from other buildings.



   (E)   MHP (manufactured home park) or RVP (recreational vehicle
park). One accessory structure less than or equal to 120 square feet may be
located within the side or rear setback area. Additional accessory structures
shall be subject to the setback requirements set forth in Vol. II, § 1-5-2,
Table 5-2.



   (F)   Setback requirement. Minimum setbacks for accessory structures
are identified in Tables 5-2 and 5-4 (see Vol. II, §§ 1-5-2 and 1-5-4).



   (G)   Height requirement. Maximum heights for accessory structures
are identified in Tables 5-2 and 5-4 (see Vol. II, §§ 1-5-2 and 1-5-4).



   (H)   Lot coverage requirement. Maximum lot coverage is identified
in Tables 5-2 and 5-4 (see Vol. II, §§ 1-5-2 and 1-5-4). Lot coverage is
the ratio of the total footprint area of all structures on a lot to the lot
area, typically expressed as a percentage. The footprints of all principal
and accessory structures, including garages, carports, covered patios, and
covered porches, shall be added together in order to calculate lot coverage.



   (I)   Size requirement. Maximum size of individual accessory
structures is identified in Tables 5-2 and 5-4 (see Vol. II, §§ 1-5-2 and
1-5-4).



   (J)   Design requirements.



      (1)   RS-GR, MHP and RVP zoned residential property. There are
no design requirements.



      (2)   Business and public-institutional zoned property (i.e.,
B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5 and PI Districts):  The design of accessory
buildings is subject to the applicable commercial design standards identified
in Vol. II, §§ 1-13-3(A) and 1-13-3(B).



      (3)   Residential property not zoned RS-GR, RS-54, MHP and RV.



         (a)   Residential zoning districts, except RS-GR, RS-54,
MHP and RVP zoned property, shall have at least 75% of each exterior wall of
a metal building covered with supplemental building materials including, but
not limited to, wood, masonry, stucco or brick that are compatible and
consistent with the main dwelling structure.



         (b)   The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether
the accessory structure's proposed design and exterior façade is compatible
and consistent with the main structure.



      (4)   RS-54 and RS-54M zoned residential property. The
following design requirements shall uniquely apply to property zoned RS-54
and RS-54M:



         (a)   Non-painted galvanized metal siding and corrugated
fiberglass siding shall be prohibited. An accessory structure of corrugated
metal or fiberglass having a semicircular cross section that curves down to
form walls or attach to walls shall be prohibited (e.g. quonset huts).



         (b)   Permitted metal sided structures shall be treated
with earth tone factory applied paint.



         (c)   Accessory structures with metal siding proposed to
be located within the RS-54 and RS-54M zoning districts shall comply with the
following unique setback limitations:



            1.   Metal sidewalls up to 12 feet in height shall
be allowed if the front, side and rear setbacks are at least 30 feet.



            2.   Metal sidewalls up to 10 feet in height shall
be allowed if the side and rear setbacks are at least 20 feet, and the front
setback is at least 30 feet.



            3.   Metal sidewalls up to 8 feet in height shall
be allowed if the side and rear setbacks are at least 10 feet, and the front
setback is at least 30 feet.



   (K)   Modifications.



      (1)   Conditional use permit. In all zoning districts, size,
height, design and setback requirements for accessory structures may be
modified by CUP approval in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-12(D)(4).



      (2)   Neighborhood petition. In the RS-54 and RS-54M
districts, metal sidewall height may be increased to 15 feet with a minimum
10 foot side and/or rear setback; and/or building height may be increased to
25 feet; and/or maximum accessory structure size may be increased to 5,000
square feet if 100% of the property owners of adjacent properties and 50% of
the property owners of those properties within 80 feet of the adjacent
properties agree with the proposed increase(s) through a neighborhood
petition that is drafted, signed and acknowledged in accordance with
Development Services Department standards. ADJACENT PROPERTIES shall be
defined as property adjoining the subject property and/or property directly
across the street, private road or road easement from the subject property.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-6  HOME BASED OCCUPATIONS.



   Home based occupations shall be subordinate and incidental to the
primary residential use and shall be subject to the following standards:



   (A)   Required license and permit. A business license and
administrative use permit ("AUP") shall be issued by the city prior to
operation of the home occupation.



   (B)   Employee. No more than one non-resident employee shall be
working on-site at any given time.



   (C)   Outdoor storage or display. There shall be no external storage
or display of inventory and/or products associated with the home occupation.



   (D)   Customer/client traffic. There shall be no more than 10
customer/client vehicles per day to the residence. Customer and client
traffic shall only be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



   (E)   Client and customer parking. Any short-term employee or
client/customer parking shall occur in the driveway of the home occupation
property or on the street immediately in front of the residence if permitted
by the city. There shall be no more than 4 client or customer vehicles parked
in the driveway or parked on the adjacent street at any one time.



   (F)   Motor vehicles. No vehicle associated with the home occupation
that exceeds a gross vehicle weight of 24,000 pounds (e.g. dump truck or
semi-cab size) shall be parked on the property. All vehicles parked overnight
on the property must be licensed and registered to the property owner. The
property shall not be used for parking or staging of business related
vehicles not owned by or licensed to the property owner.



   (G)   Indoor operation. The home occupation shall be conducted
indoors and shall not produce a noise, odor, vibration, glare, or light that
is noticeable beyond the property line for single-family zoning districts,
beyond the adjoining walls for multi-family zoning districts, or beyond the
unit spaces of manufactured home and trailer parks, as determined by the
Director or designee.



   (H)   Hazardous activities and materials. If, in the opinion of the
Building Official, Police Chief and/or Fire Chief, any home occupation is
deemed to be or becomes dangerous or unsafe, or presents a safety hazard to
the public, or presents a safety hazard to adjacent or nearby properties,
residents or businesses, the city may deny or revoke the AUP for the home
occupation and take necessary action to terminate the dangerous or unsafe
condition.



   (I)   Maximum floor area. The home occupation shall not occupy more
than 25% of the residence's gross floor area and 200 square feet of an
enclosed workshop/garage.



   (J)   Deliveries and pickups. Deliveries and pick-ups shall be those
normally associated with residential services (e.g., UPS, FedEx or Post
Office) and shall only occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
daily.



   (K)   Owner operator. The person operating the home occupation shall
be a resident of the property.



   (L)   Signs. One nameplate sign or cornerstone up to 4 square feet
in size may be attached to the residential building.



   (M)   Enforcement. Failure to comply with these home occupation
standards may result in the city revoking the AUP for the home occupation.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-7  EQUESTRIAN ACTIVITIES AND USES.



   (A)   Intent. The following regulations shall be applicable to the
keeping of horses and all other members of the equine family including
donkeys and mules. See Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 6, for
non-zoning regulations pertaining to the keeping of animals.



   (B)   Non-business equine regulations. The following regulations
shall be applicable to the keeping of horses for personal use in the city:



      (1)   Allowed zoning districts. All single-family (i.e., RS)
residential zoning districts.



      (2)   Minimum lot area. 1.25 gross acres.



      (3)   Maximum number of equine. No limit as long as the equine
are owned by the residents or owners of the property.



      (4)   Horse training. Horse training, but not boarding, as an
incidental business use shall be allowed.



      (5)   Accessory buildings and structures. Barns and stables
that house equine shall maintain a minimum 50 foot side, rear and front
setback. Horse shades shall maintain the minimum accessory building setbacks
as indicated in Vol. II, § 1-5-2, Table 5-2.



   (C)   Horse rental stables. Commercial horse rental stables include
any enterprise providing horses and equipment rented on a temporary basis,
and wherein the rented horses are permitted to be ridden away from the
property either by individual renters, with a group or with a guide. The
following regulations shall be applicable to commercial horse rental stables
in the city.



      (1)   Allowed zoning districts. Horse rental stables shall
only be allowed in the RS-GR, RS-54 and RS-54M zoning districts.



      (2)   Minimum lot area. 10 gross acres.



      (3)   Maximum number of horses. No limit.



      (4)   Accessory buildings and structures. Barns and stables
that house equine shall maintain a minimum 50 foot side, rear and front
setback. Horse shades and mare motels shall maintain the minimum accessory
building setbacks as indicated in Vol. II, § 1-5-2, Table 5-2.



      (5)   Permit required. A CUP shall be required prior to
constructing and operating a commercial rental stable.



   (D)   Commercial horse boarding regulations. The following
regulations shall be applicable to commercial house boarding within the city.



      (1)   Allowed zoning districts. Commercial horse boarding
shall only be allowed in the RS-GR, RS-54 and RS-54M zoning districts.



      (2)   Minimum lot area. 2.5 gross acres.



      (3)   Maximum number of horses. None.



      (4)   Permit required. A CUP and business license shall be
required prior to any new commercial horse boarding business being
established in the city subsequent to February 3, 2011.



      (5)   Accessory buildings and structures. Barns and stables
that house equine shall maintain a minimum 50 foot side, rear and front
setback. Horse shades shall maintain the minimum accessory building setbacks
in Vol. II, § 1-5-2, Table 5-2.



      (6)   Horse trailer parking.



         (a)   Licensed horse trailers owned by horse boarders
may be parked on a commercial horse boarding property subject to the number
of horse trailers not exceeding the total number of horses being boarded
on-site. The parking and/or storage of a horse trailer at a specific boarding
facility shall not be permitted unless the owner of the trailer has a horse
boarded at the facility at the same time. Horse trailers shall be set back a
minimum of 4 feet from adjacent properties and 25 feet from public road
rights-of-way. Trailers shall be parked in a manner that does not interfere
with safe traffic circulation and visibility as determined by the Director or
designee.



         (b)   Prior to parking horse trailers on a commercial
horse boarding property, the property owner/operator shall submit to the
Development Services Department a properly scaled and dimensioned site plan
that illustrates all existing buildings, setbacks and the location and layout
of the parking area for horse trailers. The Development Services Director, or
designee, shall review the plan and either approve, modify and approve, or
disapprove the parking site plan based on an evaluation of safe traffic
circulation and compliance with the standards identified above. Failure by
the owner and/or operator of a boarding facility to operate and comply with
this section shall be grounds for possible revocation of the business license
of the facility.



      (7)   Property caretaker/ranch hand accommodations. One
seasonal or full-time commercial horse boarding ranch hand, along with his or
her family, shall be allowed to reside on-site. The primary purpose and
responsibility of the ranch hand is to assist in the management and care of
the commercial horse boarding facility. The ranch hand shall be allowed to
live in the main residential building or within a travel trailer, motor home
or 5th wheel RV unit on-site. The RV may be permanently connected to waste,
water, gas, and/or electrical service, or may operate as a self-contained
unit. Construction of a conventionally built home to accommodate the ranch
may also be allowed in accordance with the accessory dwelling unit standards
in Vol. II, § 1-6-19 of this Chapter.



      (8)   Restroom facilities. An operator of a commercial horse
boarding facility with an on-site residence may allow the restroom facilities
of the residence to be used by patrons of the facility. Alternatively, the
owner/operator may provide a portable chemical toilet ("porta-potty") subject
to Development Services Department review and approval of a site plan that
illustrates the location and screening of the toilet.



      (9)   Health and sanitation. The operator of a horse boarding
facility shall comply with all regulations for health and safety, sanitation,
odor vector control and other related issues.



      (10)   Related events. Social events and parties shall be
subject to the same noise, parking, traffic and health and safety regulations
applied to other residential properties within the city.



      (11)   Hours of operation. Horse boarding businesses shall be
allowed to operate 24 hours/day, 7 days/week.



      (12)   Additional commercial services allowed. Riding lessons
and horse training services shall be allowed on licensed and approved
commercial horse boarding properties. Commercial horse boarding facilities
may also accommodate veterinarian, farrier, horse care specialists, and
equine services visits to serve horses kept both on-site and off-site.



      (13)   Sign requirements. Commercial horse boarding facilities
shall be allowed one detached, double-sided, 32-square-foot sign to include
the name of the facility and the property address. The sign may be externally
lit, shall comply with Dark Sky regulations, shall not be animated and shall
be setback a minimum of 10 feet from the road right-of-way and side lot lines.



      (14)   Runoff and waste management. Commercial horse boarding
facilities shall control the runoff of equine waste material from encroaching
onto adjacent properties or rights-of-way.



   (E)   Camping for horse boarders. The following regulations shall be
applicable to camping on licensed and approved commercial house boarding
properties within the city.



      (1)   Allowed zoning districts. Horse boarder camping shall be
allowed in the RS-GR, RS-54 and RS-54M zoning districts where a licensed
commercial horse boarding facility exists.



      (2)   Minimum lot area. Five gross acres.



      (3)   Permit required. A CUP and business license shall be
required prior to any camping activity being established and maintained in
the city. If the RV camping use fails to operate in accordance with the
approved conditions of the CUP and/or creates a public nuisance within the
neighborhood, the Planning and Zoning Commission may schedule a public
hearing to discuss revocation of the CUP.



      (4)   Fees. In addition to the required administrative
permitting fees, the property owner shall be required to pay a one-time
development impact fee for each campsite in accordance with the city's
Development Fee Ordinance and fee schedule.



      (5)   Maximum number of campsites allowed. A maximum of one
campsite per acre shall be allowed, with the total number of campsites not
exceeding the total number of boarded horses.



      (6)   Time period restrictions. A maximum stay of 6 cumulative
months per calendar year per RV camper shall be allowed.



      (7)   Type of camping allowed. Camping shall only be allowed
in RVs (excluding park models), and may be operated as either a
self-contained unit or with properly permitted connections to utilities.
Campers must have a horse boarded at the facility. No on-site dumping of
sewage waste shall be allowed unless the boarding facility is connected to
the sewer district system or unless other sewage disposal system solutions
are permitted by the Pinal County Health Department.



      (8)   Setbacks and RV spacing. RVs shall maintain a minimum
separation of 6 feet from each other, be setback a minimum of 3 feet to a
side or rear property line and 25 feet from a road right-of-way.



      (9)   Minimum camping space size. An RV camping space shall
contain no less than 1,000 square feet and shall be at least 25 feet wide.



      (10)   Parking. A maximum of 2 vehicles per individual RV
campsite shall be allowed, consisting of the RV and one passenger vehicle.



      (11)   Generator use. Use of generators to charge batteries
within the RV shall be permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.,
daily.



      (12)   Nuisance impacts. Standards regarding the impact of
noise, light, smoke, fumes, and odors resulting from the RV camping
activities shall be subject to local ordinance and public nuisance laws.



      (13)   Dust control. Areas where RVs are parked shall be
treated to control fugitive dust particles (i.e., PM-10 requirements), as
determined by the Development Services Engineer.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-8  CARGO CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Permit required. Issuance of an administrative use permit
("AUP") and payment of a processing fee is required prior to installation and
use of a cargo container in the city.



   (B)   Residentially zoned properties. Cargo containers on
residentially zoned properties shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Where and when allowed.



         (a)   Permanent use. Cargo containers used for permanent
storage shall only be permitted in the RS-GR, RS-54 and RS-54M residential
zoning districts with a minimum lot size of 1.25 gross acres. Cargo
container(s) shall be located to the side or rear of the principal
residential structure, and shall be set back from a neighboring property line
in accordance with the zoning district's minimum accessory building setbacks
identified in Vol. II, § 1-5-2, Table 5-2.



         (b)   Temporary use. Cargo container(s) used for
temporary storage of equipment and materials during general construction
shall be permitted in any residential zoning district provided such activity
is authorized by a valid building permit issued to a duly licensed and bonded
contractor who has obtained a city privilege license or a property owner
acting as an owner or owner/builder of a single-family residence. The
temporary cargo container shall be removed within 12 months of AUP issuance.



         (c)   Emergency use. Cargo container(s) used as an
emergency accommodation shall be allowed in conjunction with required and
properly permitted home repairs as a result of damage caused by flood, fire,
wind, or termites. The temporary cargo container shall be removed within 12
months of AUP issuance.



      (2)   Use restriction. Cargo containers shall only be used for
personal storage purposes, not for business storage or as a home occupation
workshop.



      (3)   Maximum number and size. One container up to 40-feet in
length shall be allowed.



      (4)   Utility connections. Cargo containers for permanent
storage shall be allowed an electrical connection if properly permitted.



      (5)   Color and landscape screening.



         (a)   Cargo containers used for permanent storage shall
be uniformly painted with an earth tone color and free from surface rust and
advertising signage. If the property owner wishes to custom paint the
container with a color scheme different than the required uniform earth tone
color, the property owner shall first receive approval from the Development
Services Director or his/her designee. EARTH TONE shall be defined as a color
scheme that draws from a color palette of browns, tans, and greens natural to
the Sonoran Desert environment. The colors in an earth tone scheme are muted
and flat in an emulation of the natural colors found in dirt, moss or trees,
and rocks.



         (b)   If the container is publicly visible to adjacent
neighboring properties and/or from the public street, the property owner
shall install landscape screening to buffer that visible view, with a minimal
initial planting height of 2 feet, and a minimum plant spacing distance of 4
feet. A planting list and guide is available at the Department of Development
Services.



      (6)   Structural screening. A building permit may be required
if the property owner chooses to install structural screening around the
container and/or apply building materials to the container, including awnings.



   (C)   Non-residentially zoned property. Cargo containers on
non-residentially zoned properties shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Where allowed. Cargo containers may be permitted in all
business, industrial and public/institutional zoning districts. The location
shall have a legally established commercial, industrial, or
public/institutional use on the property.



      (2)   Minimum lot size.  None.



      (3)   Maximum number and size. No restriction.



      (4)   Minimum setbacks and site location. Minimum side, rear
and front setbacks for cargo containers shall be subject to accessory
building setback requirements identified in Vol. II, § 1-5-4, Table 5-4.



         (a)   Cargo containers shall not be located within
off-street parking areas, utility/drainage/roadway easements, landscape
setback, fire lane, or within a location as to compromise emergency,
pedestrian, or customer egress and ingress circulation as determined by the
Director or designee.



         (b)   Cargo containers shall be located to the rear or
side of the principal building in a manner that minimizes public view from
neighboring properties and/or the public street as determined by the Director
or designee.



      (5)   Use. Cargo containers shall only be used for storage of
materials for the primary business, or for temporary storage of equipment and
materials during general construction provided such activity is authorized by
a valid building permit issued to a duly licensed and bonded contractor who
has obtained a city privilege license.



      (6)   Utility connections. Cargo containers for permanent
storage shall be allowed an electrical connection if properly permitted.



      (7)   Color and screening.



         (a)   Cargo containers shall be uniformly painted with
an earth tone color and be free from surface rust and advertising signage.



         (b)   If the cargo container is publicly visible to
adjacent neighboring properties and/or from the public street, the property
owner shall apply for a building permit to install and maintain a minimum
8-foot high structural screening that is compatible with the design and
architecture of the principal building. Visual examples of acceptable
structural screening devices (such as a masonry wall or completely opaque
wooden fence) are available at the Department of Development Services.



   (D)   Exemptions. The only cargo containers that are completely
exempt from the provisions of this Chapter are the 3 containers located at
936 W. Apache Trail, 57 E. 20th Avenue, and 2296 S. Cactus Road. These 3
cargo containers were originally exempted by Ordinance 630 and are in the
same locations and condition as originally placed. Should they be replaced or
removed, they lose their exempt status and all of the provisions of this
section shall apply.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-9  OUTSIDE STORAGE, DISPLAY AND ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Property maintenance. For regulations regarding property
maintenance, public nuisances, outside storage, land maintenance, exterior
building maintenance and vacant buildings see Apache Junction City Code, Vol.
I, Article 9-1 (Property Maintenance Standards).



   (B)   Outdoor storage, display and activity. Outside storage and
display shall be allowed in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 and B-5 zoning districts
subject to the following:



      (1)   Outdoor displays. Outdoor display of commercial product
samples for sale or rent to the public shall be placed on the private patio
or walkway in front of the building, and shall not be located in a parking
area or in a manner that interferes with automobile or pedestrian access,
circulation and visibility as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Outdoor
displays shall not be permanent in nature and shall be taken into the
building at close of business.



      (2)   Outdoor storage.



         (a)   Residential districts. Outdoor storage of
inoperable and/or unlicensed vehicles, automobile parts; loose rubbish,
garbage and junk shall be screened from public and neighboring view in
accordance with the regulations established in Vol. II, § 1-6-3, Table 6-1.



         (b)   Non-residential districts. Outside storage of
business inventory and parts shall be screened in accordance with Vol. II, §
1-6-3, Table 6-2.



         (c)   Building materials. Unscreened building materials
for use on the same premises may be stored on the parcel during the time that
a valid building permit is in effect for construction.



      (3)   Outdoor activity and operations. Subsequent to the
effective date of this Chapter, there shall be no outside fabrication,
processing, manufacturing, repair or assembly of products in business zoning
districts unless approved by a CUP (see Vol. II, § 1-5-3, Table 5-3).



      (4)   Modifications: The Development Services Director or
designee may approve modifications to the outdoor display and storage
standards identified above in Vol. II, § 1-6-9(B)(1) subject to issuance of
an Administrative Use Permit ("AUP") and a finding by the Director that the
modification is based on the business's unique product line, visibility
constraints and minimal aesthetic impact on neighboring properties.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-10  GROUP CARE HOMES.



   (A)   Definition. For purposes of city regulation, GROUP CARE HOMES
are limited to assisted living homes for the elderly, adult foster care
homes, adult day health care facilities and group homes for the
developmentally disabled.



   (B)   Requirements. Group care homes are permitted subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   Permit required for single-family residential districts.
An administrative use permit ("AUP") shall be required prior to construction
and/or operation of a group care home with 10 or less residents. This
limitation does not include the operator of the facility, members of the
operator's family or staff persons, except that the number of all persons
living in the residential facility shall not exceed 12. Group care homes with
greater than 10 residents shall not be allowed.



      (2)   Permit required for multi-family residential and
non-residential districts. A conditional use permit ("CUP") shall be required
prior to construction and/or operation of a group care home. The number of
residents shall be subject to the conditions of the CUP.



      (3)   Sign restrictions. No signs, graphics, displays, or
other visual means of identifying the group care home shall be visible from a
public street.



      (4)   Separation requirement. A separation between group homes
of no less than 1,200 feet is required. Separation distances shall be
measured from the property lines.



      (5)   Information requirement.  Copies of all materials
including licenses, certifications, or registrations required for the group
care home by a county, state or federal agency shall be submitted to the city.



      (6)   Kitchen requirement. A common kitchen facility to serve
all resident shall be required.



      (7)   Garbage. Any large and/or multiple trash receptacles not
usually found in the residential area shall be screened from public view.



      (8)   Exterior design. No exterior change that would alter the
building's residential character shall be made to the exterior of the
building and grounds.



      (9)   Compliance with Building Code. The proposal shall comply
with all applicable building and fire safety regulations.



      (10)   Annual home inspections. The Director or designee may
require and perform annual home inspections in accordance with the Arizona
Department of Health Services ("DHS") inspection checklist and forward the
findings of the inspection to DHS for further review and action. The
administrative process for conducting these inspections shall be established
by city staff and will be available at the Development Services Department.



      (11)   Preemptions. Notwithstanding the forgoing, if the state
has adopted laws or rules for the regulation of a specific type of group
home, then any such state law or rule shall apply in addition to the
conditions listed herein and/or shall preempt any conflicting condition
listed herein.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-11  SWIMMING POOLS, WATER FEATURES AND SPORTS COURTS.



   (A)   Swimming pools. Swimming pools are permitted in all
residential zones, subject to the following restrictions:



      (1)   Location.



         (a)   Swimming pools in single-family residential zones
may encroach within the side or rear setback area, but shall maintain a
minimum 3 foot setback from the property lines and in residential areas shall
be constructed to the side or rear of the main dwelling, behind the front
façade of the home.



         (b)   Swimming pools in multiple-family residential and
business zones shall comply with the required accessory structure setbacks
for the zone in which they are located.



      (2)   Swimming pool enclosures. Swimming pools shall comply
with the provisions of City Code, Vol. I, Article 7-2, Requirements for
Swimming Pool Enclosures.



   (B)   Water features. Decorative water features such as fountains
and ornamental ponds are permitted in all zones, subject to a minimum 10 foot
front setback and minimum 3 foot side and rear setback.



   (C)   Sports courts. Sport courts may encroach within the side or
rear setback area, but shall maintain a minimum 3 foot setback from the
property lines and in residential areas shall be constructed to the side or
rear of the main dwelling, behind the front façade of the home. Basketball
backboards/hoops attached to the garage or 1 standalone pole in the driveway
are not classified as sport courts for the purposes of regulation.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-12  MEDICAL MARIJUANA.



   (A)   Permit required. A CUP shall be required for the establishment
of nonprofit medical marijuana dispensaries with or without cultivation
facilities, off-site cultivation facilities and for stand-alone nonprofit
medical marijuana infusion facilities.



   (B)   Number of facilities allowed in city. One nonprofit medical
marijuana dispensary with or without an on-site cultivation facility, 1
off-site cultivation facility and 1 stand-alone infusion facility shall be
allowed in the city. An additional dispensary, off-site cultivation facility,
and standalone infusion facility may be allowed when the city has at least 20
pharmacies within its municipal limits, and then 1 additional facility for
every 10 pharmacies thereafter. (See A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1 Arizona
Medical Marijuana Act, for definitions and statutes pertaining to medical
marijuana.)



   (C)   Allowed zoning districts.



      (1)   Location of nonprofit medical marijuana dispensaries
with or without on-site cultivation facilities shall be limited to the city's
B-1 through B-5 zoning districts.



      (2)   Location of an off-site cultivation facility (i.e., a
cultivation facility not co-located with a dispensary) and/or a stand-alone
nonprofit medical marijuana infusion facility which serves 1 or more
nonprofit medical marijuana dispensaries shall be limited to the city's B-5
(Industrial) zoning district. Nonprofit medical marijuana dispensaries,
off-site cultivation facilities and/or infusion facilities shall not be
allowed within any MPC zoned property.



   (D)   Facility security. Medical marijuana dispensaries, cultivation
facilities, and infusion facilities shall be located in an enclosed locked
facility, such as a permanent secure building and not in a cargo container,
RV, trailer, or motor vehicle. If a green house is used as a cultivation
facility, reasonable measures shall be taken to obscure the visibility of the
marijuana plants from outside the building.



   (E)   Applications. A CUP application for medical marijuana
dispensaries, cultivation facilities or infusion facilities shall include, at
a minimum, the following supplemental information:



      (1)   Signature and consent on the application form by the
property owner of record that he or she is aware the property will be used
for medical marijuana dispensing, cultivating or infusion.



      (2)   A copy of the preliminary approval from the State
Department of Health Services ("DHS"), such as a registration certificate,
for the nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary, nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary off-site cultivation facility or stand-alone nonprofit medical
marijuana infusion facility, and a written assurance that all nonprofit
medical marijuana dispensary agents associated with the approved facility
shall register with the Apache Junction Police Department upon final approval
to operate from DHS, as well as a copy of said final approval document.



      (3)   Application and all applicable fees paid as required by
Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I; Chapter 8, Business, and the Apache
Junction City Tax Code as amended.



      (4)   A detailed site plan and floor plan for the facility
prepared in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-9, and narrative explaining the
operation of the facility and hours of operation.



   (F)   Conditions of approval. The conditions of approval which may
be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission in evaluating these
requests include the following:



      (1)   Required spacing requirements:



         (a)   A minimum of 1,320 feet between dispensaries,
off-site cultivation facilities or stand-alone infusion facilities, as
measured from nearest building wall to nearest building wall.



         (b)   A minimum of 750 feet between a dispensary,
off-site cultivation facility or stand-alone infusion facility and any public
or private school, business zoned day care center, church, or drug and/or
alcohol rehabilitation center, as measured from nearest building wall of the
business to the nearest building wall of the protected use.



         (c)   A minimum of 750 feet from other sensitive land
uses as determined by the Zoning Administrator on a case by case basis, as
measured from the nearest building wall of the business to the nearest
building wall of the protected use.



      (2)   Operating requirements:



         (a)   Drive-through pickup windows and delivery service
shall not be allowed.



         (b)   Outdoor seating areas at dispensaries, cultivation
facilities or standalone infusion facilities shall not be allowed.



         (c)   Security plans shall include lighting, monitored
alarm and/or camera surveillance systems, secure storage, and other necessary
building safety measures.



         (d)   On-site consumption of medical marijuana at a
dispensary, cultivation facility or infusion facility shall not be allowed.



         (e)   Dispensaries selling marijuana or tobacco-smoking
related products such as pipes, water pipes, rolling paper, screens,
vaporizers, mills, concealing devices and other than cookbooks and
educational materials shall not be allowed.



         (f)   The size of facility in terms of square footage,
building height or other factors shall be consistent with the character of
existing or planned surrounding development.



         (g)   Signage that will be visible from the exterior of
the facility may be approved by the city if all sign regulations have been
met.



      (3)   Other conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
deem it necessary to apply other conditions to conserve and promote the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, including:



         (a)   Compliance with all city-adopted zoning,
landscaping, engineering, building, design guidelines, overlay district
and/or planned development district requirements.



         (b)   The Commission shall reserve the right to revoke a
CUP for noncompliance with any condition prescribed as part of the permit
approval or if the use is demonstrated to be a nuisance or hazard to the
neighborhood or community.



      (4)   Patient home cultivation. In the event that a qualifying
patient residing in the city lives 25 miles or farther from a dispensary,
said individual or his or her designated caregiver may cultivate no more than
12 marijuana plants at the place of primary residence (including a
manufactured home or a recreational vehicle) of the qualifying patient, with
owner's permission, without need to apply for a CUP. However, said individual
or his or her designated caregiver shall apply the same types of precautions
as above for security, use, documentation and must advise the Chief of Police
of his or her intent to cultivate marijuana at home. At such time as a
dispensary is located within 25 miles from the qualifying patient's home, all
cultivation of marijuana plants in the home must cease or shall be considered
a zoning violation, among other possible local, state and federal law
violations.



      (5)   Caregiver home cultivation. In the event that a
designated caregiver whose residence is in the city limits is cultivating
marijuana for the qualifying patient or patients in his or her care, and
whose qualifying patient or patients in his or her care live 25 miles or
farther from a dispensary, said designated caregiver may cultivate no more
than 12 marijuana plants per patient at the place of primary residency of the
designated caregiver (including a manufactured home or a recreational
vehicle), with homeowner's permission, without need to apply for a CUP.
However, said designated caregiver shall apply the same types of precautions
as above for security, use, documentation and must advise the Chief of Police
of his or her intent to cultivate marijuana at home for the benefit of his or
her qualifying patient or patients. At such time as a dispensary is located
within 25 miles from the designated caregiver's home, all cultivation of
marijuana plants in the home must cease or shall be considered a zoning
violation, among other possible local, state and federal law violations.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-13  VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision
between a height of 3 feet and 10 feet above the centerline grades of the
intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, planted and maintained within
the 33' by 33' triangular yard space formed by the intersection of the lot
lines adjoining the intersecting streets for a distance of 33 feet from such
intersection and a line connecting the ends of such lot lines as illustrated
in Vol. II, Image 6-1.



   (B)   Where a conflict occurs between this requirement and the
zoning setback regulations, Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Chapter 2,
Subdivision Regulations and/or sight distance regulations provided in Apache
Junction City Code, Vol. II, Chapter 10, Engineering Design Guidelines and
Policies, the more restrictive provision shall apply.



IMAGE 6-1: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS







 



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-14  AIRPORTS AND HELIPADS.



   Permit required. Airports, airstrips, landing areas and helipads shall
be permitted only as a CUP as provided in Table 5-1 and Table 5-3 (see Vol.
II, §§ 1-5-1 and 1-5-3). The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City
Council may require conditions of approval to protect the public's interest
in controlling noise, vibration, glare, light, runway protection zones, over
flight areas, fumes, dust, fuel particles, crash hazards, These conditions of
approval shall apply to the take-off and landing of any contrivance, now
known or hereafter invented, for use or designed for navigation of or flight
in the air, including helicopters, fixed-wing aircraft and gliders, and
lighter-than-air vehicles such as hot-air balloons, blimps and dirigibles.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-15  ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   Permit required. Adult oriented businesses, including adult
arcade, adult peepshow, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult novelty
store, adult cabaret, adult motel/hotel, adult live entertainment
establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, adult escort
agency and modeling shall be approved by CUP and shall only be allowed in the
zoning districts identified in Vol. II, § 1-5-3, Table 5-3.



   (B)   Spacing requirements. In order to diminish the potentially
adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community and neighborhood,
adult uses shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following
uses:



      (1)   Churches, synagogues and any other religious institution.



      (2)   Public or private school or college.



      (3)   Public parks or playgrounds.



      (4)   Conforming or nonconforming residential use or any
residential zoning district.



      (5)   Another adult use.



      (6)   Any establishment selling alcoholic beverages.



   (C)   Measurement. For the purposes of spacing requirements,
measurement from the proposed adult use shall be made from that portion of
the adult use building that is closest to the property line of any uses
identified in the above paragraph, or to the property line of any land in any
residential zoning district.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-16  ALTERNATE ENERGY STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Solar panels. The following standards shall apply to solar
panels used for the primary purpose of providing energy for the immediate
site or development:



      (1)   Building permit required. A building permit shall be
required for installation of solar panels.



      (2)   Attached solar panels. Solar panels attached entirely to
the roof shall be permitted in all zoning districts. Solar panels located
behind parapets on flat roofs shall comply with maximum zoning height
standards.



      (3)   Detached, freestanding solar panels. Detached or
freestanding solar panel structures shall be permitted in all zoning
districts, and shall comply with the zoning district's setback, size and
height requirements for accessory structures.



   (B)   Solar farms and alternative energy production facilities.
Solar farms and other alternative energy production facilities (e.g.,
geo-thermal, wind, biofuel and biomass) that generate energy for use beyond
the property shall comply with the following minimum standards:



      (1)   Permit required. A CUP shall be required for
installation and use of solar farms and alternate energy production
facilities.



      (2)   Where allowed. Solar farms and alternate energy
production facilities shall be allowed in the business zoning districts
indicated in Vol. II, § 1-5-3, Table 5-3.



      (3)   Setbacks. Setbacks shall comply with the zoning district
standards for main structure setbacks.



      (4)   Screening. Solar panels and equipment used for solar
farms and/or alternative energy production facilities shall be screened from
the public view of the adjacent road rights-of-way in a manner that
eliminates glare, as determined by the Director or designee.



      (5)   Environmental standards. Alternate energy production
facilities shall comply with state and federal environmental standards
regarding emissions, public health, noise and safety.



   (C)   Alternate energy technology. Alternate energy production such
as wind, geothermal, biofuel and biogas hydrogen applications may be allowed
pursuant to a CUP in all zoning districts and shall comply with the zoning
district standards for accessory structures unless modified through the CUP.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-17  ANIMAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide rules and
regulations for the keeping of agricultural animals so that these animals do
not become a nuisance, hazard, and/or health problem to the adjoining
neighbors and the general public.



   (B)   Large livestock. Large livestock animals (excepting equine
which are regulated in Vol. II, § 1-6-7) may be kept in the RS-GR, RS-54 and
RS-54M residential zoning districts subject to the following:



      (1)   Minimum lot size. 1.25 gross acres.



      (2)   Maximum number.



         (a)   RS-GR District. No limit.



         (b)   RS-54 and RS-54M Districts. Maximum of 1 head of
large livestock per ½ acre.



   (C)   Small livestock and foul. Small livestock and fowl may be kept
in all single-family residential zoning districts subject to the following:



      (1)   Minimum lot size. None.



      (2)   Maximum number.



         (a)   RS-GR District. No limit.



         (b)   All other single-family residential zoning
districts. Maximum of 2 small livestock per property and 2 chickens per 1,500
square feet of property. Chickens and small livestock shall be contained on
the property and no roosters or pea fowl shall be allowed.



   (D)   Grazing area. The area used for grazing, exercising or
training of livestock shall be secured to prevent the animals from straying.



   (E)   Maintenance and sanitation. See Apache Junction City Code,
Volume I, Chapter 6, Animals.



   (F)   Equine.  See Vol. II, § 1-6-7 (equestrian regulations).



   (G)   Household pets and kennels. See Apache Junction City Code,
Volume I, Chapter 6, Animals.



   (H)   Commercial feedlots. No commercial feedlots shall be allowed
in any zoning district.



   (I)   Setbacks for accessory structures housing livestock. Accessory
structures allowed to house large livestock (excluding equine) shall maintain
a minimum side, rear and front setback of 50 feet.  Accessory structures
allowed to house small livestock and foul shall maintain a minimum side and
rear setback of 15 feet. Structures housing equine shall be subject to the
standard accessory structure setback requirements in Vol. II, § 1-5-2, Table
5-2. See Vol. II, § 1-6-5 of this Chapter regarding detailed regulations for
accessory buildings, and Vol. II, § 1-6-17 of this Chapter regarding
additional regulations for housing of livestock. In no case shall an
accessory structure (excluding equine horse shades) be located between the
main building and the road frontage.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-18  AGRICULTURE.



   (A)   Commercial agricultural uses. Commercial agricultural uses
shall only be allowed in the RS-GR (General Rural) residential zoning
district and may include field crops, truck gardening, berry crops, flower
gardening, plant nurseries, greenhouses, orchards, aviaries and apiaries. A
produce sales stand up to 200 square feet in size for the sale of farm
products grown on the premises is allowed but shall be set back a minimum of
10 feet from the road right-of-way.



   (B)   Non-commercial agricultural uses. Non-commercial agricultural
and horticultural uses shall be allowed in all residential zoning districts.



   (C)   Commercial feedlots. No commercial feedlots shall be allowed
in any zoning district.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-19  ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.



   (A)   Purpose and definition. An accessory dwelling unit is an
attached or detached residential dwelling unit that may provide complete
independent living facilities for 1 or more persons, and which may include
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same
parcel where the primary single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory
dwelling unit may also be known as a secondary dwelling unit, granny flat,
property caretaker's dwelling or guest house. Accessory dwelling units should
not be confused with "accessory structures", which are defined and regulated
differently in Vol. II, § 1-6-5.



   (B)   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the following
regulations.



      (1)   Permit required. An administrative use permit ("AUP")
shall be required prior to construction and use of an accessory dwelling unit.



      (2)   Number allowed. One accessory dwelling unit is permitted
on a residential lot in all single-family detached residential zoning
districts. This limitation does not include a personal caretaker's unit,
which is separately described and regulated in Vol. II, § 1-6-20.



      (3)   Design.



         (a)   Accessory dwelling units may be detached,
attached, or directly accessible from the primary dwelling unit. An accessory
dwelling unit shall be constructed as a conventional (i.e., site-built)
structure that compliments and is consistent with or improves upon the main
building's design and building materials, as determined by the Director or
designee.



         (b)   Property caretakers, however, working as ranch
hands for approved commercial horse boarding facilities may use a motor home,
travel trailer or 5th wheel RV unit for their accommodation. See Vol. II, §
1-6-7(D)(7).



      (4)   Setbacks. Accessory building setbacks shall comply with
the main building's setback requirements, and shall not be located between
the main building and the front road right-of-way.



      (5)   Use. An accessory dwelling unit may be used to
accommodate family, friends, guests, personal caretaker and/or property
caretaker.



      (6)   Size. An accessory dwelling unit shall not be larger
than 50% of the main building's square footage.



      (7)   Height. The maximum height shall not exceed 25 feet.



      (8)   Kitchen allowed. An accessory dwelling unit shall be
permitted to have a kitchen.



      (9)   No rentals allowed. An accessory dwelling unit shall not
be operated as a separate rental unit; if the entire property is a rental
property, the owner or lessee thereof shall not sublet the accessory dwelling
unit.



      (10)   Addressing. An accessory dwelling unit is not permitted
to have a separate address or separate utility services/meters, or
sewer/septic system from the main dwelling unit (unless an additional septic
tank is allowed by the Pinal County Health Department).



      (11)   Driveway access. The main dwelling unit and the
accessory dwelling unit shall both use the same driveway for access.



      (12)   Conditional use permit modification option.
Modifications to the maximum size and height of an accessory dwelling unit
may be allowed by approval of a CUP in accordance with Vol. II, §
1-16-12(D)(4).



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-20  PERSONAL CARETAKERS UNITS.



   (A)   Purpose. The City Council has determined that there is a need
in the city for special consideration to housing handicapped/disabled persons
who need on-site personal care and assistance.



   (B)   Permit required. An administrative use permit ("AUP") shall be
required prior to construction, placement or use of a personal caretaker unit.



   (C)   Site requirements. A personal caretaker's unit may be allowed
subject to the following:



      (1)   Number allowed. One temporary personal caretaker unit is
permitted on a residential lot in all single residence zoning districts.
Personal caretaker unit is separate and distinct from an accessory dwelling
unit, which is described and regulated in Vol. II, § 1-6-19 of this Chapter.



      (2)   Type of unit allowed. The personal caretaker unit may be
a travel trailer, motor home or fifth-wheel. Park models and manufactured
homes are prohibited.



      (3)   Setbacks. Personal caretaker unit setbacks shall comply
with the accessory building setback requirements, and shall not be located
between the main building and the front road right-of-way.



   (D)   Use. A personal caretaker's unit may be used to house a person
who is caring for a handicapped/disabled person(s) living in the main
dwelling, or to house the handicapped/disabled person who is being cared for
by a person living in the main dwelling.



   (E)   Termination of permit. An AUP is granted to the property owner
but does not run with the land, is not transferable and terminates
automatically as soon as the disabled person(s) no longer resides on the
property.



   (F)   Verification of need. An AUP for a personal caretaker's unit
may be granted if the disabled person(s) is physically or mentally impaired
and incapable of caring for himself or herself. The beneficiary must also be
in such need of care, attention and support that not being granted an AUP
will result in the individual being confined to a hospital, sanatorium,
nursing center, supervisory care facility or similar health care environment
where his or her personal needs can be adequately met. A letter from a
physician on office letterhead must be included with the application
verifying this need.



   (G)   Compensation. Neither the applicant nor any other person shall
receive rent or any other valuable consideration for allowing a person to
live in a dwelling unit under an AUP for a personal caretaker's unit. This
should not be construed as to prevent a health care provider from receiving
remuneration for health care services provided.



   (H)   Affidavit required. An affidavit must be submitted by the
applicant indicating a commitment to concur with all the requirements of this
section. Sample affidavits are available at the Development Services
Department.



   (I)   Application process. Application for the AUP shall be made to
the Director or his or her designee by the landowner or tenant in possession,
with the signed approval of the landowner. The application shall be
accompanied by an accurate site plan drawn to scale which identifies the
location of the proposed personal caretaker's unit, the legal description of
the property involved, the name and relationship to the beneficiary,
information on how the sewage from the personal caretaker's unit will be
disposed of, the sworn affidavit required above, and the nonrefundable
application fee set forth in the Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter
4, Fees. The information on sewage disposal shall be sufficient for the Pinal
County Health Department to determine whether the provisions are adequate. No
AUP may be issued without the written approval of the Pinal County Health
Department. The application shall also be accompanied by an accurate verified
list, made within the previous 30 calendar days, giving the names and
addresses of the owners of all properties lying within 300 feet of the
subject property.



   (J)   Approval process. Upon receipt of a completed application and
fee, the application will be reviewed by the Development Services Director
who shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application. If
the request for the AUP is approved, notification of the installation of
personal caretaker unit shall be sent to all property owners located within
300 feet of the subject property. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Director may file an appeal with the Board of Adjustment and Appeals in
accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-4.



   (K)   Financial obligations. All financial or other obligations
occurring to the property owner or his or her authorized agent as a result of
approval or conditional approval of the AUP are the sole responsibility of
the property owner or his or her authorized agent.



   (L)   Annual renewal. An AUP for a personal caretaker's unit shall
be renewed once a year upon proof it is still needed, by means of a letter
from a board-certified physician. The renewal letter shall be accompanied by
a fee as set forth in the Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4, Fees.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-21  PUBLIC AND PRIVATE UTILITIES.



   (A)   Above ground utilities. Unless pre-empted and allowed by state
law, the above ground erection or alteration of pipes, poles, wires and
similar installations necessary to distribute public utilities shall require
approval of an administrative use permit ("AUP"). Proposed utility
substations shall be screened with a minimum 8 foot high decorative masonry
wall.



   (B)   Below ground utilities. The installation of underground
utilities shall be subject to Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Chapter 10,
Engineering Design Guidelines and Policies.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-22  GRAVEL PITS AND QUARRIES.



   Permit required. Clay, sand or gravel pits, and rock or stone quarries
may be permitted in any zoning district subject to approval of a CUP,
provided that the use is designed and located so as not to create any
unreasonable hazard or nuisance in the immediate neighborhood of the proposed
site.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-23  TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Permits required. Temporary uses and structures are intended
to be of limited duration and will not permanently alter the character or
physical facilities of the site where they occur. Certain types of temporary
uses may be allowed by issuance of an administrative use permit, while others
are subject to issuance of a conditional use permit.



   (B)   No temporary uses may be established prior to city issuance of
the appropriate permit in accordance with the following:



      (1)   Conditional use permit. Temporary business uses and/or
structures not identified in Vol. II, § 1-6-3, Table 6-1 shall require CUP
approval by Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (2)   Administrative use permit. Temporary uses and/or
structures identified in Vol. II, § 1-6-23, Table 6-3 may be approved by the
Director through issuance of an AUP. An application for an AUP shall be filed
with the Development Services Department in accordance with the "City of
Apache Junction Temporary Use Application Checklist" available at the
Development Services Department. Temporary uses and structures approved by an
AUP shall be valid for up to 1 year, and shall be subject to the location and
time limit standards provided in Vol. II, § 1-6-23, Table 6-3, and, if
applicable, the following additional standards:



         (a)   If required by the Zoning Administrator, the
applicant shall submit a scaled site plan illustrating the proposed temporary
use parking and structures.



         (b)   Temporary business use signage shall not exceed 50
square feet (combined total) in size and 10 feet in height. No signs shall be
allowed in the public right-of-way, nor may any signs be affixed to any
publicly owned property, utility or structure. All signs for temporary uses
shall be attached to the temporary use structure, vehicle or existing
business sign on the private property. Portable signs prohibited in the
city's sign regulations shall also be prohibited for temporary uses.



         (c)   Only 1 temporary use permit shall be permitted for
a single parcel of land at any given time.



         (d)   Temporary structures and/or display of merchandise
shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district within
which it is located. The temporary use structure and display shall also
comply with the sight distance requirements in Vol. II, § 1-6-13. In no case
shall structures, signs, parking or displays encroach within the public
right-of-way.



         (e)   No risk of injury to persons or damage to public
or private property shall occur, as defined by the Zoning Administrator.



         (f)   No unreasonable noise impact, public or private
disturbances or nuisances shall occur or be permitted to continue, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.



         (g)   No unsafe impediments, distractions, or congestion
to vehicular or pedestrian movement shall be allowed, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.



         (h)   Proper security and trash removal shall be
provided by the operator.



         (i)   No permanent alterations to the affected site
shall be allowed.



         (j)   No encroachment of a temporary use into
established landscaped areas of a developed site or public right-of-way shall
be allowed.



         (k)   Sufficient space for the temporary use and
associated off-street parking and circulation is required.



         (l)   Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning
Administrator, hours of operation shall be limited from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
p.m., daily, for temporary business uses.



         (m)   Approval of all applicable permits and licenses
prior to operation shall be required.



         (n)   The site shall be returned to its original
condition within 48 hours of its discontinuance.



         (o)   A performance bond or other financial assurance
for public infrastructure damage and repair resulting from the temporary use
may be required by city in accordance with Vol. II, Chapter 10 of the Apache
Junction Land Development Code.



         (p)   Location of parking and temporary
equipment/structures, and the aesthetic appearance of temporary signs and
structures, shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the
temporary use being located on the property.



         (q)   Temporary sanitary facilities for temporary uses
(i.e., porta-johns) may be allowed subject to proper permitting.



         (r)   The Zoning Administrator may work with the Police
Department, Building Official, Public Works Department, City Clerk's Office
and Fire District regarding conditions, if any, to issuing a permit.



TABLE 6-3: TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES REQUIRING AUP APPROVAL1



 

TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE
 
MAXIMUM TIME FRAME
 
LOCATION PERMITTED




Temporary Office Facilities supporting existing or developing business use
 
1 year (renewable for additional year upon a finding of need)
 
Developed or developing non- residential zoned site


Construction trailers, modular units and parking to support construction and
land development projects
 
1 year (renewable for additional year upon a finding of need)
 
Developed or developing non- residential zoned site


Special Events 2 (Applies to multiple vendor events conducted, organized and
sponsored by non-profit organizations and approved by the City Council)
 
4 consecutive days per specific event per calendar year
 
Developed or vacant non- residential zoned site


Community Events 3 (Applies to multiple vendor events conducted, organized
and sponsored by non-profit organizations)
 
4 consecutive days per specific event per calendar year
 
Developed or vacant non- residential zoned site


Private Events 4 (Applies to multiple vendor events conducted, organized and
sponsored by for-profit organizations or businesses)
 
4 consecutive days per specific event per calendar year
 
Developed or vacant non- residential zoned site


Temporary Residence for Security Guard 5
 
12 months
 
Non-residential construction site


Seasonal Holiday Sales Limited to:

- Christmas/New Year's (i.e., trees, wreathes and fireworks)
- Halloween (i.e., pumpkins and gourds)
- 4th of July (i.e., fireworks)
 
30 days per holiday per location
 
Developed or vacant non- residential zoned site


Farmers Market, Fruit and Produce Stands (Excludes flea markets and swap
meets)
 
3 days per week per location
 
Developed or vacant non- residential zoned site


Carnivals, Circuses and Fairs (See Vol. I, Chapter 8 of the Apache Junction
City Code)
 
7 consecutive days per specific event per calendar year
 
Developed or vacant non- residential zoned site


Flea Markets and Swap Meets (See Vol. I, Chapter 8 of the Apache Junction
City Code)
 
3 days per week per location
 
Developed non-residential zoned site


Vendors Using Carts, Booths or Kiosks (excludes food and beverage sales)
 
3 days per week per location
 
Developed non-residential zoned site


Food/Beverage Cart or Concession Trailer (See Vol. I, Chapter 8 of the Apache
Junction City Code)
 
7 consecutive days per location
 
Developed non-residential zoned site


Car Tent Sales (i.e., Applies only to city approved new and/or used car sites)
 
7 consecutive days, 4 occurrences per year
 
Developed non-residential zoned site


Classic Car Shows
 
3 days per week per location
 
Developed non-residential zoned site


Grand Openings (See Vol. I, Chapter 8 of the Apache Junction City Code)
 
14 consecutive days
 
Developed non-residential zoned site


Art Display and/or Sales
 
7 days per week
 
Developed or vacant non- residential zoned site


Temporary Residence During Home Construction 6
 
8 months
 
All single-family zoning districts




 



Notes:



1.   Approval of temporary uses not listed in Vol. II, Table 6-3 above are
subject to CUP approval.



2.   Special events. Special events that are conducted, organized and
sponsored solely by non-profit organizations with multiple vendors shall be
approved by the City Council during the annual budget process, and shall not
exceed 4 consecutive days in any calendar year. The community event shall
have the purpose of promoting or benefitting the city and its residents
and/or the sponsoring non-profit organizations. City Council approved special
events conducted, organized and sponsored by non-profit organizations do not
require Development Services Department approval. Special events may be
allowed in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-6-3, Table 6-2 and Apache Junction
City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 8 .



3.   Community events. Community events that are conducted, organized and
sponsored solely by non-profit organizations with multiple vendors shall be
administratively approved by the City Manager or designee and shall not
exceed 4 consecutive days in any calendar year. The community event shall
have the purpose of promoting or benefitting the city and its residents
and/or the sponsoring non-profit organizations. Community events are subject
to the standards identified in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 8 .



4.   Private events. Private events that are conducted and sponsored by
for-profit organizations, agencies or businesses with multiple vendors shall
be administratively approved by the City Manager or designee and shall not
exceed 4 consecutive days in any calendar year. Private events may be allowed
in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-6-3, Table 6-2 and Apache Junction City
Code, Vol. I, Chapter 8 .



5.   Residence for security guard. During the active construction period
(after a building or grading permit has been issued) of a construction
project involving a non-residential property, 1 manufactured home, park model
or trailer may be allowed on the same property to be used as a temporary
residence for a night watchman for a period not to exceed 12 months or the
active construction period, whichever is less. The temporary structure shall
be removed from the site within 14 days of issuance of the final certificate
of occupancy.



6.   Residence during home construction. During the active construction
period (after a building or grading permit has been issued) of a residence
within all single-family zoning districts, 1 travel trailer, motor home or
fifth wheel may be parked and used as a temporary living quarters for up to 8
months while a home is being constructed on a single-family residentially
zoned property subject to compliance with the accessory building's setback
requirements. The temporary quarters may be temporarily connected to
utilities subject to proper permitting.



TABLE 6-4: TEMPORARY USES OR STRUCTURES NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT



 

TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE
 
MAXIMUM TIME FRAME PERMITTED
 
LOCATION


Non-Profit Organization Fundraising
 
No limit.
 
Non-Residential Zoned Property



 



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-24  HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATIONS AND COMMON FACILITY MAINTENANCE.



   Subject to state law, the city may require developers/builders to
establish an association to maintain private, common or community owned
improvements as condition of final subdivision plat approval.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-25  MODEL HOMES.



   Home builders/developers may be allowed model homes subject to approval
of an AUP and the following requirements:



   (A)   Proper permitting of utility connections.



   (B)   Development Services Department approval of access and access
maintenance.



   (C)   Development Services Department approval of the number and
location of models.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-26  ANCILLARY MANUFACTURING USES.



   (A)   An ancillary manufacturing use is a subsidiary or secondary
use or operation connected to the main use of a building. Ancillary
manufacturing uses identified in manufacturing sectors 31-33 of the 2012
North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS") shall be allowed in
the B-1, B-2 or B-3 zoning districts if incidental and subordinate to the
primary retail, office, public or quasi/public use, provided that not more
than 50%, up to a maximum of 1,500 square feet, of the floor area of the
business is engaged in these ancillary manufacturing activities. No outside
manufacturing, processing, repair or equipment/inventory storage shall be
allowed for ancillary uses.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-6-27  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   No structures, earthwork, filling or construction, and no
fencing or landscape vegetation which would impede water flow, shall be
allowed within established drainage ways or retention basins located within
platted subdivisions, except as may be approved by the Development Services
Engineer.



   (B)   No structures, including fences and walls, shall be allowed
within drainage easements designated on a subdivision plat, except by plat
amendment.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-7:  PARKING, LOADING AND CIRCULATION REGULATIONS



Section



   1-7-1   Intent



   1-7-2   Application



   1-7-3   Parking standards



   1-7-4   Modifications and appeals



   1-7-5   Loading facility standards



   1-7-6   Private street standards



§ 1-7-1  INTENT.



   This chapter of the Zoning Code is intended to provide for adequate
off-street parking spaces and help prevent congestion of city streets. Proper
design of, and access to, parking facilities shall be required in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-7-2  APPLICATION.



   Existing parking, loading and circulation areas that were legally
established prior to the effective date of this Chapter are allowed to
continue. However, new development, or redevelopment and/or additions where
50% or more expansion of the existing building floor area occurs, shall be
subject to these parking regulations.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-7-3  PARKING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Number of stalls required. Vol. II, § 1-7-6, Table 7-3 sets
forth the minimum number of required parking spaces for different land use
types.



   (B)   Uses not identified in Table 7-3. The Zoning Administrator
shall determine the parking requirement for uses that do not closely
correspond to the categories listed in Vol. II, § 1-7-6, Table 7-3. In such
instances, the applicant shall provide the following information for staff
review and determination:



      (1)   Explanation of proposed uses;



      (2)   Number of employees;



      (3)   Building design capacity;



      (4)   Gross floor area (square feet);



      (5)   Proposed on-site parking spaces;



      (6)   Proposed off-site parking spaces;



      (7)   Hours of operation; and



      (8)   Analysis of proposed parking demand.



   (C)   Parking stall size. Parking stall and aisle dimensions shall
comply with Vol. II, § 1-7-6, Table 7-1.



   (D)   Multiple uses. Where there are multiple uses within a
structure or property, the minimum standards shall apply to each use, except
as provided in Vol. II, §§ 1-7-3(G) and 1-7-3(H) regarding shared parking
facilities.



   (E)   Parking location.



      (1)   Business and multi-family zoned properties. Parking
shall only be allowed in approved parking spaces and shall be located
on-site, except as provided below in Vol. II, § 1-7-3(G). Parking spaces
shall be located and designed to prohibit backward movement of a vehicle onto
a public right-of-way, except for single-family and duplex dwellings. Bumper
guards or wheel barriers shall be used in multi-family and non-residential
parking areas to prevent a parked vehicle from projecting into a public
right-of-way, adjoining property or sidewalk.



      (2)   Single-family and duplex residential properties. Parking
for passenger vehicles shall be limited to the driveway and to the side of
the house. Passenger vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats,
all-terrain vehicles and other types of vehicles and equipment shall not be
parked or stored in the front yard, except for the driveway.



   (F)   Large trucks and recreational vehicle parking. One unoccupied
recreational vehicle or 1 large truck (e.g., semi or dump truck) less than
24,000 pounds empty weight, which is licensed and operable, may be stored or
parked in a residential zoning district in the side or rear yard behind the
front façade of the residence, or in a completely enclosed garage.



   (G)   Off-site shared parking. Off-site/off-street shared parking
may be allowed if all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The off-site parking facilities are within 100 feet of
the property;



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator determines that the total
parking demand of all the uses contributing to the parking at any 1 time is
less than the total parking stalls required in accordance with the shared
parking calculation described in Vol. II, § 1-7-3(H); and



      (3)   A city approved perpetual parking easement/agreement for
off-site/off-street parking shall be executed by the parties and recorded in
the County Recorder's office.



   (H)   On-site shared parking. Developments which contain a mix of
uses on the same parcel may reduce the amount of required parking in
accordance with the following methodology:



      (1)   Step 1. Calculate the minimum parking requirements for
each use in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-7-6, Table 7-3;



      (2)   Step 2. Multiply the minimum parking amount for each use
by the corresponding percentages for each of the 5 time periods set forth in
Columns (B) through (F) of Vol. II, § 1-7-6, Table 7-2;



      (3)   Step 3. Calculate the total for each time period; and



      (4)   Step 4. Select the total with the highest value as the
required minimum number of parking spaces.



   (I)   Maintenance of parking areas. The maintenance of required
parking and loading facilities are continuing obligations of the property
owner or tenant. Parking surfaces shall be kept in a clean, safe and well
maintained condition. More, specifically, the property owner shall restore
the parking surface to its original approved condition if parking surface
areas become deteriorated and/or emit dust particles into the air, as
determined by the Development Services Engineer.



   (J)   Use of parking stalls. Required parking spaces shall be
available for parking of vehicles of residents, customers, patrons and
employees, and shall not be used for inventory storage, extra signage,
outside retail sales, servicing or repair unless otherwise authorized by the
city.



   (K)   Site plan. A scaled site plan illustrating existing and
proposed off-street parking shall be included in an application for
development site plan approval and/or building permit where parking is
required. The site plan shall include the following:



      (1)   Delineation and size of individual parking spaces and
aisles.



      (2)   Circulation area necessary to serve spaces.



      (3)   Driveway openings to streets.



      (4)   Curb and median cuts.



      (5)   Grading, drainage and surfacing details.



      (6)   Delineation of obstacles to parking and circulation
within parking area.



      (7)   Specifications as to signs and bumper guards.



      (8)   Landscaping.



   (L)   Access to public streets. Driveways and areas for loading,
parking and maneuvering of vehicles for multiple-family residential, business
and institutional land use shall comply with Apache Junction City Code, Vol.
II, Chapter 10, Engineering Design Guidelines and Policies.



   (M)   Stormwater management. A parking area shall be subject to the
runoff, drainage and retention requirements of the Development Services
Engineer.



   (N)   Parking lot obstructions. No obstructions of any kind shall be
permitted within any designated parking space except for approved
landscaping, retention basins, lighting, curbing, walkways or shopping cart
corrals.



   (O)   Blocked stalls. No parking space shall be located or used in a
manner as to block access to another parking space, except on a parking lot
with a parking attendant having access to each vehicle's keys or as part of
an approved planned development (PD) rezoning site plan.



   (P)   Lighting. Parking area lighting shall not create unsafe glare
to motorists and shall be designed and installed in accordance with Vol. II,
Article 1-10.



   (Q)   Signage. Directional signs and pavement markings shall be used
to control vehicular movement in a parking area. Signs shall be limited to 2
square feet each, and an aggregate total not to exceed 20 square feet. No
sign of any kind other than those indicating entrances, exits, name of
establishment to which the parking area is accessory, or conditions of use
shall be erected.



   (R)   Surface grade. No driveway over 300 feet long shall exceed a
10% grade, and no driveway shall exceed a 17% grade.



   (S)   Shared access. Common driveways between adjacent properties
are encouraged and may be required as a condition of site plan approval. A
perpetual cross access and maintenance agreement between the adjoining
properties shall be required in a form approved by the City Attorney.



   (T)   Parking lot surface. The following requirements shall apply to
loading spaces, maneuvering areas, and driveways for new development or
redevelopment and/or additions where 50% expansion of the existing building
floor area occurs, shall be surfaced as follows:



      (1)   B-1, B-3, B-4, B-4, RM-1, RM-2 and RM-3 Zoning
Districts. Asphalt, concrete or masonry pavers installed at a depth approved
by the Development Services Engineer shall be required for new development or
redevelopment and/or additions where 50% expansion of the existing building
floor area occurs.



      (2)   B-2 (Old West District). A minimum depth of 3 inches of
1/2 minus compacted decomposed granite or other dust controlling material
approved by the Development Services Engineer, and which complies with the
American Disabilities Act, shall be allowed. The design and layout of the
unpaved parking and circulation area shall be subject to the Zoning
Administrator's determination that the unpaved parking area layout provides
safe and manageable parking and circulation.



      (3)   Air quality control. Existing and future parking
surfaces shall comply with air quality control requirements (i.e., PM-10) as
set forth in Ordinance No. 1316, and as amended in the future.



   (U)   Landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall be designed and
installed in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-8-6(E).



   (V)   Accessibility standards. Accessible (persons with
disabilities) parking and pedestrian access shall be designed and installed
in accordance with the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended.



   (W)   Structured parking. The exterior elevations of any multi-level
parking structure must be designed so as to screen or conceal parked cars on
the first and second floor from exterior public view.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-7-4  MODIFICATIONS AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Parking standard modification. If the number of proposed
parking stalls does not comply with the standards in Vol. II, § 1-7-6, Table
7-3, the Zoning Administrator may reduce the required number of stalls by up
to 10% following review and determination of the following:



      (1)   Technical evidence that the proposed use(s) generates a
parking demand that is at least 10% less than the required parking standard
in Vol. II, § 1-7-6, Table 7-3; and/or



      (2)   Determination by the Zoning Administrator that a portion
of the required parking can be accommodated with existing public parking that
is available within 100 feet of the property.



   (B)   Appeals. Variances and appeals to the parking standards shall
be applied for and processed through the Board of Adjustment and Appeals in
accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-5.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-7-5  LOADING FACILITY STANDARDS.



   Off-street loading, unloading and the maneuvering of commercial
vehicles shall be subject to the following:



   (A)   Circulation.  There shall be no loading or unloading of
commercial vehicles on the public street. Off-street maneuvering space shall
be provided so that no backing onto or from a public street is required.



   (B)   Screened. The loading area shall be screened from adjacent
residentially zoned property with a solid 8 foot high wall, and located to
minimize visibility from a public street.



   (C)   Size. Off-street loading spaces shall be at least 12 feet wide
and 35 feet deep, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-7-6  PRIVATE STREET STANDARDS.



   (A)   Private streets shall be a minimum of 28 feet in unobstructed
width of paved surface (back of curb to back of curb, if curbs are installed)
with a 20-foot by 20-foot cutoff at intersections or a minimum turning radius
of 20 feet. Narrower private streets may be permitted subject to City
Council, review and approval.



   (B)   A private street may be permitted where its use is logically
consistent with a desire for neighborhood identification and control of
access and where special design concepts may be involved, such as within
planned development areas, manufactured home developments, subdivisions or
with CUPs.



   (C)   Private streets shall be subject to Planning and Zoning
Commission recommendation, City Council approval and the following
requirements:



      (1)   Paving shall be installed according to City Engineering
Guidelines for public residential streets, or in accordance with subdivision
regulations, if applicable. Curbs, gutters, sidewalks and streetlights may be
required by the Council. Alternative paving surfaces may be permitted by the
Development Services Engineer;



      (2)   Other requirements may be imposed by the Council for
vehicular and pedestrian safety, utilities and emergency vehicle access;



      (3)   Private streets shall not be allowed if, in the opinion
of the City Council, a public street would better serve the public health,
safety and welfare, or the location of the private access way presents a
potential hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic at the intersection of
the private street with a public street; and



      (4)   City approvals shall be required for private streets.
The design engineer shall be responsible that their design meets the
geometrical and structural street design requirements and policies in
accordance with general engineering standards. Testing and inspection for
conformance of construction to minimum requirements of approved plans shall
be the responsibility of the developer, who shall provide the city with proof
that the requirements have been satisfied prior to project acceptance.



      (5)   The maintenance of private streets is a continuing
obligation of the property owners and/or homeowner's association. Streets
shall be kept in a clean, safe and well maintained condition. More,
specifically, the property owner and/or homeowner's association shall restore
the street to its original approved condition if parking surface areas become
deteriorated and/or emit dust particles into the air, as determined by the
Development Services Engineer.



TABLE 7-1: PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS



 

Angle of Parking
 
Stall Width
 
Curb Length Per Stall
 
Stall Depth
 
One-Way Aisle Width
 
Two-Way Aisle Width




Parallel
 
9'0"
 
22'0"
 
9'0"
 
12°
 
20°


30°
 
9'0"
 
18'0"
 
17'4"
 
11°
 
20°


40°
 
9'0"
 
14'0"
 
19'2"
 
12°
 
22°


45°
 
9'0"
 
12'9"
 
19'10"
 
13°
 
24°


50°
 
9'0"
 
11'9"
 
20'5"
 
15°
 
24°


60°
 
9'0"
 
10'5"
 
21'0"
 
18°
 
24°


70°
 
9'0"
 
9'8"
 
21'0"
 
19°
 
24°


90°
 
9'0"
 
9'0"
 
18'0"
 
24°
 
24°




 







 



Note: Up to 20% of the total required parking spaces may be compact spaces
with minimum 9' by 16' stall dimensions for 90 degree parking.



TABLE 7-2  SHARED PARKING CALCULATOR.



 

(A) Land Use
 
Weekday
 
Weekend
 
(F) Nighttime 12:00 a.m. - 6:00 a.m.


(B) Daytime 9:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
 
(C) Evening 6:00 p.m. - 12:00 a.m.
 
(C) Daytime 9:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
 
(E) Evening 6:00 p.m. - 12:00 a.m.


Office/Industrial
 
100%
 
10%
 
10%
 
5%
 
5%


Retail
 
60%
 
90%
 
100%
 
70%
 
5%


Hotel
 
75%
 
100%
 
75%
 
100%
 
75%


Restaurant
 
50%
 
100%
 
100%
 
100%
 
10%


Entertainment/
Commercial
 
40%
 
100%
 
80%
 
100%
 
10%



 



TABLE 7-3: NUMBER OF PARKING STALLS REQUIRED



 

CLASSIFICATION
 
NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED1




Residential


Single-family dwelling residential
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit.


Studio or efficiency residential
 
1 space per dwelling unit.


One-bedroom apartment
 
1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.


Two or more bedroom apartment
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit.


Independent senior housing
 
Based on specific project need as determined by the Zoning Administrator.


Assisted living senior housing
 
Based on specific project need as determined by the Zoning Administrator.


Nursing home
 
1 space per 3 beds.


Group home
 
Based on specific project need as determined by the Zoning Administrator.


Manufactured home or RV in park
 
1 space per unit space; plus 1 visitor parking space per 10 unit spaces; and
parking spaces to meet the needs to any commercial; office or public assembly.


Manufactured home in subdivision
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit.


Rooming house or boarding house
 
1 space per guest room; plus 1 space for resident manager.


Commercial


Retail and/or Office Sales and Service
 
1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Restaurant/bar/nightclub (indoor area)
 
1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of customer accessible area and 8 spaces of
stacking in the drive-through area.  Stacking shall be from the
pick-up/final window back.


Restaurant/bar/nightclub (outdoor area)
 
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of seating/service area outdoors, in addition to
required parking for indoor uses.


Medical and dental offices/clinics
 
1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.


Lodging (hotel/motel/bed and breakfast)
 
1 space per room, plus 1 space per 200 square feet of meeting, banquet and
restaurant space not solely intended for hotel guests and/or staff.


Indoor amusement center (including bowling alleys)
 
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.


Funeral home
 
1 space per 4 seats.


Hospital
 
1.5 spaces per bed.


Vehicle service and/or sales
 
1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area for office/display/seating,
plus 2 spaces per service bay.


Swap meets/farmer's markets
 
Based on specific project needs as determined by the Zoning Administrator.


Amusement park, fairground or transient show
 
Based on specific project need as determined by the Zoning Administrator.


Arena, stadium, auditorium or theater
 
1 space for every 5 seats (20 inches of bench or pew shall be considered 1
seat).

 

1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area if not permanent seats.


Institutional


Private lodges and clubs (no overnight lodging)
 
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.


Religious assembly
 
1 space for every 8 seats in the principal auditorium (20 inches of bench or
pew shall be considered 1 seat).  If no fixed seating is provided, 1 space
is required for every 50 sq. ft. of sanctuary/primary assembly area.


Outdoor recreational facilities
 
Based on specific project need as determined by the Zoning Administrator.


Schools
 
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.


Day care/nurseey
 
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.


Library and museum
 
Based on specific project need as determined by the Zoning Administrator.


Industrial


Industrial and warehousing
 
1 space per 1,000 square feet gross floor area of industrial, manufacturing
and warehouse space, plus 1 space per 300 square feet of office space.




 



1.   Fractional parking stall calculations should be rounded to the
nearest whole number.  For example, a parking stall requirement for 10.3
stalls should be rounded to 10 stalls, whereas a requirement for 10.7 stalls
should be rounded to 11 stalls.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-8:  LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS



Section



   1-8-1   Intent



   1-8-2   Interpretation



   1-8-3   Conflicting regulations



   1-8-4   Scope and applicability



   1-8-5   Exemptions



   1-8-6   Landscape standards



   1-8-7   Landscape plan submittal requirements



   1-8-8   Installation and inspection



   1-8-9   Dust control



   1-8-10   Surety



   1-8-11   Landscape maintenance



   1-8-12   Prohibited plants



   1-8-13   Native plant preservation



   1-8-14   Modifications and appeals



   1-8-15   Permit issuance



§ 1-8-1  INTENT.



   (A)   Create aesthetically pleasing views and vistas along public
streets.



   (B)   Complement and enhance the functional and aesthetic design of
new buildings and site development projects.



   (C)   Provide visual screening of parking, service and storage areas.



   (D)   Mitigate the adverse impacts of higher intensity land uses
upon lower intensity uses through landscape buffers.



   (E)   Promote water conservation by restricting the use of turf and
ornamental water features and requiring the use of low water use plant
materials.



   (F)   Promote climate modifications for enhancement of pedestrian
environments at street frontages, parking lots and building façade.



   (G)   Provide maximum shade on ground surfaces to reduce the urban
heat island effect.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-2  INTERPRETATION.



   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the interpretation of
the landscape regulations.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-3  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   Where there is a conflict between the provisions of the landscape
regulations and provisions of other city, the more restrictive provisions
shall apply.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-4  SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   New development. The landscape regulations shall apply to new
development of commercial, industrial, institutional, subdivision,
multi-family residential, manufactured home park and recreational vehicle
park land uses. The landscape regulations shall not, however, apply to
single-family and duplex dwellings.



   (B)   Additions and expansions to existing development. The
landscape regulations in Vol. II, § 1-8-6, Table 8-1 shall apply if the
existing building is expanded by more than 50% of its existing gross floor
area.



   (C)   Landscape plan approval. Landscape plans shall be subject to
review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (D)   Landscape architect required. Landscape plans shall be
prepared by a landscape architect registered in the State of Arizona. This
requirement may be waived if the Zoning Administrator determines that the
landscaping plan requires less than 10 plants.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-5  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Property frontage less than 50 feet wide. Business zoned
properties with less than 50 feet of street frontage, and/or which are less
than 10,000 net square feet in size, shall be exempt from the landscape
standards unless required to be landscaped and screened as part of an
approved Planned Development rezoning, CUP or AUP. The Director or designee
may require, however, that minimal landscape and screening improvements
(e.g., planters, foundation shrubbery, and parking lot shading) be installed
prior to occupancy.



   (B)   B-2 (Old West) and B-3 (City Center) zoned  districts.
Property located within the B-2 (Old West) and the B-3 (City Center) zoned
district shall be subject to the following unique landscape requirements:



      (1)   Transition buffer. Business zoned properties adjacent to
residentially zoned lots/parcels are encouraged to provide a landscape
buffer/screen wall between their business site and the residential site.



      (2)   Parking lot buffer. A landscape buffer between the
parking lot area and public road right-of-way is encouraged.



      (3)   Parking lot landscaping. Properties with greater than 20
parking stalls shall comply with Vol. II, § 1-8-6(D).



      (4)   Desert plants. All trees and plant material shall be
compatible with the desert environment, be water-efficient and shall conform
to the current recommended low water using plant list of the Arizona
Department of Water Resources Phoenix Active Management Area, or alternative
city approved materials that are drought-resistant.



      (5)   Installation and surety. Required landscaping shall be
installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final
inspection, as applicable. A site inspection must be conducted by the
Planning Division to verify proper installation. It is the owner's (or
owner's representative's) responsibility to arrange an inspection appointment
with the Planning Division. A surety bond, cash deposit or assured letter of
credit in an amount to guarantee the installation of the landscaping within 6
months from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final
inspection may be permitted by the Development Services Director or designee
in lieu of immediate installation of plant materials.  The allowable
installation period will not be extended more than 6 months from the date of
the certificate of occupancy or final inspection.



      (6)   Landscape maintenance. All landscaping shall be
reasonably maintained and any dead plant material shall be immediately
replaced by the property owner. Maintenance shall include but not be limited
to removal of debris, pruning, trimming, watering or other requirements to
create an attractive appearance for the development. Maintenance must ensure
that pedestrian and vehicular traffic will not be obstructed by any of the
vegetation.



      (7)   Overhead wires. Undergrounding of overhead wires and
equipment shall be required in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-8-6(N).



      (8)   Planters, planting pots and raised planters. Landscape
planters, planting pots and/or raised planters shall be required between the
building and the road right-of-way(s), along walkways, and within parking
areas, as approved by the Zoning Administrator. The landscape planters,
and/or flower boxes shall be appropriately sized and accommodate a minimum of
two 5 gallon shrubs per 20 feet of property frontage.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-6  LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Street frontage. Trees, shrubs and groundcover shall be
installed in accordance with the following:



      (1)   Minimum quantity and size of plants. See Vol. II, §
1-8-6, Table 8-1.



      (2)   Groundcover.  The street frontage planting strip shall
include vegetative ground cover (1-gallon minimum) and be covered with
inorganic mulch such as crushed decorative rock, river run and/or boulders.
An impervious weed barrier or pre-emergent chemical treatment shall be
applied to the bare ground prior to the placement of inorganic ground cover
materials.



      (3)   Planting strip. Required trees and shrubs shall be
planted within a 10 foot wide planting strip adjacent to and parallel with
the street right-of-way. No trees or shrubs shall be planted within the
public road right-of-way without approval from the Public Works Department.



      (4)   Parking lot screen wall. See Vol. II, § 1-8-6(B)(1).



      (5)   Substitutions. Twenty (20%) percent of the required
shade trees may be substituted with minimum 10 foot high Saguaro cactus.



      (6)   Existing landscaping. Existing trees and shrubs located
within the street frontage landscaping area may be counted as part of the
street frontage landscape requirement if the existing tree(s) meets the
minimum size requirement.



      (7)   Flexible design. The Zoning Administrator may approve a
more natural landscape distribution of trees and shrubs rather than the
regimented plant spacing provided in Vol. II, § 1-8-6, Table 8-1.



   (B)   Screening.



      (1)   Screen walls for side and rear property lines. Where
industrial or commercial development is proposed to be located adjacent to an
existing or future residential property, screening walls shall be required in
accordance with Vol. II, § 1-6-3, Table 6-2.



      (2)   Screen walls for parking. If parking is located between
the building and the front road right-of-way, a decorative wall or fence
between 3 and 4 feet in height shall be installed at the interior edge of the
planting strip to serve as a visual transition between the roadside planting
strip and the parking area (see Vol. II, § 1-6-3, Table 6-2).



      (3)   Screening for patios. Restaurant and bar patio
enclosures shall be allowed in accordance with Vol. II, Table 6-2.



      (4)   Screening of outdoor storage. Outdoor storage on
business zoned properties shall be screened in accordance with Vol. II, §
1-6-9(B)(2) and Vol. II, § 1-6-3, Table 6-2.



      (5)   Screening of dumpsters. Dumpsters on business,
institutional and multi-family residential properties shall be screened with
a minimum 6-foot high decorative masonry wall and a decorative gate. Dumpster
gates shall be closed except while loading and unloading.



   (C)   Open space area landscaping. Any part of a site not utilized
for structures, parking, driveways or sidewalks is defined as open space and
shall be covered with either vegetative ground cover (1-gallon minimum) or
inorganic ground cover such as decomposed granite, crushed decorative rock,
river run and/or boulders. An impervious weed barrier or pre-emergent
chemical treatment shall be applied to the bare ground prior to the placement
of inorganic ground cover. Additionally, open space areas shall be landscaped
with plantings in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-8-6, Table 8-1.



   (D)   Interior parking lot landscaping. Parking lots containing 10
or more parking spaces shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Minimum quantity and size. See Vol. II, § 1-8-6, Table
8-1.



      (2)   Coverage. A minimum of 10% of the parking lot shall be
landscaped. This landscaping shall consist of landscaped islands and
peninsulas located within the parking lot. The parking lot is defined as the
interior area within the perimeter of the curbs or the edge of pavement
framing the parking lot area.



      (3)   Landscape island spacing and size. Landscape islands or
peninsulas shall be installed at least every 12 consecutive parking spaces
with a minimum 5 foot width and minimum 50 square foot area.



TABLE 8-1: LANDSCAPE AREA STANDARDS



 

Landscape Area
 
Minimum Amount
 
Minimum Size


Street Frontage
 
1 tree and 5 shrubs per 30 ft. of frontage
 
Trees: 24" box
Shrubs: 5 gallon


Interior Parking Lot
 
1 tree and 5 shrubs per 10 stalls
 
Trees: 24" box
Shrubs: 5 gallon


Open Space
 
1 tree and 5 shrubs per 1,000 sq. ft.
 
Trees: 15 gallon
Shrubs: 5 gallon



 



   (E)   Retention basin landscaping. Retention basins shall be
landscaped in accordance with excepted engineering standards to manage
erosion.



   (F)   Irrigation. All landscaping shall be serviced with a permanent
underground automated irrigation system designed in compliance with the
"Minimum Standards for Landscape Irrigation" by the Arizona Chapter, American
Society of Irrigation Consultants, which is on file with the Director or
designee.



   (G)   Curbing. In order to control storm water flows and minimize
damage to plantings by vehicular traffic, all landscaped areas adjacent to
vehicular parking and access areas shall be protected by 6 inch vertical
concrete curbing, anchored wheel stop, decorative bollards or other
alternative approved by the Director or designee.



   (H)   Desert plants. All trees and plant material shall conform to
the current recommended low water using plant list of the Arizona Department
of Water Resources Phoenix Active Management Area. Furthermore, landscape
plans shall comply with Vol. II, § 1-8-13 of this Chapter. Limited turf
areas may be allowed for accent areas subject to approval of the Director or
designee.



   (I)   Intersection visibility triangle. Plant material installed
within the site triangle at roadway intersections shall not exceed 3 feet in
height at maturity. The site triangle requirements are further defined in
Vol. II, § 1-6-13.



   (J)   Landscaping in utility easements. Landscaping planted in
utility easements shall comply with the requirements established by utility
company policy.



   (K)   Relocation of overhead wires and equipment.



      (1)   Intent and purpose. The intent and purpose of requiring
certain overhead wires and equipment to be placed underground is to enhance
the visual aesthetics of the city and to protect the views of the
Superstition Mountains, while taking into consideration the financial burden
on the property owner and/or developer due to the cost of burying overhead
lines.



      (2)   Applicability. All new or existing overhead lines and
equipment (i.e., poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs,
platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches,
communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances used for
electrical, communication, entertainment, and information transmission
purposes) located along the property's road frontage shall be placed
underground at the developer's or property owner's cost as a condition of
subdivision, development and/or redevelopment approval, if all of the
following conditions apply:



         (a)   Electrical power lines are 12 kilovolt (kV) or
less capacity;



         (b)   The width of property (i.e., development site)
frontage exceeds 150 feet; and



         (c)   The proposed subdivision, development or
redevelopment is located along a principle arterial, Old West Highway, Apache
Trail, State Route 88, any new private and public streets or within an
adopted redevelopment area.



      (3)   Exemptions. All requests for exemption from this
requirement must be presented in writing to the Director or designee prior to
development or redevelopment approval by the city. The Director or designee
may exempt or conditionally exempt a proposed development or redevelopment
from the requirement to place new and/or existing overhead wires and
equipment underground after review and determination of the following:



         (a)   The adjacent land on both sides of the proposed
development/redevelopment property is developed with existing structures or
buildings and has existing overhead lines and equipment located along the
property's public or private road frontage;



         (b)   The character of existing development within the
immediate area exhibits a dominant pattern of existing overhead lines and
equipment;



         (c)   The proposed development/ redevelopment does not
qualify as a substantial improvement;



         (d)   The proposed development results in a minor
subdivision of 3 or less lots; or



         (e)   The developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the Director or designee that undergrounding overhead lines and equipment
will result in the proposed development not being constructed.



         (f)   In no case, however, shall new utility service
extensions from existing service/transmission lines to a proposed subdivision
or nonresidential development or redevelopment be exempted from the
undergrounding requirement.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-7  LANDSCAPE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Number of plans needed. Four sets of scaled plans and 1
digital set of plans.



   (B)   Required landscape plan elements. The landscape plan shall
include the following details:



      (1)   Proper dimensions and drawn to scale.



      (2)   North arrow and scale.



      (3)   Location of proposed and existing landscaping including
trees, shrubs, turf, ground cover and inorganic materials.



      (4)   Landscape illustrations depicted at mature size.



      (5)   Schedule identifying botanical and common plant name,
planting size and plant quantity.



      (6)   Property lines, right-of-way(s), easements, alleys and
adjacent private streets.



      (7)   Existing and proposed building footprints.



      (8)   Existing and proposed parking spaces and internal
traffic circulation.



      (9)   Existing and proposed location of walkways and sidewalks.



      (10)   Existing and proposed location of refuse/dumpster
area(s).



      (11)   Existing and proposed location of outside storage
area(s), if any.



      (12)   Existing and proposed location of outside product
display area(s), if any.



      (13)   Existing and proposed freestanding signs.



      (14)   Existing and proposed light poles.



      (15)   Irrigation plan showing location of controller,
existing or proposed meters, backflow preventer, water lines, heads, and
materials.



      (16)   Project data table that includes:



         (a)   Gross and net site area.



         (b)   Existing zoning of property.



         (c)   Lot coverage (i.e., square feet of impervious
surface area).



         (d)   Gross floor area of existing and proposed
buildings.



         (e)   Landscape area (i.e., square feet of pervious
surface area).



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-8  INSTALLATION AND INSPECTION.



   All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with Arizona Nursery
Association standards and the approved landscape plan. The Zoning
Administrator shall inspect all landscaping and no certificate of occupancy
or similar authorization will be issued unless the landscaping meets the
Landscape Code requirements.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-9  DUST CONTROL.



   Dust control during and after installation of landscaping shall comply
with state and federal particulate matter requirements.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-10  SURETY.



   All required landscaping materials shall be in place prior to issuance
of a certificate of occupancy, weather permitting. In periods of adverse
weather conditions, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued,
subject to the posting of a cash escrow, performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit in an amount equal to 1-1/2 times the estimated cost of the
landscaping, with the estimated cost to be certified by a licensed
landscaping contractor. The cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit may
be forfeited if the required landscaping is not completed within 6 months
after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Forfeiture of any cash
escrow, performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall not relieve
the owner of the responsibility to complete the required landscaping.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-11  LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Responsibility.



      (1)   The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be
jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping
within their own private property or on the adjoining right-or-way.
Landscaping shall be maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly
appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris.



      (2)   The property owner is responsible for obtaining required
permits for the location of landscaping in a public right-of-way. Lack of
maintenance shall constitute a violation of this code.



   (B)   Replacement plants. Dead plants or plants that have been
removed shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or tenant to replace
immediately. All replacement plants and other non-living landscape materials
shall be equal in size, density and appearance as originally required at the
time of the approval of the development.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-12  PROHIBITED PLANTS.



   (A)   Olive Trees (Olea Europaea), are prohibited for reasons of
their profuse production of allergy producing pollen. However, the "Swan Hill
Olive" and the "Wilson Olive" varieties may be used due to their
non-flowering non-pollen status.



   (B)   Fountain Grass (Pennisetum Setaceum) is prohibited as a
defined weed with the potential to spread throughout the city and become a
fire hazard.



   (C)   Common Bermuda Grass (Cynodon Dactilon) is prohibited as a
defined weed and for its profuse production of allergy producing pollen. (For
clarification purposes, non-allergenic species are permissible as approved by
the city).



   (D)   Mulberry Trees (Morus) are prohibited as noxious pollen
producers.



   (E)   Other plants deemed inappropriate by interpretation of the
Zoning Administrator and/or City Landscape Architect.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-13  NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   Protect native plants and to ensure appropriate
re-vegetation for all development projects.



      (2)   Provide for in-place preservation and protection of
existing protected native plants and the transplanting of protected native
plant materials indigenous to the area and typical of the Sonoran Desert
region.



      (3)   Preserve the organic characteristics of the Sonoran
Desert region.



      (4)   Preserve desert wildlife habitats and food sources.



      (5)   Require the protection and re-vegetation of protected
native plants disturbed during land development.



      (6)   Encourage the use of protected native plants that are
drought tolerant and require low maintenance and minimal groundwater after
establishment.



      (7)   Reduce the potential for erosion by water, wind or
subsidence.



   (B)   Applicability. The native plant preservation requirements
shall apply to rezonings, subdivision plats, non-residential and residential
construction, CUPs and/or any amendments thereof.



   (C)   Standards for native plant protection and preservation.



      (1)   Protected native trees. High rated native trees with a
4-inch or larger caliper trunk (as measured 1 foot from the adjacent ground
surface) that are listed in Vol. II, § 1-8-15, Table 8-2 shall be considered
protected.



      (2)   Protected cacti and shrubs. High rated native cacti and
shrubs that are 3 feet in height or taller that are listed in Vol. II, §
1-8-15, Table 8-2 shall be considered protected.



      (3)   Non-protected native plants. All other native plants
with less than a 4-inch caliper trunk or 3 feet in height, and with less than
a high rating, are considered non-protected and may be offered for salvage to
the city, nonprofit organizations or other qualified organizations within 30
days prior to scheduled grubbing and grading operations.



      (4)   Location/transplanting.



         (a)   Protected plants. All protected native plants
shall be preserved in place or salvaged and transplanted within on-site
landscaped areas if located within a grading/construction area.



         (b)   Non-protected plants. All non-protected native
plants shall be placed in a salvage pool for off-site transplanting if
requested by the city, or properly disposed of by the property owner.



         (c)   Temporary nursery. Protected plants to be
transplanted shall be maintained in a temporary nursery pending relocation in
accordance with the approved landscape plan. All temporary nurseries shall
provide automatic drip irrigation and fertilizer to promote plant health,
until such time that plants are moved for re-planting.



         (d)   Donation to city. Any protected native plants that
the developer and Zoning Administrator agree cannot be used on-site, may be
donated to the city in conformance with the Arizona Department of Agriculture
requirements regarding "notice of intent to clear land".



   (D)   Landscape plan submittal requirements. In addition to the
landscape plan submittal requirements described in Vol. II, § 1-8-7, the
following additional information is required for properties with protected
native plants:



      (1)   Professional credentials. Landscape plans for property
with protected native plants shall be prepared by a pre-approved plant
salvage professional with credentials as a Western Chapter International
Society of Arboriculture ("ISA") certified arborist. Salvage contractors
wishing to be placed on this list must first submit a written methodology for
inventory, rating and salvaging plants for city approval. Interested parties
may contact the city's Development Services Department for further
information.



      (2)   Landscape plan details. A landscape plan with the
following details shall be submitted and approved for properties with
protected native plants prior to issuance of a grading and building permit:



         (a)   A recent aerial photo or site plan showing
construction limits and showing an inventory of all protected native plants,
in addition to the project name, a scale (minimum scale of 1 inch = 50 feet),
a north arrow, a vicinity map, the adjacent street names, and the name of the
company performing the inventory.



         (b)   Identification and inventory of all native
protected plants within the area permitted for grading and 50 feet beyond, or
to the edge of the property, whichever is the shorter distance.



         (c)   The salvage status of each plant (i.e., remaining
in place, relocating or being removed) with a tag number, species (both
common and botanical names), size and general condition of each plant. If a
plant is noted as non-salvageable, the reason or reasons for the assessment
shall be stated.



         (d)   The new location and placement of salvaged
protected native plant material, including any proposals and justifications
for specific plants to be removed from the project site shall be submitted.



         (e)   Location of any on-site nursery for the storage of
salvaged protected native plants.



         (f)   A copy of the approved and stamped Arizona
Department of Agriculture "notice of intent to clear land" shall be submitted.



   (E)   Plant ratings. The designation of "high rated" plants, as
determined by the plant professional, shall be based on the following
criteria:



      (1)   The plant's health reflecting the degree of major
infestations or apparent diseases.



      (2)   The plant's age reflecting the likelihood of transplant
survival.



      (3)   The plant's conduciveness to boxing during the
transplanting; tree spading will be allowed on a case-by-case basis.



      (4)   Ability of excavating existing soil, cohesiveness and
ability to support a box transplant.



      (5)   Accessibility of surrounding topography to box and
remove the plant(s).



      (6)   The likelihood that adjacent plants will not interfere
with any root systems or with plant removal.



   (F)   Mitigation.



      (1)   Protected native plants harmed by on-site salvage and
transplant, or damaged or destroyed during development shall be mitigated by
1-to-1 species replacement with a minimum 48-inch box size for trees and 10
foot minimum height for Saguaro cactus.



      (2)   Protected native plants that have been destroyed by an
act of God shall not be subject to the mitigation replacement requirements as
long as every effort to maintain the health of the plant has occurred.



   (G)   Inspections.



      (1)   All protected native plants scheduled to remain in place
or authorized for destruction, removal or relocation by the approved
landscape plan shall be tagged and numbered by the plant specialist prior to
an on-site inspection by the Development Services Department staff. Salvage
operations shall not commence until the Development Services Department staff
has performed an inspection and given approval to begin salvage.



      (2)   Tags shall be color-coded according to the following
schedule so that the status of each plant may be easily identified:



         (a)   Protected native plants proposed to remain in
place shall be tagged with green plastic tape.



         (b)   Protected native plants proposed for relocation
on-site shall be tagged with white plastic tape.



         (c)   Protected native plants proposed for destruction
shall be tagged with red plastic tape.



         (d)   Non-protected native plants proposed for off-site
relocation by the city shall be tagged with yellow plastic tape.



      (3)   Tags required by this section shall be affixed in a
visible location on the plant. The initial inspection will be performed once
tagging is completed and an inspection request has been received by the
Development Services Department.



      (4)   Once attached, the tags shall not be removed until the
approved landscape plan is implemented and a final inspection has been
performed by the Development Services Development.



      (5)   All areas designated to remain as natural open space or
protected native plants designated to remain in place shall be contained with
a fence or a durable tape for protection during construction. The Director or
designee may allow an alternative method to protect plants during
construction. The applicant is responsible for maintaining this "no
disturbance" boundary line, and no protected native plants within this
protected area shall be salvaged or destroyed.



      (6)   The city may perform a nursery inspection to verify
conditions of protected native plants during construction of the site.



      (7)   A final inspection shall be performed by the Development
Services Department which verifies the required on-site relocation of
salvaged plants to their new locations, and the required in-place
preservation of protected native plants.



   (H)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   Any person who, individually or through the acts of
another person, intentionally or negligently damages, destroys or removes
from the



site any protected native plant, except as authorized by an approved
landscape plan, shall be subject to a civil penalty based on the following:



         (a)   Protected native trees: up to $300 per caliper
inch (measured 1 foot above ground level).



         (b)   Protected native cacti: $200 per foot.



         (c)   Maximum per plant: $5,000.



      (2)   Civil penalties shall be ordered by the Director of
designee in accordance with administrative procedures established by the
Director.



      (3)   Determination of the sum of money to be paid to the city
pursuant to this section shall be based upon the type, size, density,
distribution and condition of the protected native plant materials that
existed on the property prior to the violation, or upon inspection of the
remains of destroyed protected native plant materials or other physical
evidence as may be available. Any party may appeal a civil penalty order to
the City Manager or his or her designee by filing the appeal with the City
Clerk's Department no later than 20 calendar days from the date of the
Development Services Department's civil penalty determination. Within 5
working days, the City Manager or his or her designee shall hold a hearing on
the matter. Within 5 working days after the hearing, the City Manager or his
or her designee shall send a written determination to the appellant. This
decision is final at the city level but can be appealed to the Pinal County
Superior Court pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-904 et seq. in accordance with
similar administrative appeals.



   (I)   Criminal penalties. In addition to the civil penalties
referenced above, any violator of this chapter may be charged with a class
one misdemeanor by the City Attorney's office. See criminal penalties under
Vol. II, § 1-16-16.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-14  MODIFICATIONS AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Conditional use permit modifications.  The size, type and
amount of required landscaping may be modified by CUP approval in accordance
with Vol. II, § 1-16-12(D)(4).



   (B)   Board of Adjustment. Variances and appeals to the
interpretation of the landscape standards shall be applied for and processed
in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-5.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-8-15  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Building permits. Building permits shall not be issued prior
to Zoning Administrator approval of the required landscape plan.



   (B)   Certificate of occupancy. Certificates of occupancy shall not
be issued prior to completion of landscape installation and acceptance by the
Zoning Administrator, or the posting of the appropriate surety as provide in
Vol. II, § 1-8-10. Compliance with this requirement shall be recorded in
written form and released through the Zoning Administrator to the Building
Official.



TABLE 8-2: PROTECTED NATIVE PLANT LIST



 

LATIN NAME
 
COMMON NAME
 
PROTECTION




Carnegiea gigantea
 
Saguaro
 
NPL


Castela emoryi
 
Crucifixion Thorn
 
NPL


Cercidium floridum
 
Blue Palo Verde, 4" caliper
 
NPL


Cercidium microphyllum
 
Foothills Palo Verde, 4" caliper or more
 
NPL


Echinocactus horizonthalonius var.
 
Blue Barrel Cactus
 
NPL/ESA


Ferocactus wislizenii
 
Fishhook Barrel
 
NPL


Fouquieria splendens
 
Ocotillo
 
NPL


Mammillaria thornberi
 
Thornber Clustered Pincushion
 
NFL


Olneya tesota
 
Ironwood
 
NPL


Peniocereus greggi
 
Desert Night-blooming Cereus
 
NPL


Prosopis pubescens
 
Screwbean Mesquite
 
NPL


Prosopis velutina
 
Velvet Mesquite
 
NPL


Tumamoca macdougalii
 
Tumamoc Globeberry
 
NPL


Yucca elata
 
Soaptree Yucca
 
NPL


Zizyphus obtusifolia var. canescens
 
Greythorn
 
NPL


KEY:


"ESA"=Plants protected by the Federal Endangered Species Act.


"NPL"=Plants regulated by the Arizona Native Plant Law.




 



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-9:  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE REGULATIONS



Section



   1-9-1   Intent



   1-9-2   Standards for manufactured home on single-family zoned lots



   1-9-3   Standards for manufactured home parks and/or recreational
vehicle parks



   1-9-4   Permits and approvals



§ 1-9-1  INTENT.



   These regulations are intended to regulate manufactured homes located
within single-family residential zoning districts, and manufactured homes and
recreational vehicles located in manufactured home or recreational vehicle
("RV") parks.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-9-2  STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES ON SINGLE-FAMILY ZONED LOTS.



   (A)   Required zoning. Manufactured homes may only be located within
the RS-GR, RS-54M, RS-20M, RS-10M and RS-7M single-family residential
districts.



   (B)   Foundation required. Manufactured homes located on individual
single-family zoned lots (i.e., not within parks) shall be permanently
attached to a foundation that is approved by the Arizona Office of
Manufactured Housing.



   (C)   Amount. Not more than 1 manufactured home shall be permitted
on single-family zoned lots. RVs used as a residence shall not be permitted
on single-family zoned lots unless permitted as a legal non-conforming use,
as a personal caretaker or property caretaker pursuant to Vol. II, §§
1-6-19 and 1-6-20 or as a temporary residence during construction pursuant to
Vol. II, § 1-6-23.



   (D)   Maximum height. Manufactured homes on single-family lots are
subject to the maximum height standards for the main structure within the
zoning district where the home is located (see Vol. II, § 1-5-2, Table 5-2).



   (E)   Minimum lot size. Lots for manufactured homes are subject to
the minimum lot size standards within the zoning district where the home is
located (see Vol. II, § 1-5-2, Table 5-2).



   (F)   Minimum setbacks. Setbacks for manufactured homes on
single-family lots are subject to the minimum setback standards within the
zoning district where the home is located (see Vol. II, § 1-5-2, Table 5-2).



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-9-3  STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND/OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
PARKS.



   (A)   Required zoning. Parks that accommodate manufactured homes and
RVs shall only be zoned MHP. Parks that accommodate only RVs shall only be
zoned RVP.



   (B)   Limitation on RVs in MHP District. No more than 30% of the
park spaces/lots in a MHP zoned park may be used for RVs.



   (C)   Minimum park area. Ten acres for both manufactured home and RV
parks.



   (D)   Minimum park space size. Two thousand square feet for RV park
space and 3,500 square feet for manufactured home park space/lot (see Vol.
II, § 1-9-4, Table 9-1).



   (E)   Minimum park space width. Thirty feet for RV park space and 50
feet for manufactured home park space (see Vol. II, § 1-9-4, Table 9-1).



   (F)   Maximum height. Fifteen feet for both RVs and manufactured
homes.



   (G)   Minimum setbacks. See Tables 5-2 or 9-1 (see §§ 1-5-2 and
1-9-4).



   (H)   Number allowed. Only 1 RV or manufactured home shall be
allowed on each approved park space/lot. No dwelling units of conventional
construction shall be permitted on a park space/lot.



   (I)   Accessory structure standards. Detached accessory structures
shall be subject to the following standards:



      (1)   Minimum setbacks. See Tables 5-2 or 9-1 (see §§ 1-5-2
and 1-9-4).



      (2)   Height. Fifteen feet maximum.



      (3)   Easement areas. No structures shall be located within a
public utility easement or drainage easement area.



      (4)   Design. There are no design standards for accessory
buildings in the MHP and RVP districts.



   (J)   Manager's office/residence. A manager's office and community
buildings shall be allowed as either conventional or modular construction.



   (K)   Community center. Recreation and social centers may be used by
residents for dancing, crafts, hobbies, games, child care, meetings,
banquets, theatrical performances, movie viewing and similar entertainment
uses. Such facilities shall be of conventional construction (i.e., not
factory built).



   (L)   Outdoor recreational facilities. Outdoor recreation facilities
such as parks, swimming pools, ramadas, playground equipment, shuffleboard
and tennis courts, putting greens, and similar recreational uses intended for
use by the residents of the park shall be allowed.



   (M)   Ancillary retail sales, special events/activities intended for
park residents only. Park management shall apply for and obtain an AUP from
the Zoning Administrator prior to conducting or allowing park sponsored and
authorized ancillary retail sales (e.g., market days, craft/art sales,
fundraisers and temporary food vendors) or special events/activities. If
approved, the Zoning Administrator shall issue an AUP with written conditions
of approval in accordance with the following:



      (1)   All proprietors and vendors shall possess valid business
licenses and permits as required by the City Code, and comply with required
sales tax administration and collection processes.



      (2)   The application for an administrative permit shall
contain a description of the retail sales activity, maximum number and type
of vendors, days and hours of operation and a site plan illustrating the
location and parking associated with the retail sales.



      (3)   All signs that describe or relate to ancillary retail
activities shall not be visible from beyond the boundaries of the park.



      (4)   Ancillary retail sales shall be conducted indoors within
the recreational/social center or outdoors within a common area.



      (5)   Parking for approved ancillary retail uses shall be
accommodated within established and approved parking areas, or by on-street
parking approved by the zoning administrator.



      (6)   Ancillary retail sales shall be directed to, and be for
the benefit of, park residents and their guests only.



      (7)   Ancillary retail sales shall not exceed more than 3 days
per week and shall operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



      (8)   The administrative permit may be valid for multiple
events.



      (9)   Failure to comply with the conditions of approval
established in the administrative permit may result in the revocation of the
permit, and prohibition on issuing future ancillary retail sales permits to
the park.



   (N)   Ancillary retail sales, special events/activities intended for
both park residents and non-park residents. Special events and/or activities
hosted or sponsored by the parks (e.g., concerts, fund raisers, lectures,
seminars, workshops, educational classes, recreation, food/beverage sales,
sporting events and meetings) or ancillary retail uses (e.g., restaurants,
personal care services, specialty retail and professional offices) shall only
be allowed subject to approval of a CUP or, if applicable, compliance with
Vol. I, Chapter 8 of the City Code regarding special events.



   (O)   Common use areas/structures. Common-use laundry facilities,
maintenance buildings, and security guard house shall be allowed subject to
conventional construction design.



   (P)   Required parking. There shall be a minimum of one 9' x 20'
paved parking space per park space. The required parking space may be
covered; however the cover may not encroach into the setback area.



   (Q)   Accessory parking. Designated areas for boat and recreational
vehicle storage which are used solely by the residents of the park shall be
allowed, but shall not exceed 20% of the park's land area. Additionally,
parking to accommodate recreation center use and park guests shall be
required in accordance with Zoning Administrator review and approval of the
number and location of parking spaces.



   (R)   Private street widths. Private streets developed within RV
parks shall have a minimum width of 28 feet and a minimum turning radius of
22 feet.



   (S)   Access. Access to lots or spaces shall be from the interior of
the park.



   (T)   Screening walls. Minimum 6 foot high solid screening walls
shall be constructed around the perimeter of the manufactured home park and
RV park. The portion of the wall(s) facing the public street shall be
constructed as a decorative wall and all exterior wall surfaces shall be
stained or colored with an earth tone approved by the Zoning Administrator.



   (U)   Skirting. A manufactured home and park model shall be skirted
in a uniform manner if located within a park for 30 calendar days or more,
but shall not be required to be attached to a permanent foundation.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-9-4  PERMITS AND APPROVALS.



   (A)   Site plan approval required. Development, redevelopment and/or
expansion of an RV park or manufactured home park shall require city approval
of a site plan in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-9.



   (B)   Building permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person
to install a manufactured home, park model, structure, addition or any
electrical, plumbing, or mechanical component without first obtaining a
required permit or permits from the Building Division.



   (C)   Owner approval required. No person shall install any
manufactured home, structure or addition without approval of the property
owner, the owner's agent, or other authorized representative.



TABLE 9-1: STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND RV PARKS



 


 
Recreational Vehicle Park
 
Manufactured Home Park




Required Zoning:
 
RVP
 
MHP


Minimum Park Area:
 
10 acres
 
10 acres


Minimum Space Size:
 
2,000 sq. ft.
 
3,500 sq. ft.


Minimum Space Width:
 
30 feet
 
50 feet


Front Setback1:
 
3 feet
 
8 feet


Street Side Setback1:
 
3 feet
 
8 feet


Side Setback2:
 
3 feet
 
5 feet


Rear Setback2:
 
3 feet
 
5 feet


Property Line Setback:
 
5 feet
 
5 feet


Max. Acc. Structure Height
 
20 feet
 
20 feet




 



1.   The front setback and street side setback shall be measured from the
nearest edge of the interior road/curb fronting the park space/lot.



2.   One detached accessory storage structure smaller than 120 square feet
in size may be located anywhere to the side or rear of the RV or manufactured
home. Additional accessory structures, including awnings, shall comply with
the front, side and rear setbacks in Vol. II, Table 9-1 above.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-10:  OUTDOOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS



Section



   1-10-1   Intent



   1-10-2   Interpretation



   1-10-3   Scope and applicability



   1-10-4   Exemptions



   1-10-5   Prohibited fixtures



   1-10-6   Lighting standards



   1-10-7   Non-conforming fixtures



   1-10-8   Plan submittal requirements



   1-10-9   Verification, inspection and enforcement



   1-10-10   Appeals



§ 1-10-1  INTENT.



   (A)   The outdoor lighting regulations are intended to achieve a
balance between safety and aesthetics by regulating the quality and quantity
of nighttime illumination. Accordingly, these regulations will control the
use of artificial outdoor illuminating devices in a manner that conserves
energy, improves safety and security and reduces outdoor lighting glare and
trespass.



   (B)   The city recognizes the International Dark-Sky Association,
the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America ("IESNA"), and the
International Energy Conservation Code ("IECC"), and has used these
organization's recommendations and standards as guiding principles in the
development of the outdoor lighting regulations.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-10-2  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the
interpretation of the outdoor lighting regulations.



   (B)   The interpretation of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed
to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



   (C)   The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to prevent the
use of any material or method of installation not specifically prescribed by
the this chapter, provided any such alternate has been approved by the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the following:



      (1)   Fixture or device provides approximate equivalence to
the specific requirements of this chapter; or



      (2)   Fixture or device is otherwise satisfactory and complies
with the intent of this Chapter.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-10-3  SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   New installations. These regulations shall apply to all new
installations of outdoor lighting fixtures or devices that require city
approval and/or issuance of a permit.



   (B)   Replacements. If renovation of a property's lighting system
requires a permit and results in replacement of more than 50% of the
property's lighting fixtures within a 1-year period, the entire property's
lighting system shall be brought into compliance with this Chapter. These
regulations shall not apply to simple replacement of a lamp or fixture that
does not require city approval and/or issuance of permit.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-10-4  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Existing outdoor lighting fixtures and devices that were
legally permitted and installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter.



   (B)   Standard maintenance replacement of lamps that were legally
permitted and installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter.



   (C)   Fossil fuel light lighting produced by the combustion of
natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels.



   (D)   Incandescent light bulbs less than or equal to 150 watts, and
compact fluorescent lamps less than or equal to 40 watts.



   (E)   Replacement of outdoor residential lighting fixtures or lamps
that do not require an electrical permit.



   (F)   Motion sensor controlled security lighting.



   (G)   City approved street lighting and public recreational
facilities.



   (H)   State, federal and local jurisdictions that are pre-empted
from local zoning control.



   (I)   Temporary emergency lighting needed for public safety.



   (J)   Vehicle lights.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-10-5  PROHIBITED FIXTURES.



   (A)   Installation of any fixture or lamp that does not comply with
this Chapter.



   (B)   Mercury vapor, strobe, flashing or search lights.



   (C)   The use of laser source light or any similar high-intensity
light for outdoor advertising when projected above the horizontal plane.



   (D)   Private recreational facility lighting after 10:00 p.m.,
unless authorized by the city.



   (E)   Unshielded outdoor illumination of any building, landscaping
or site, except for exempt lighting.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-10-6  LIGHTING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Full cutoff fixtures. Full cutoff fixtures shall be required
for non-exempt fixtures in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-10-10, Table 10-1. A
full cutoff fixture is designed such that no light is projected at or above a
90-degree plane running through the lowest point on the fixture.



   (B)   Shielded fixtures. Shielded fixtures shall be required for
non-exempt fixtures in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-10-10, Table 10-1. A
shielded fixture is designed such that no light source is visible to adjacent
properties and streets.



   (C)   Canopy lighting. Lighting under canopies shall be fully
recessed or flush with the bottom surface of the canopy. Alternatively,
indirect lighting where the light is directed upward and then reflected down
from the underside of the canopy shall be allowed subject to the light source
not being visible from the ground or street.



   (D)   Sign lighting. External lighting fixtures for signs shall be
placed above the sign and shall be shielded and directed downward so that the
illumination source is not be visible from adjacent street or property.



   (E)   Billboard lighting. Billboards shall have shielded lighting
equipped with a permanent automatic shut-off device that turns the lighting
off between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 5:00 a.m., daily.



   (F)   Landscape and building lighting.



      (1)   Landscaping and building accent lighting shall be
shielded and directed to prevent horizontal and vertical glare and light
trespass to the street, neighboring property and sky.



      (2)   The use of exposed neon, argon, light emitting
diode/krypton tubing, incandescent lighting or other similar lighting to
outline any structure or portion thereof may be allowed if, according to the
Zoning Administrator, such lighting constitutes a design component of the
overall building architecture, is harmonious with the architectural style of
the building, and does not portray an advertising message.



   (G)   String lighting. Exposed decorative string lighting shall be
allowed subject to a maximum bulb rating of 5 watts or less. String lighting
shall not be installed higher than the main building or 15 feet above grade,
whichever is higher. String lighting of trees are exempt from the height
limitations.



   (H)   Security lighting. Security lighting systems shall use full
cutoff fixtures.



   (I)   Flagpole lighting. Flagpole lighting is restricted to state
and federal flags, and shall be shielded or recessed so that the light source
is not directly visible from neighboring properties. Flagpole lighting may
operate at night, but shall be turned off at dusk if the flag is removed.



   (J)   Pedestrian lighting. Pedestrian lighting systems shall use
full cutoff fixtures.



   (K)   Outdoor recreational facilities. Private outdoor recreational
lighting shall be turned off by 10:00 p.m. daily, unless otherwise approved
by the city as a community event. Lighting for private sport courts, fields
and arenas shall be installed as full cutoff fixtures, and the lamps from
such fixtures shall not be directly visible from adjacent residential
properties. Lighting shall not exceed 25 feet in height, measured from the
finished grade to the top of the lighting fixture. Public outdoor
recreational lighting shall be installed and operated in accordance with city
approval.



   (L)   Light glare and trespass. Non-exempt lighting shall be
installed as full cutoff fixtures, and the lamp shall not be directly visible
from adjacent residential properties or streets. The use of light shields may
be used on full cutoff fixtures to eliminate glare and light trespass. Light
spill over from business zoned property onto residentially zoned property
shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles above ambient light level at adjacent
residentially zoned property lines between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., daily.



   (M)   Light fixture height. Pole and wall mounted light fixtures
installed on non-residentially zoned properties and for private recreational
facilities shall not exceed 25 feet in height; light fixtures installed on
residentially zoned properties shall not exceed 15 feet in height.



   (N)   Underground service. Outdoor lighting for business and
multi-family residential zoned properties shall be served by underground
electrical service if installed after the effective date of this Chapter.



   (O)   Lighting curfew. Non-security lighting for business zoned
properties shall be turned off by 10:00 p.m., daily, or within 1 hour of
business closing, whichever is later.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-10-7  NONCONFORMING FIXTURES.



   (A)   Existing fixtures. All legal nonconforming light fixtures
installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be allowed to be
maintained and continued subject to replacement requirements provided below
in Vol. II, § 1-10-8(B).



   (B)   Replacement fixtures. If renovation of a property's lighting
system requires a permit and results in replacement of more than 50% of the
property's lighting fixtures within a 1-year period, the entire property's
lighting system shall be brought into compliance with this Chapter. These
regulations shall not apply to simple replacement of a lamp or fixture that
does not require city approval and/or issuance of permit.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-10-8  PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Building and electrical permit. Lighting plan submittals shall
comply with city building and electrical permit requirements.



   (B)   Zoning review. Lighting plans associated with new or expanded
development of multi-family residential, mixed-use, business or institutional
zoned properties shall be submitted to the Development Services Department
for review and approval, and shall include the following:



      (1)   Proposed and existing light pole location on site plan.



      (2)   Proposed and existing ground lighting on site plan.



      (3)   Proposed and existing wall lighting on building
elevations.



      (4)   Proposed and existing security lighting on site plan
and/or building elevations.



      (5)   Design cut sheets and specifications for all proposed
lighting fixtures and poles.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-10-9  VERIFICATION, INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   All outdoor lighting installations and operations are subject to
compliance inspection and verification by the city's Development Services
Department.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-10-10  APPEALS.



   Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Variances and appeals to the outdoor
lighting standards shall be applied for and processed in accordance with Vol.
II, § 1-16-5.



TABLE 10-1:  GENERAL LIGHTING STANDARDS1



 

TYPE OF LIGHTING
 
REQUIRED DESIGN
 
MAX. LIGHT INTENSITY
 
MAX. HEIGHT




Non-Residential Pole and Wall Lighting
 
Full Cutoff
 
None
 
25 feet


Non-Residential Landscape and Facade Accent Lighting
 
Shielded
 
None
 
-


Residential Site and Building Lighting
 
Full Cutoff
 
None
 
15 feet


Canopy Lighting
 
Recessed or indirect under canopy
 
None
 
-


Private Recreational Facility
 
Full Cutoff
 
None
 
25 feet


Billboard Lighting
 
Shielded
 
None
 
-


Exterior Sign Lighting
 
Shielded and Directed Downward
 
None
 
Top of Sign


Security Lighting
 
Full Cutoff
 
None
 
25 ft. (Non-Resid)
15 ft. (Resid)


Flagpole Lighting
 
Shielded or recessed
 
None
 
-


String Lighting
 
None
 
5 watts/bulb
 
Max. Bldg height or 15 feet, whichever is higher




 



1.   See complete description of regulations in Vol. II, § 1-10-6.  The
cutoff and shielding standards in Vol. II, Table 10-1 shall not apply to
exempt lighting described in Vol. II, § 1-10-4.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-11:  SIGN REGULATIONS



Section



   1-11-1   Intent



   1-11-2   Interpretation



   1-11-3   Scope and applicability



   1-11-4   Calculating sign area



   1-11-5   Calculating sign height



   1-11-6   Exempt signs



   1-11-7   Prohibited signs



   1-11-8   Permitted signs and sign regulations



   1-11-9   Special sign regulations



   1-11-10   Sign design criteria



   1-11-11   Application and permit requirements



   1-11-12   Construction requirements



   1-11-13   Nonconforming and discontinued signs



   1-11-14   Maintenance and repair



   1-11-15   Modifications and appeals



   1-11-16   Enforcement and penalties



§ 1-11-1  INTENT.



   (A)   Preserve and protect the public health, safety and welfare
within the city.



   (B)   Encourage development of private property in harmony with the
desired character of the city while providing due regard for the public and
private interests involved.



   (C)   Minimize visual clutter and maintain high quality signage in
the city.



   (D)   Promote the effectiveness of signs by preventing their over
concentration, deterioration and improper placement.



   (E)   Protect the public from injury or damage as a result of sign
distraction, obstruction or faulty construction.



   (F)   Implement the city's General Plan.



   (G)   Assure that public benefits derived from expenditure of public
funds for the improvement and beautification of streets and other public
structures and spaces shall be protected by exercising reasonable controls
over the character and design of private structures.



   (H)   Provide an improved visual environment for the city's
citizens, business owners and visitors.



   (I)   Comply with state and federal law.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-2  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the
interpretation of the outdoor sign regulations.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator's interpretation may be appealed to
the Board of Adjustment and Appeals in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-5.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-3  SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of the outdoor sign regulations shall apply to the
erection, construction, alteration, use, location and maintenance of
regulated signs within the city.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-4  CALCULATING SIGN AREA.



   Sign area. The area of a sign is calculated as the entire area within a
single contiguous perimeter composed of parallelograms, circles, ellipses,
trapezoids and/or triangles which enclose the extreme limits of the
advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration, insignia, surface or space of a similar nature, together with
any frame of other material, color or condition which forms an integral part
of the display and is used to differentiate the sign from the structure, wall
or background against which it is placed. Only 1 face of a double faced sign
shall be included in determining the area of the sign.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-5  CALCULATING SIGN HEIGHT.



   Sign height. The height of freestanding signs shall be measured as the
vertical distance between the top of the curb, or crown of the roadway where
no curb exists, to the top of the sign. The total sign height includes any
monument base or other structure erected to support the sign.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-6  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   Signs that are exempt from these regulations are as follows:



   (A)   One nameplate signs or cornerstone up to 4 square feet in size
for residences and businesses.



   (B)   Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary or remembrances
of persons or events noncommercial in nature.



   (C)   Sign maintenance.



   (D)   Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the property or
from any public right-of-way.



   (E)   Works of fine art, sculpture, or depictions of persons, places
or events noncommercial in nature and not used for purposed of commercial
identification.



   (F)   Incidental signs, such as logos, hours of business, open and
closed signs, under 3 square feet in area.



   (G)   Temporary decorations or displays associated with traditional
patriotic, religious or local holidays subject to a display period of 30
calendar days prior to the event and 10 calendar days after the event.



   (H)   Official government signs, postings, kiosks, flags, pennants,
banners or insignias.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-7  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   Prohibited signs. Prohibited signs are as follows:



   (A)   Signs in violation of this Article.



   (B)   Signs not listed as permitted in Vol. II, § 1-11-16, Table
11-1.



   (C)   Portable signs, except those permitted in Vol. II, § 1-11-16,
Table 11-1.



   (D)   Off-site signs except those permitted in Vol. II, § 1-11-16,
Table 11-1.



   (E)   Rotating or moving signs.



   (F)   Obscene signs.



   (G)   Signs located in the public right-of-way or public easement
except for permitted emergency hospital signs, sign walkers, political signs,
garage sale signs, temporary real estate directional signs and approved
permanent directional/wayfinding signs.



   (H)   Signs attached to any public or private utility pole or
structure, streetlight, tree, fence, fire hydrant, fire escape, building
access ladder, bridge, curb, sidewalk, park bench or other location on public
property, except for official government signs and signs for city sponsored
events.



   (I)   Unsafe signs as determined by the City Engineer, Building
Official and/or Chief of Police.



   (J)   Roof signs.



   (K)   Discontinued and/or abandoned non-conforming signs.



   (L)   Audible signs.



   (M)   Digital projection signs.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-8  PERMITTED SIGNS AND SIGN REGULATIONS.



   Permitted signs. Vol. II, § 1-11-16, Table 11-1 sets forth the
regulations regarding sign type, size, height, quantity, location and design.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-9  SPECIAL SIGN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Manual changeable message signs.



      (1)   Maximum size. Fifty percent (50%) of the maximum size
allowed for the freestanding/monument sign.



      (2)   Maximum height. In accordance with allowed
freestanding/monument signs.



      (3)   Maximum quantity. One changeable message sign per
property to be incorporated into the permitted freestanding/monument sign.



      (4)   Location. Minimum 5 foot front, side and rear setback.
The freestanding sign setback shall also comply with the city's intersection
visibility requirements in Vol. II, § 1-6-13.



      (5)   Zoning districts where allowed. All non-residential
zoning districts.



      (6)   Design. The changeable letter sign shall be incorporated
into a decorative monument base.



      (7)   Commercial message content. The commercial message
displayed on the sign shall directly relate to the business or businesses
conducted on-site.



      (8)   Illumination. Signs may be illuminated.



      (9)   Permit required. AUP.



   (B)   Electronic changeable message signs.



      (1)   Maximum size. Fifty percent (50%) of the maximum size
allowed for the freestanding/monument sign.



      (2)   Maximum height. In accordance with allowed
freestanding/monument signs.



      (3)   Maximum quantity. One changeable electronic message sign
per property to be incorporated into the permitted freestanding/monument sign.



      (4)   Location. Minimum 5 foot front, side and rear setback.
The freestanding sign setback shall also comply with the city's intersection
visibility requirements in Vol. II, § 1-6-13.



      (5)   Zoning districts where allowed. All non-residential
zoning districts.



      (6)   Display. Displays may use full color and animation,
however, no flashing, rotating or strobe effects shall be allowed.



      (7)   Design. The digital sign shall be incorporated into a
decorative monument base.



      (8)   Minimum display time. Static images shall last for at
least 5 seconds before transitioning to another static message.



      (9)   Transition method and duration. Such electronic message
sign shall be limited to static displays, messages that appear or disappear
from the display through dissolve, fade, travel, scroll or similar
transitions and frame effects that have text, animated graphics or images
that appear to move or change in size, or be revealed sequentially rather
than all at once. The transition duration between messages shall not exceed 1
second.



      (10)   Commercial message content. The commercial message
displayed on the electronic/digital sign shall directly relate to the
business or businesses conducted on-site.



      (11)   Illumination levels.



         (a)   All electronic message signs shall come equipped
with automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts the sign's
brightness in direct correlation with ambient light conditions.



         (b)   No electronic message sign shall exceed a
brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a
foot candle (Lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area. The
measurement distance shall be calculated with the following formula: The
square root of the product of the sign area and 100. Example using a 12
square foot sign:



            Light Meter Measurement Distance = Square Root of (12
sf x 100) = 34.6 feet.



      (12)   Permit required. AUP.



   (C)   Political and campaign signs.



      (1)   Maximum size. Sixteen square feet on residentially zoned
property and 32 square feet on non-residentially zoned property and city
rights-of-way.



      (2)   Maximum height. Six feet.



      (3)   Maximum quantity. No limit.



      (4)   Location. Political signs placed in public rights-of-way
shall not be hazardous to public safety, obstruct clear vision in the area or
interfere with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, as
determined by the City Engineer.



         (a)   If the City Engineer deems that the placement of a
political sign constitutes an emergency, city representatives may immediately
relocate the sign.  The city shall notify the candidate or campaign
committee that placed the sign within 24 hours after the relocation.



         (b)   If a sign is placed in violation of this section
and the placement is not deemed to constitute an emergency, the city may
notify the candidate or campaign committee that installed the sign.  If the
sign remains in violation at least 24 hours after the city notified the
candidate or campaign committee, the city may remove the sign and shall
contact the candidate or campaign committee to retrieve the sign within 10
business days. After such time, the signs may be disposed of as the city
deems fit.



      (5)   Zoning districts where allowed. All zoning districts.



      (6)   Display period. Political signs may be posted any time
before a primary election, but must be removed within 15 calendar days after
a primary election for candidates who do not advance to the general election.
All candidate signs must be removed within 15 days after the general election.



      (7)   Information. The sign shall contain the name and
telephone number of the candidate or campaign committee contact person.



      (8)   Illumination. Signs shall not be illuminated.



      (9)   Permit required. No.



   (D)   Vehicle signs.



      (1)   Sign location on vehicle. Vehicle signs may be placed
along the body surface of the vehicle by means of painting, decal, magnetic
attachment or adhesive vinyl film, or may be attached and secured to the body
or bed of the vehicle in a manner deemed legal by the Arizona Department of
Transportation for licensed street use.



      (2)   Maximum size.



         (a)   Signs attached by painting, decal, adhesive and
magnetic signs. The maximum size of these signs, which are self-attached to
the vehicle, is limited to the surface area of the vehicle's body (i.e.,
hood, doors, fenders, and truck box).



         (b)   Signs attached with hardware. The maximum size of
these signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in size or extend higher than 2
feet above the top of vehicle.



      (3)   Vehicle parking.  The vehicle shall be licensed and
operable for use on a public road, and shall be parked within an approved
parking space on the property of the business it is advertising. Vehicles
with attached signs shall not be located in a manner that interferes with
visual or physical access to adjacent businesses.



      (4)   Zoning districts where allowed. All non-residential
zoning districts.



      (5)   Illumination. Signs shall not be illuminated.



      (6)   Permit required. No.



   (E)   Billboards.



      (1)   New billboards. No billboards shall be erected within
the city limits, including along the freeway.



      (2)   Existing billboards. Existing billboards may be required
to be removed as a condition of rezoning, subdivision plat or CUP approval.



      (3)   Illumination. Billboards with existing external
illumination deemed legal non-conforming by the Zoning Administrator shall be
allowed. No new internal or external lighting of billboards shall be allowed.



      (4)   Compliance with state law. All existing billboard signs
shall comply with applicable provision of A.R.S. §§ 9-461, et. seq.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-10  SIGN DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Design integration. Permanent signs shall be fully integrated
with the design of the building and the site development, reflecting the
architecture, building materials, and landscape elements of the project. The
means of integrating freestanding signs with the architecture of the building
shall be achieved through the use of complimentary architectural
embellishments, colors, building materials, texture, and other elements found
in the building design.



   (B)   Sign style. Freestanding signs not located along the freeway
shall be installed as either a monument style sign or a post and panel style
sign. Freestanding signs located along the freeway shall be installed as
either a monument style sign, or a pylon sign.



   (C)   Lighting and illumination. Unless specifically prohibited,
signs may be either illuminated or non-illuminated. The direct source of the
sign's illumination shall not be visible from any public street, sidewalk or
adjacent residential area. Sign lighting shall comply with the outdoor
lighting standards established in Vol. II, Article 1-10 of this Chapter.



   (D)   Action signs. There shall be no physical movement or rotation
of the sign body or any segment thereof by mechanical or any other means.



   (E)   Design guidelines. See city publications on file in the
Development Services Department entitled "Commercial Design Guidelines for
Apache Junction" and "Downtown Overlay District Design Guidelines" for visual
examples of acceptable signs described in this Chapter.



   (F)   Neon signs. Permitted freestanding, wall and/or window signs
may use neon display in their design.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-11  APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application and permit requirements. Unless specifically
exempted in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-11-6 and Vol. II, § 1-11-16, Table
11-1, no sign shall be erected, installed, enlarged or maintained without
first obtaining an AUP from the Development Services Department and paying a
permit fee. Application for an AUP shall be made in writing upon forms
furnished by the Development Services Department. The application shall
contain the sign location, street name and address, as well as the name and
address of the owner and the sign contractor or erector. Two copies of fully
dimensioned plans and specifications shall be submitted with the application
for each sign. All plans shall show complete details to include size,
materials, method of support or attachments, name and address of the persons
or firm designing the sign and plot plan showing the location of the sign on
the premises. The city may require additional information where that
information is necessary to ensure compliance with this Code.



   (B)   Permit expiration. If actual work to install or construct the
approved sign is not commenced within 100 and 180 days from the date of such
AUP issuance, such permit shall become null and void.



   (C)   Permit fee. Before issuing an AUP required by this Chapter,
the city shall collect a fee in accordance with a fee schedule established in
Vol. I, Chapter 4 of the City Code.



   (D)   Permit revocation.  An AUP may be automatically revoked by
the Zoning Administrator for lack of compliance with the standards in this
Chapter and/or the approved sign permit. The permit applicant shall first
receive a 14 calendar day written notice from the Zoning Administrator prior
to revocation.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-12  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   Building Code. All signs shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Building Code.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-13  NONCONFORMING AND DISCONTINUED SIGNS.



   (A)   Signs for a legal nonconforming use. New or additional signs
for a nonconforming use shall comply with the requirements of the outdoor
sign regulations.



   (B)   Signs rendered nonconforming. Existing legal signs rendered
nonconforming as a result of this Chapter shall be considered legal
nonconforming and allowed to continue and shall be allowed reasonable repairs
and maintenance. Such legal nonconforming signs shall not be expanded,
enlarged or structurally altered unless brought into conformance with the
outdoor sign regulations.



   (C)   Signs rendered discontinued. The use of any legal
nonconforming sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and
unoccupied for a period of 6 months shall be deemed to have been
discontinued, and therefore shall be removed by the owner of the property or
sign.



   (D)   Repair and maintenance. Any legal nonconforming sign may be
continued in use and be allowed reasonable repair and maintenance. All signs,
sign finishes, supports and electrical work shall be kept in good repair and
safe condition, including the replacement of defective parts, painting,
repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of the sign.



   (E)   Change of tenancy. Whenever the name of a business changes,
the copy on the sign or sign face may be changed without bringing the legal
nonconforming sign structure into compliance with the outdoor sign
regulations.



   (F)   Damage or deterioration. Any legal nonconforming sign shall be
removed or rebuilt in full conformity to the terms of the outdoor sign
regulations if it is damaged or allowed to deteriorate to such an extent that
the cost of repair or restoration exceeds 50% of the sign value, as
determined by a competent Arizona licensed appraiser.



   (G)   Removal and replacement. Legal nonconforming signs that are
removed, re-erected or replaced shall be brought into conformance with the
outdoor sign regulations.



   (H)   New sign permit applications. If a property contains legal
nonconforming signs, the following requirements apply to any new sign
permits/applications:



      (1)   Permits for new wall signs shall not be approved until
existing legal nonconforming wall signs are removed or replaced with
conforming wall signs.



      (2)   Permits for new detached signs shall not be approved
until existing legal nonconforming detached signs are removed or replaced
with conforming detached signs.



   (I)   Development, redevelopment and expansion. New development,
redevelopment or expansions of 50% or more of the total building floor area
shall require that all nonconforming signs be brought into compliance with
the outdoor sign regulations.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-14  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   (A)   Signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
condition, including replacement or defective parts, repainting, cleaning and
other acts required for the maintenance of the sign.



   (B)   No person or entity shall maintain or permit to be maintained
on any premises they own or control any sign which is in a dangerous or
defective condition. Any such sign shall be promptly removed or repaired by
the owner of the sign within 90 days of city notice.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-15  MODIFICATIONS AND APPEALS.



   (A)   CUP modifications.  Modifications to the sign regulations
regarding size (i.e., square footage), location, type and amount may be
approved by CUP approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission
("Commission") in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-12(D)(4).



   (B)   Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Variances and appeals to the
sign standards shall be applied for and processed in accordance with Vol. II,
§ 1-16-5.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-11-16  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Authority. The Zoning Administrator, along with code
enforcement staff, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
provisions of the outdoor sign regulations.



   (B)   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any sign or sign structure
in the city, or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any
of the provisions of the outdoor sign regulations.



   (C)   Penalty. See Vol. II, § 1-16-16.



TABLE 11-1: PERMITTED SIGN STANDARDS



 

SIGN TYPE1
 
MAXIMUM SIGN SIZE2
 
MAXIMUM SIGN HEIGHT3
 
MAXIMUM QUANTITY
 
PERMIT NEEDED
 
PERMITTED LOCATION4
 
DISPLAY PERIOD
 
DESIGN
 
ZONING DISTRICTS




Freestanding Signs (non- freeway frontage)
 
1 sf. per 1 lineal ft. of parcel frontage up to a 150 sq. ft. max.
 
12 ft.
 
1 sign per street frontage
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
Monument or Post & Panel signs only. Addresses must be visible from ROW. See
Vol. II, Article 1-13
 
Non- Residential Zones


Freestanding Signs (freeway fronatge)
 
1 sf. per 1 lineal ft. of parcel fronatge up tp a 500 sf. max. for single
tenant and 150 sf. for multi- tenant
 
25 ft. above grade of closest freeway lane.
 
1 sign per property
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
Monument and pylon signs only.  Addresses must be visible from ROW.  See
Vol. II, Article 1-13
 
Non- Residential Zones


Wall Signs and Wall Murals
 
2 sf. per 1 lineal ft. of tenant frontage up to a 150 sq. ft. max.5
 
No higher than building wall
 
3 signs/murals per tenant per street frontage
 
AUP
 
Building wall
 
Continuous
 
See Vol. II, Article 1-13
 
Non- Residential Zones


Hanging Signs
 
10 sf.5
 
Min. 8 ft. clearance to ground and no higher than 1st floor.
 
1 hanging or projection sign per street frontage
 
AUP
 
Hanging either perpendicular or parallel to road
 
Continuous
 
See Vol. II, Article 1-13
 
Non- Residential Zones


Projecting Sings
 
10 sf.5
 
Min. 8 ft. clearance to ground and no higher than 1st floor.
 
1 hanging or projection sign per street frontage
 
AUP
 
Hanging either perpendicular or parallel to road
 
Continuous
 
See Vol. II, Article 1-13
 
Non- Residential Zones


Window Signs
 
75% of window area
 
N/A
 
No limit
 
No
 
Inside of window
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Awning Sings
 
50% of awning area5
 
N/A
 
No limit
 
AUP
 
On awning
 
Continuous
 
Non-illuminated
 
Non- Residential Zones


Umbrella Signs
 
8 sf.
 
8 ft.
 
No limit
 
No
 
On umbrellas
 
Continuous
 
Non-illuminated
 
Non- Residential Zones


Banners and Fin Flags
 
30 sf.
 
12 ft. for fin flags and 10 ft. for banners
 
2 banners, or 2 fin flags, or 1 of each per business
 
No
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones and Multi-Family Zones


A-Frame Signs (visible from road)
 
6 sf.
 
3 ft.
 
1 sign per business
 
No
 
Min. 2 ft. from ROW
 
During business hours only
 
Professionally manufactured
 
B-3 Zone


A-Frame Signs (not visible from road)
 
6 sf.
 
3 ft.
 
1 sign per business
 
No
 
Along store front
 
During business hours only
 
Professionally manufactured
 
Non- Residential Zones


Temporary Use Signs
 
50 sf.
 
8 ft.
 
1 per approved temporary business
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
As per AUP
 
Non-illuminated Wall or Post & Panel Sign
 
Non- Residential Zones


Grand Opening Signs (temporary)
 
100 sf.
 
No higher than building wall
 
1 sign per business
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
30 days before and 90 days after opening
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential  and Multi- Family Zones


Ballons and Inflatable Signs (temporary)
 
N/A
 
20 ft.
 
1 inflatable sign per property
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
60 cumulative days/year
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Pennants
 
2 sf. per pennant
 
No higher than top of roofline
 
200 ft. of string length
 
No
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Sign Walkers
 
12 sf.
 
N/A
 
1 sign walker per business
 
No
 
Min. 5 ft. from edge of pavement or curb, whichever is greater
 
During business hours only
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Commercial Flags
 
15 sf.
 
20 sf.
 
2 flags per pole and 2 poles per property
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Menu Boards
 
30 sf./menu board
 
8 ft.
 
2 menu boards per business
 
AUP
 
To the side or rear of the building
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Emergency Hospital Sign
 
1 sf. per 1 lineal ft. of street frontage up to a 200 sf. maximum
 
20 ft.
 
1 sign per street frontage
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. setback or within ROW with encroachment permit
 
Continuous
 
Monument Sign
 
Non- Residential Zones


Interim Business Signs
 
2 sf. per 1 lineal ft. of tenant frontage up to a 150 sq. ft. max.5
 
10 ft.
 
1 sign per street frontage
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
3 months
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Statues
 
N/A
 
10 ft.
 
1 statue per business
 
No
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Parking Lot Directional Signs (on-site)
 
2 sf. per sign
 
5 ft.
 
As per AUP
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Private Light Pole Banners
 
10 sf.
 
15 ft.
 
1 per light pole
 
No
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Gas Stations Canopy Signs
 
15 sf. per canopy side
 
Shall not extend above or beyond canopy
 
1 sign per canopy side
 
AUP
 
On canopy
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
Non- Residential Zones


Contractor Project Signs
 
50 sf.
 
10 ft.
 
1 sign per construction site
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
During construction
 
Non-illuminated
 
All Zones


Garage Sale Signs
 
6 sf.
 
3 ft.
 
3 off-site signs and 1 on-site sign
 
No
 
Min. 2 ft. from pavement edge or curb, whichever is greater
 
During sale hours only
 
N/A
 
All Zones


Real Estate Open House Signs (off- site)
 
6 sf.
 
3 ft.
 
5 off-site signs per property being marketed
 
No
 
Min. 10 ft. from edge of pavement or curb, whichever is greater
 
6:00 p.m. Friday to 8:00 a.m. Monday or during holidays
 
N/A
 
All Zones


Real Estate Yard Signs
 
12 sf.
 
8 ft.
 
1 sign per street frontage
 
No
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
During listing period
 
Non-illuminated
 
All Zones


Religious Institution Signs (on-site)
 
1 sf. per 1 lineal ft. of street frontage up to a 120 sf. max.
 
12 ft. for monument signs and 8 ft. for wall signs
 
1 monument and 1 wall sign per frontage
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
All Zones


Wayfinding Signs (off-site)
 
Per City Council approval.
 
Per City Council approval.
 
Per City Council approval.
 
AUP
 
Per City Council approval
 
Continuous
 
N/A
 
All Zones


Developer and Builder Signs (temporary)
 
50 sf.
 
10 ft.
 
1 sign per street frontage
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
During marketing period
 
Monument or Post & Panel Sign
 
All Zones


Residential Subdivision or Multi-Family Sign
 
50 sf.
 
8 ft.
 
1 sign per entryway
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
Monument or Post & Panel Sign
 
All Zones


Ranch Gate Sign
 
20 sf.
 
16 ft. if mounted on overhead gate, 8 ft. if ground mounted
 
1 sign per property
 
AUP
 
Min. 5 ft. front, side and rear setback
 
Continuous
 
Exterior illumination allowed
 
Residential Zones


Billboards
 
See Vol. II, § 1-11-9(E)


Vehicle Signs
 
See Vol. II, § 1-11-9(D)


Changeable Letter Signs (Digital)
 
See Vol. II, § 1-11-9(B)


Changeable Letter Signs (manual)
 
See Vol. II, § 1-11-9(A)


Political Campaign Signs
 
See Vol. II, § 1-11-9(C)




 



1.   See Vol. II, Article 1-11 for additional regulations regarding signs.



2.   The area of a sign is calculated as the entire area within a single
contiguous perimeter composed of parallelograms, circles, ellipses,
trapezoids and/or triangles which enclose the extreme limits of the
advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration, insignia, surface or space of a similar nature, together with
any frame of other material, color or condition which forms an integral part
of the display and is used to differentiate the sign from the structure, wall
or background against which it is placed. Only one face of a double faced
sign shall be included in determining the area of the sign.



3.   The height of freestanding signs shall be measured as the vertical
distance between the top of the curb, or crown of the roadway where no curb
exists, to the top of the sign. The total sign height includes any monument
base or other structure erected to support the sign.



4.   The location of freestanding signs is subject to the city's
intersection visibility requirements in Vol. II, § 1-6-13 of this Chapter.
The setback for freestanding signs is measured from the edge or face of sign
which is closest to the right-of-way or property line. Additionally, the
location of certain temporary signs within the public road rights-or-way may
be subject to Public Works Director approval and encroachment permit.



5.   If the business has a combination of wall, awning, projecting and/or
hanging signs, the combined square footage of all such signage cannot exceed
2 square feet per lineal foot of tenant frontage or 150 square feet,
whichever is less.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-12:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND STORMWATER REGULATIONS



Section



   1-12-1   Floodplain management and stormwater regulations



§ 1-12-1  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND STORMWATER REGULATIONS.



   The administration and enforcement of floodplain areas and stormwater
management shall be in accordance with and pursuant to Apache Junction City
Code, Vol. II, Chapter 5.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-13:  DESIGN STANDARDS



Section



   1-13-1   Intent



   1-13-2   Applicability



   1-13-3   Design standards



§ 1-13-1  INTENT.



   This Chapter identifies design standards for certain types of
development within the city. These standards shall be carried out in a manner
that encourages creative and appropriate solutions while avoiding unnecessary
delays in project approval. The intent of requiring design review is as
follows:



   (A)   Ensure that the proposed development plan will be in
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.



   (B)   Ensure high quality development and encourage development
options that are designed in an aesthetically pleasing manner and incorporate
public spaces that are integral to the project.



   (C)   Achieve goals, objective, and policies of the General Plan,
sub-area plans, and other policies adopted by the City Council.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-13-2  APPLICABILITY.



   Adopted design standards shall apply to all non-residential, mixed-use
and multi-family residential development in accordance with the following:



   (A)   New development. New development on vacant land shall be
subject to the adopted design standards for that area.



   (B)   Additions to existing structures. Additions to existing
structures shall be subject to the adopted design standards for that area. If
the addition exceeds 50% of the existing building size, the city may require
the existing portion of the building and the entire site to also comply with
applicable design standards.



   (C)   Redevelopment. If more than 50% of the existing structure is
damaged, destroyed, removed or structurally altered as part of a
redevelopment plan, both the existing and proposed structure and site shall
be subject to the adopted design standards for that area.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-13-3  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   City of Apache Junction commercial design guidelines. The
"City of Apache Junction Commercial Design Guidelines", available at the
Development Services Department, are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this Chapter. These design guidelines shall apply to all
non-residential, mixed-use and multi-family residential development, except
for such development located within the Downtown Suburban Zone, Downtown
Transition Zone and Core Downtown Zone, which are separately described below
in Vol. II, § 1-13-3(B).



   (B)   Downtown Overlay District design guidelines. The "Downtown
Overlay District Design Guidelines", available at the Development Services
Department, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
Chapter. These design guidelines shall apply to any B-1, B-2 or B-3 zoned
properties located within the Downtown Suburban Zone, Downtown Transition
Zone and Core Downtown Zone.



      (1)   Building design requirements. New buildings and/or
building expansions located in these downtown zones shall comply with the
"Downtown Overlay District Design Guidelines". Expansions to existing
buildings that are greater than 50% of the existing structure's floor area
shall require that the entire building comply with the "Downtown Overlay
District Design Guidelines".



      (2)   Landscaping requirements. B-1 (General Commercial) zoned
property shall comply with the standard landscaping requirements in Vol. II,
Article 1-8 of this Chapter. B-2 (Old West) and B-3 (City Center) zoned
property shall comply with the unique landscaping requirements in Vol. II, §
1-8-5(B).



      (3)   Sign design requirements in B-2 District. The Downtown
Overlay District "Old West" design standards for signs in the transition zone
shall be required for new signs and total sign replacements for properties in
the B-2 (Old West) district. Reasonable maintenance and repair of existing
signs shall not trigger this requirement.



   (C)   Accessory building design standards. Design standards for
accessory buildings are required as follows:



      (1)   RS-GR, MHP and RVP Zoning Districts. There are no design
requirements.



      (2)   Business zoning districts. The design of accessory
buildings is subject to the applicable commercial design standards identified
in Vol. II, §§ 1-13-3(A), 1-13-3(B) and 1-6-5.



      (3)   All residential zoning districts except RS-GR, MHP, RVP
and RS-54. See Vol. II. § 1-6-5(J)(3).



      (4)   RS-54 Zoning District. See Vol. II, § 1-6-5(K)(4).



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-14:  ENGINEERING REGULATIONS



Section



   1-14-1   Engineering regulations



§ 1-14-1  ENGINEERING REGULATIONS.



   The administration and enforcement of engineering standards shall be in
accordance with and pursuant to Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Chapter
10.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-15:  GREEN BUILDING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



Section



   1-15-1   Intent



   1-15-2   Standards for municipal structures



   1-15-3   Guidelines for private development



§ 1-15-1  INTENT.



   This Chapter is intended to enhance the public welfare and assure that
any city owned and city operated development is consistent with the city's
desire to create a more sustainable community by incorporating green building
measures into the design, construction, and maintenance of its buildings and
sites.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-15-2  STANDARDS FOR MUNICIPAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   All new municipal buildings of 5,000 square feet or larger
shall be designed, constructed and certified at the United States Green
Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ("LEED")
minimum certified level.



   (B)   City staff shall use the most recent LEED certification
standards as a benchmark to achieve maximum energy efficiency and
environmental sustainability.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-15-3  GUIDELINES FOR PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT.



   Private development is encouraged, but not required, to be designed and
constructed at minimum LEED certified levels and to achieve energy efficiency
and environmental sustainability.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-16:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



   1-16-1   Development Services Department and Zoning Administrator



   1-16-2   Planning and Zoning Commission



   1-16-3   City Council



   1-16-4   Board of Adjustment and Appeals



   1-16-5   Appeal and variance procedures



   1-16-6   Amendments to Zoning Code or Zoning Map



   1-16-7   Public hearings, notice and citizen review processes



   1-16-8   Preliminary development review (PDR) processes



   1-16-9   Site plan review and approval process



   1-16-10   Annexation process



   1-16-11   Amendments to the General Plan



   1-16-12   Conditional use permits, administrative use permits and
building permits



   1-16-13   Development agreements



   1-16-14   Administrative relief exceptions



   1-16-15   Fees



   1-16-16   Violations, penalties and enforcement



§ 1-16-1  DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Development Services Department. The Development Services
Department includes the Planning Division, Building Safety and Code
Compliance Division and Revenue Development Division. The Planning Division
shall be responsible for current planning, long-range planning, General Plan
administration, Zoning Code administration and administering the Planning and
Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



   (B)   Establishment of Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator is the city official(s) established pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-462.05 that is charged with responsibility for interpreting and
administering the Zoning Code. The Development Services Director ("Director")
or his/her designee shall serve as the Zoning Administrator.



   (C)   Authority and duties of Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for the following:



      (1)   Perform administrative actions required by this Chapter,
including the giving of notice, scheduling of hearings, preparation of
reports, and receiving and processing of appeals.



      (2)   Interpret the Zoning Code to the public, city
departments and other branches of government, subject to the supervision of
the Director and subject to general and specific policies established by the
Mayor and City Council ("Council").



      (3)   Serve as Secretary to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



      (4)   Make recommendations to the Director on changes and
improvements in Zoning Code regulations and procedures.



      (5)   Determine the location of any district boundary shown on
the official Zoning Maps adopted as part of this Chapter when such location
is in dispute.



      (6)   Review, consider and approve/deny administrative use
permits as authorized by the Zoning Code.



      (7)   Determine non-conforming use status and authorize
certificates of legal non-conformity pursuant to Apache Junction City Code,
Vol. II, § 1-2-5(E).



      (8)   Work with the assistance of Code Compliance staff to
enforce the provisions of the Zoning Code, including Council directed
enforcement priorities, pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 9-462.05 et. seq.



   (D)   Appeals from Zoning Administrator. Any person aggrieved by a
decision of the Zoning Administrator may appeal the decision to the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals in accordance with Vol. II, §§ 1-16-4 and 1-16-5 of
this Chapter.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-2  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission ("Commission") shall be established,
constituted, operated and administered in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-461.02,
as amended, and City Code, Vol. I, Planning Commission, § 2-22. More
specifically, it shall be the duty of the Commission to:



   (A)   Formulate, create and administer any lawful plan duly adopted
by the governing body for the present and future growth of the city
pertaining to the use of land and buildings for any purpose, together with
all incidental activities usually associated therewith and commonly known as
"Planning and Zoning".



   (B)   To make or cause to be made a continuous study of the best
present and future use to which land and buildings shall be put within the
city.



   (C)   To recommend to the governing body revisions in the plans
which, in the opinion of the Commission, are for the best interest of the
citizens of the city.



   (D)   To promulgate rules of procedure and to supervise the
enforcement of rules so promulgated by the Commission and approved by the
Council.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-3  CITY COUNCIL.



   The Council shall be established, constituted, operated and
administered in accordance with City Code, Vol. I, Article 2-1. In addition
to any authority granted the Council by general or special law, the Council
shall make final decisions pertaining to the following development and zoning
matters:



   (A)   Initiate, adopt, and amend a comprehensive, long-range General
Plan for the development of the city.



   (B)   Initiate, adopt, and amend specific plans, regulations,
programs and legislation as needed for the systematic implementation of the
General Plan.



   (C)   Initiate, adopt, and make amendments to the Zoning Code
regulations and/or Zoning Code Maps.



   (D)   Create necessary boards, commissions or taskforces to
administer and implement the General Plan and Zoning Code.



   (E)   Consider and approve applications for preliminary and final
plats.



   (F)   Consider and approve development agreements.



   (G)   Adopt design guidelines for the design review process.



   (H)   Consider and adopt, reject or modify annexation of property
within the city.



   (I)   Consider and adopt, reject, or modify requests for public
rights-of-way dedications, extinguishments, vacations and relinquishments.



   (J)   Appoint members of the Commission and Board of Adjustment.



   (K)   Adopt the policies, rules, and procedures deemed necessary for
the implementation and enforcement of the Zoning Code.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-4  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Establishment. A Board of Adjustment and Appeals ("Board") is
hereby established pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.06 and Apache Junction City
Code, Vol. I, § 2-21-1.



   (B)   Meetings. The Board shall meet regularly as needed. All
meetings shall be open to the public. It shall elect its own officers,
establish its own rules, keep a record of its action, and render an annual
report to the Council and Commission. The Chairperson, or in his or her
absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses in accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona.
Any finding, ruling, or decision of the Board relating to the administration
of the Zoning Ordinance shall be an order at either a regular or special
meeting of the Board, and shall be fully reported in the minutes of the Board.



   (C)   Powers and duties. The Board shall have the following powers
and duties:



      (1)   Appeals of Zoning Administrator's decisions. Hear and
decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an error in an order,
requirement, interpretation or decision made by the Zoning Administrator in
the enforcement of the Zoning Code.



      (2)   Appeals for variances.



         (a)   Hear and decide requests for variances from the
terms of the Zoning Ordinance only if, because of special circumstances
applicable to the property, including its size, shape, topography, location,
or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance will result
in unnecessary property hardships, result in serious impairment of
substantial property rights and deprive such property of privileges enjoyed
by other property of the same classification in the same zoning district.



         (b)   Any variance granted is subject to such conditions
as will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not be contrary to the
public interest, shall not constitute a grant of special privileges
inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and
zone in which such property is located and shall cause the minimum possible
interference with the general purposes and intent of this Chapter.



   (D)   Powers and duties not authorized. The Board shall not have the
following powers and duties:



      (1)   Make any changes or allow modifications to the uses
permitted in any zoning district classification (i.e., no use variances
allowed).



      (2)   Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable
to the property are self-imposed by the property owner.



   (E)   Ex parte communications. The Board shall act in a
quasi-judicial manner and shall not entertain, accept or participate in any
ex parte communications.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-5  APPEAL AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Legal standing for appeals. Appeals to the Board may be taken
by persons aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the
city affected by a decision of the Zoning Administrator, by filing with the
Development Services Department a notice of appeal and required complete
application within 30 calendar days of the decision being communicated to the
applicant.



   (B)   Information required for filing an appeal. The following
information is required for filing an appeal:



      (1)   Completed application form filed with the Zoning
Administrator at 300 E. Superstition Blvd., Apache Junction, Arizona 85119,
with date of appeal, name and contact information of person filing the appeal
(i.e., appellant), assessor's parcel number, case number and any individual
representing the appellant.



      (2)   List of address to which notices must be sent.



      (3)   Description of requested variance or decision being
appealed.



      (4)   Date of the Zoning Administrator's decision that is
being appealed.



      (5)   Description of requested outcome if the appeal is
granted.



      (6)   Description of grounds for appeal.



      (7)   Scaled and properly dimensioned Site Plan illustrating
relevant property information.



      (8)   Payment of application fees established in Apache
Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4.



      (9)   Other items and materials required by the application
form and/or necessary for the appeal.



   (C)   Legal effect of appeal. An appeal to the Board stays all
proceedings in the matter appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator
certifies to the Board that, in the Zoning Administrator's opinion and
finding, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon such
finding, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by restraining order granted
by the Board or by a court of record on application and notice to the Zoning
Administrator. Proceedings shall not be stayed if the appellee requests
relief which has previously been denied by the Board, except pursuant to a
special action in Superior Court.



   (D)   Public hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time to
conduct a public hearing for the appeal. Public notice of the hearing shall
be administered by the Development Services Department and shall comply with
the following:



      (1)   Newspaper publication. Notice of the time, date and
place of the hearing, including a general description of the matter to be
considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation that is published or circulated in the
community. The publication notice shall be at least 15 calendar days before
the hearing, and shall be published as required by A.R.S. 9-462.04, as
amended.



      (2)   Posting notice. The notice of public hearing shall be
posted by the applicant in accordance with the instructions provided in the
application materials.



      (3)   Mailing notice. The city shall send notice by first
class mail to each real property owner, as shown on the last assessment of
the property, within 300 feet of the appellant's property. The notice shall
include the proposed hearing date, time, location and information regarding
the case.



   (E)   Failure to receive notice. The failure of any person or entity
to receive notice shall not constitute grounds for the city or any court to
invalidate the actions of the Board.



   (F)   Board review. The Board shall conduct a public hearing (i.e.,
de novo), and shall review all relevant information, including but not
limited to the application, plans, related project materials that were
submitted by city staff and the appellant, the original decision being
appealed, any additional materials as may be presented at the appeal hearing,
any written correspondence submitted prior to or during the hearing, and any
information observed by a site visit.



   (G)   Board's decision. The Board may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny an appeal, and may prescribe reasonable conditions in
connection with its decision as may be necessary in order to fully carry out
the purpose and intent of the Zoning Code.



   (H)   Appeal to Superior Court. Any person aggrieved by a decision
of the Board or any taxpayer, officer or department of the municipality
affected by a decision of the Board may, at any time within 30 calendar days
after the Board has rendered its decision, file a complaint for special
action in the Superior Court to review the Board decision. Filing the
complaint does not stay proceedings on the decision sought to be reviewed,
but the Court may, on application, grant a stay and on final hearing may
affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, or modify the decision reviewed.



   (I)   Expiration. Rights and privileges established by the granting
of a variance shall be exercised within 1 year following the date of approval
unless a different time limit is specified by the Board at the time the
variance is granted. Failure to exercise a variance within the time limits
specified shall cause the variance to become null and void.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-6  AMENDMENTS TO ZONING CODE OR ZONING MAP.



   (A)   Authority. The Council may, from time to time, upon the
recommendation of the Commission amend, supplement, change or repeal the
Zoning Code regulations (i.e., Zoning Code text) and/or Zoning Map boundaries
(i.e., rezoning). The Council shall have the power to approve, modify and
approve with conditions or deny the Commission's recommendation.



   (B)   Request to amend.



      (1)   By Commission or Council. Request to amend the Zoning
Code regulations or Zoning Maps may be initiated by the Council or Commission
on its own motion.



      (2)   By private party. Petition by a private party for a
Zoning Map amendment shall be made to the Commission on a form and
application provided for that purpose by the Development Services Department
and shall be signed and notarized by the real property owners of the
properties to which the Zoning Map amendment applies.



   (C)   Citizen review process. Prior to any Commission public hearing
regarding a Zoning Map amendment initiated by a private party, a Citizens
Review Process shall be required pursuant to Vol. II, § 1-16-7(B).



   (D)   Public hearing and notice. The Commission shall hold a public
hearing on any proposed amendment to the Zoning Code regulations or Zoning
Map boundaries, and city staff shall provide the following notice:



      (1)   Newspaper publication. Notice of the time, date and
place of the hearing, including a general description of the matter to be
considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation that is published or circulated in the
community. The publication notice shall be at least 15 calendar days before
the hearing, and shall be published as required by A.R.S. § 9-462.04, as
amended.



      (2)   If the proposed amendment involves a change to the
Zoning Code standards, the changes, or reference to where the changes may be
publically viewed, shall be published in a display ad covering not less than
1/8 of a full page as per A.R.S. § 9-462.04(A)(4)(c).



      (3)   Property posting. The notice of public hearing shall be
posted by the applicant in accordance with the instructions provided in the
application materials.



      (4)   Outside agency notice. In proceedings involving Zoning
Map amendments of land which abuts other municipalities or unincorporated
areas of the county or a combination thereof, copies of the notice of public
hearing shall be transmitted to the planning agency of such governmental unit
abutting such land.



      (5)   Mailing notice for Zoning Map amendments. Proposed
amendments to the Zoning Maps shall require that the city send notice by
first class mail to each real property owner, as shown on the last assessment
of the property, of the area to be rezoned and all property owners, as shown
on the last assessment of the property, within 300 feet of the property to be
rezoned to a non-industrial zoning district classification. Proposed rezoning
to an industrial district classification shall require a mailing to property
owners within 500 feet of the property to be rezoned. Mailing notices shall
not be required for Zoning Code text amendments.



   (E)   Failure to receive notice. The failure of any person or entity
to receive notice shall not constitute grounds for the city or any court to
invalidate the actions of the Commission or Council.



   (F)   Planning and Zoning Commission decision. Following public
hearing, the Commission shall render its decision in the form of a written
recommendation to the Council. The recommendation shall include the reasons
for the recommendation and shall be transmitted to the Council in such form
and manner as may be specified by the Council.



   (G)   City Council decision.



      (1)   If the Commission has held a public hearing, the Council
may adopt the recommendation of the Commission without holding a second
public hearing if there is no objection, request for public hearing or other
protest. The Council shall hold a public hearing if requested by the
aggrieved party or any member of the public or of the Council, or in any
case, if no public hearing has been held by the Commission. Notice of the
date, time and place of the hearing shall be given in the time and manner
provided for the giving of notice of the hearing by the Commission.



      (2)   A request made by an aggrieved party or member of the
public or of the Council for a public hearing to be held by the Council shall
be made within 14 calendar days from the date the Commission votes upon a
proposed amendment. The request shall be in writing on a form provided by the
City Clerk and filed with the City Clerk.



   (H)   Conditions of Zoning Map amendment approval.



      (1)   Base district Zoning Map amendments. The Council may
condition approval of base district Zoning Map amendments on the following:



         (a)   Dedication of public rights-of-way as streets (in
accordance with city's Street Classification System), alleys, public ways,
drainage and public utilities as are reasonably required by or related to the
effect of the rezoning.



         (b)   Establishment of a schedule for development of the
specific use or uses for which rezoning is requested. If at the expiration of
this period the property has not been improved for the use for which it was
conditionally approved, the legislative body, after notification by certified
mail to the owner and applicant who requested the rezoning, may schedule a
public hearing to take administrative action to extend or determine
compliance with the schedule for development or take legislative action to
cause the property to revert to its former zoning classification.



      (2)   Planned Development Overlay District Zoning Map
amendments. The Council may condition approval of a Planned Development
Overlay Zoning Map amendment on modification of regulations in accordance
with Vol. II, § 1-4-3 (PD District).



   (I)   Reconsideration of denied amendment. In the event that an
application for amendment to the zoning district boundaries is denied by the
Council, the Commission and Council shall not reconsider a similar
application for at least 90 calendar days from the date of the denial action.



   (J)   Protests against Zoning Map amendment.



      (1)   If the owners of 20% or more either of the area of the
lots included in a proposed Zoning Map amendment, or of those immediately
adjacent in the rear or any side thereof extending 150 feet therefrom, or of
those directly opposite thereto extending 150 feet from the street frontage
of the opposite lots, file a protest in writing against a proposed amendment,
it shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of 3/4 of all
members of the Council. If any members of the Council are unable to vote on
such a question because of a conflict of interest, the required number of
votes for passage of the question shall be 3/4 of the remaining membership of
the Council, provided that such required number of votes shall in no event be
less than a majority of the full membership of the legally established
Council.



      (2)   Protests shall be filed with the Development Services
Department no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Wednesday preceeding the Council
meeting, or the following day if Wednesday is a holiday where City Hall is
closed.



   (K)   Effective date. A decision by the Council involving rezoning
of land which is not owned by the city and which changes the Zoning Map
classification of such land may not be enacted as an emergency measure and
such change shall not be effective for at least 30 days after final approval
of the change in classification by the Council.



   (L)   Consistency with the General Plan. All Zoning Map amendments
or Zoning Code text amendments adopted under this article shall be consistent
with and conform to the adopted General Plan of the city. In the case of
uncertainty in construing or applying the conformity of any part of a
proposed amendment to the adopted General Plan of the city, the proposed
amendment shall be construed in a manner that will further the implementation
of, and not be contrary to, the goals, policies and applicable elements of
the General Plan. An amendment conforms to the General Plan if it proposes
land uses, densities or intensities within the range of identified uses,
densities and intensities of the Land Use Element of the General Plan.



   (M)   Filing fees. Application fees for amendments to the Zoning
Code regulations or the Zoning Maps shall be in accordance with Apache
Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4 .



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-7  PUBLIC HEARINGS, NOTICES AND CITIZEN REVIEW PROCESSES.



   (A)   Public hearing and notice. Information and procedures
regarding public hearing, public posting, newspaper publication, property
posting and property owner mailing notice requirements for certain zoning and
development applications is provided below.



      (1)   Zoning Code and Map amendments. Public notice
requirements for Zoning Code and Zoning Map amendments are provided in Vol.
II, § 1-16-6.



      (2)   Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Public notice
requirements for appeals are provided in Vol. II, § 1-16-5.



      (3)   Conditional use permits. Public notice requirements for
conditional use permit applications are provided in Vol. II, § 1-16-12(D).



      (4)   General Plan amendments. Public notice requirements for
General Plan amendments are provided in Chapter 15 (Amending the General
Plan) of the "Apache Junction General Plan", or any subsequent amendment.



      (5)   Annexations. Public notice requirements for proposed
annexations are provided in Vol. II, § 1-16-10.



   (B)   Citizen review process. A neighborhood meeting shall be
required for all privately initiated applications for major General Plan Land
Use Plan Map amendments, Zoning Map amendments and specific Plan approvals.
The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is to provide a means for the
applicant, surrounding neighbors and homeowners associations to review
privately initiated preliminary Zoning Map and Land Use Plan Map amendment
proposals and solicit input and exchange information about the proposed
amendment with the intent to resolve potential conflicts prior to the
required formal hearings.



      (1)   Neighborhood meeting scheduling. The applicant is
required to hold at least 1 neighborhood meeting at least 15 calendar days
prior to their scheduled Planning Commission Public Hearing.



      (2)   Neighborhood meeting notification. At least 10 calendar
days prior to the neighborhood meeting, the applicant shall provide
notification to the affected neighbors as follows:



         (a)   Applicant shall notify by first-class mail all
property owners of record within 300 feet of the property.



         (b)   Applicant shall notify any persons who have
specifically requested notice regarding the application who register their
names and addresses with the city as being interested in receiving such
notice.



         (c)   The neighborhood meeting notice shall set forth
the purpose, substance of the proposed application (e.g., site plans,
building elevations and project data), and the time, date and place of the
meeting.



         (d)   A copy of the neighborhood meeting notice shall be
submitted to the Development Services Director.



      (3)   Follow-up report. Applicants shall provide a written
report to the Development Services Department on the results of their citizen
review efforts at least 10 calendar days prior to the Commission's public
hearing. This report will be attached to the staff's public hearing case
report. At a minimum, the written report of the citizens review meeting shall
include the following details:



         (a)   Dates and locations of all meetings where citizens
were invited to discuss the proposal;



         (b)   Content, dates mailed and number of mailings,
including examples of letters, meeting notices, newsletters and other
publications;



         (c)   The addresses of residents, property owners and
interested parties receiving notices, newsletters or other written materials;



         (d)   The number of people that participated in the
process; and



         (e)   A summary of concerns, issues and problems
expressed during the process, including the substance of the concerns, issues
and problems; and how the concerns were addressed or resolved.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-8  PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT REVIEW (PDR) PROCESS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary development review
("PDR") process is to create efficiency, predictability and consistency in
the development review and approval process.  The PDR process provides an
internal forum for the prospective applicant and city staff to review and
discuss a proposed development, identify opportunities and constraints and to
outline the procedural steps that are required for approval.



   (B)   PDR submittal and review process. The PDR submittal process
and requirements are provided in the "Preliminary Development Review
Instructional Packet" available at the Development Services Department.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-9  SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   Purpose. The Site Plan review and approval provisions are
intended to promote safe, functional and aesthetic development of property
and to ensure that new structures, utilities, streets, parking, circulation
systems, yards and open spaces are developed in conformance with the
standards of the Zoning Code, Engineering Design Guidelines, General Plan and
any adopted specific plans.



   (B)   Application. No non-residential and/or multi-family
residential structure or use shall be permitted prior to Development Services
Department review and approval of a development site plan prepared in
accordance with this section.



   (C)   Submittal and approval requirements. The applicant shall
submit a completed application to the Director or designee in accordance with
this Article. The Director will review the application and Site Plan then
proceed as follows:



      (1)   Incomplete submittal. If the Site Plan application is
incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant with a
statement of the reasons why the proposed Site Plan does not conform to the
applicable Zoning Code standards.



      (2)   Permitted by right uses and structures. If the proposed
use or structure is permitted by right in the Zoning Code, the Director or
designee will review the completed application and Site Plan in accordance
with applicable Zoning Code standards, and either deny the Site Plan for
cause or approve and forward the Site Plan to the Building Division for code
review and processing.



      (3)   Conditional uses or planned development overlay zoning
requests. If the proposed use or structure is associated with a CUP
application or a Planned Development Overlay Zoning application, the Director
will review the Site Plan and forward a report and recommendation to the
Commission and/or Council for their final review and action. If the final
Site Plan conforms to the approval of the Commission and, if required,
Council, the Director will forward such approval to the Building Division for
permit processing.



   (D)   Minor Site Plan modifications and revisions requiring only
administrative approval. The following proposed minor changes to Commission
or Council approved Site Plans may be administratively approved by
interpretation of the Director or his/her designee:



      (1)   A change in floor area less than 10%, subject to
compliance with setback requirements.



      (2)   A reduction of less than 10% of the landscape area, open
space or outdoor living area.



      (3)   A minor change to a condition of approval that does not
change the basic intent of the condition.



      (4)   A minor change to the design that does not deviate from
the previously approved design concept.



      (5)   Changes that are not likely to have an adverse impact on
adjoining properties.



   (E)   Major Site Plan modifications and revisions requiring
Commission and/or Council approval. Major changes to Site Plans associated
with Commission approved CUPs or Council approved planned development
rezonings shall require approval by the Commission or Council, respectfully.
Major modifications shall include substantial design, Site Plan, setback,
landscaping, density, lot size, signage, building height, access and/or use
revisions to the approved Site Plan.



   (F)   Site Plan requirements. The Site Plan submittal process and
requirements are provided in the "City of Apache Junction Site Plan
Application Checklist" available at the Development Services Department.



   (G)   Effect of Site Plan approval.



      (1)   Effective period of Site Plan approval. The approval of
a Site Plan shall be effective for a period of 2 years from the date of
approval, at the end of which time the applicant must have submitted an
application for building permit. If a Site Plan is not submitted for
certification within the 2 year period, the approval shall be null and void,
and the applicant shall be required to submit a new Site Plan for review.



      (2)   Application for building permits. After a Site Plan has
been approved, the applicant may apply for building permits consistent with
the Site Plan as approved. No building permit application may be issued until
the Site Plan has been certified by the Director as conforming to the
approved Site Plan.



   (H)   Final inspection. The Director or his/her designee shall
inspect the development site for compliance with the approved Site Plan
before a final certificate of occupancy is issued for the project. Any
deficiencies shall be recorded in a letter to the applicant. The applicant
shall have 10 calendar days in which to eliminate the deficiencies. If the
applicant is unable to comply within the 10 calendar day period, the
applicant may request, in writing, an extension of time for the completion
which shall not exceed 6 months. The written request shall state the
extenuating circumstances causing the delay. Upon review and approval by the
Director or designee, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
indicating the date by which the deficiencies shall be eliminated (Note: the
Planning Division's final inspection for Site Plan compliance is separate and
distinct from the Building Division's inspections for Building Code
compliance).



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-10  ANNEXATION PROCESS.



   (A)   Intent. This section establishes uniform procedures for
annexation of property not within the city limits and subsequent zoning of
that property.



   (B)   Process.



      (1)   Upon compliance with state statutes and city regulations
and processes, annexation applications shall be forwarded to the Council for
the public hearing required by A.R.S. § 9-471(A)(3) prior to release of the
annexation petition.



      (2)   Once the Council conducts its initial public hearing and
accepts the request for annexation, official annexation petitions shall be
prepared by staff to be circulated to the effected property owners following
the public hearing.



      (3)   When all provisions of A.R.S.§§  9-471, et seq. have
been complied with, the Council shall hold the required public hearings to
consider an ordinance authorizing annexation of the property into the city.



   (C)   Zoning of annexed properties. Areas under consideration for
annexation may be zoned at the time of annexation or within 6 months after
the annexation to city zoning districts comparable to, but not greater in
intensity than the county zoning applicable to the property immediately
preceding annexation. In the event that city zoning is not established with
annexation, the area shall be considered to be zoned as shown on the Official
Pinal or Maricopa County Zoning Map, as the case may be.



   (D)   Construction and building permits.



      (1)   County building permits validly issued pursuant to
county requirements not more than 60 calendar days prior to the effective
date of annexation, shall be accepted by the Building Official as valid
permits for a period of 60 calendar days after the effective date of
annexation. If construction has not commenced on or before the 60th calendar
day after the effective date of annexation, a city building permit shall be
required.



      (2)   For buildings under construction with a valid building
permit issued by Pinal County prior to the effective date of an annexation
ordinance, a city building permit shall not be required, but the Building
Official shall require that buildings constructed under such county building
permit be structurally safe and conform to pertinent county zoning
regulations in effect at the time the county permit was issued.



   (E)   Existing uses and structures.



      (1)   Any use or activity conducted contrary to county zoning
regulations at the effective date of annexation and not constituting a legal
non-conforming use under the county zoning regulations, shall not be
considered a legal non-conforming use by the city.



      (2)   Any use or activity conducted in conformance with county
zoning regulations at the effective date of annexation and not in conformance
with this Chapter shall be considered a legal non-conforming use by the city.



      (3)   Any use, activity or structure that is existing at the
effective date of annexation, under a county use permit with a time limit
imposed, may continue for the remainder of the time limit. Any extension of
this time limit requires city approval of a CUP. The type of CUP required
shall be determined according to the regulations for the city zoning district
where the use is located. If, after the expiration of the Pinal County use
permit, no CUP is specified or approved for that activity, then the property
shall require rezoning to a conforming zoning district permitting the
activity, or the activity may continue only as a legal nonconforming use,
subject to the requirements of Vol. II, § 1-2-5.



      (4)   Any legal lot or parcel of land duly recorded in the
County Recorder's Office prior to the effective date of this Chapter and
having an area, width, depth, or street frontage less than that required in
the Zoning District regulations in which such lot or parcel is situated,
shall be deemed to be a lot and may be used as a building site, provided that
all other regulations for the city zoning district shall apply.



      (5)   Building setbacks established by county overlay zoning
or special use permit for existing residential developments shall be
enforced. Conventional residential developments without county overlay zoning
or special use permit shall have setbacks as specified in the city's Zoning
Ordinance.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-11  AMENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL PLAN.



   Submittal and approval process. Proposed amendments to the General Plan
shall comply with the amendment process and requirements established in the
most current version of the Apache Junction General Plan, or any subsequent
update to the Plan.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-12  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS AND BUILDING
PERMITS.



   (A)   Authorization and applicability. It shall be unlawful to
erect, construct, reconstruct, alter or change the structure, land and/or use
of any property within the city without first obtaining the required building
permit, administrative use permit, and/or conditional use permit from the
Development Services Department.



   (B)   Building permits. The City of Apache Junction Building
Official and the city's adopted building codes establish the requirements and
procedures for building permits.



   (C)   Administrative use permits. An Administrative Use Permit
("AUP") may be approved by the Zoning Administrator following review of the
application and a finding that the use and/or structure complies with
specific standards specified for such use and/or structure in the Zoning
Code. Uses and/or structures requiring approval of an AUP, along with permit
approval criteria, are identified in Tables 5-1 and 5-3 (see Vol. II, §§
1-5-1 and 1-5-3).



   (D)   Conditional use permits. Conditional uses are those uses that
are generally compatible with the land uses permitted by right in a zoning
district, but which require individual Planning and Zoning Commission review
and Conditional Use Permit ("CUP") approval of their location, design,
operation and configuration along with the imposition of conditions in order
to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location. Uses
requiring a CUP are identified in Tables 5-1 and 5-3 (see Vol. II, §§ 1-5-1
and 1-5-3). The CUP application and process requirements are as follows:



      (1)   CUP application. An application for a CUP shall be filed
with the Development Services Department in accordance with the "City of
Apache Junction Conditional Use Permit Application Checklist" available at
the Development Services Department.



      (2)   CUP public hearing and notice. The Commission shall hold
a public hearing on any proposed CUP or CUP amendment, and provide the
following notice. The failure of any person or entity to receive notice shall
not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the actions of the
Commission or Council.



         (a)   Newspaper publication. Notice of the time, date
and place of the hearing, including a general description of the matter to be
considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation that is published or circulated in the
community. The publication notice shall be at least 15 calendar days before
the hearing, and shall be published as required by A.R.S. § 9-462.04, as
amended.



         (b)   Property posting. The notice of public hearing
shall be posted by the applicant in accordance with the instructions provided
in the application form.



         (c)   Mailing notice. The city shall notice by first
class mail each real property owner, as shown on the last assessment of the
property, within 300 feet of the property subject to the CUP proposal.



      (3)   Findings. A CUP may be granted upon a finding by the
Commission that the use covered by the permit, the manner of its conduct, and
any structure involved will not be detrimental to persons residing or working
in the area, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood, or to the public
welfare in general. The burden of proof for satisfying the aforementioned
requirements shall rest with the applicant.  In arriving at the above
determination, the Commission shall consider but not be limited to the
following factors:



         (a)   Adequacy of roadways, off-street parking, public
facilities and services to accommodate the proposed use;



         (b)   Negative impacts arising from the emission of
odor, dust, gas, noise, lighting, vibration, smoke, heat or glare;



         (c)   Contribution to the deterioration of the
neighborhood or the negative impact on neighborhood property values;



         (d)   Compatibility with surrounding uses and structures;



         (e)   Conformance with the General Plan and city
policies;



         (f)   Screening and buffering of uses; and



         (g)   Unique nature of the property, use and/or
development's physical characteristics.



      (4)   CUP modification of dimensional zoning standards. When a
proposed development exhibits unique characteristics related to land,
topography, architectural style, scale, historical interest or other
distinguishing feature that necessitates a measure of regulatory relief, CUP
modification of certain dimensional zoning standards may be approved by the
Commission in accordance with the findings described above in Vol. II, §
1-16-12(D)(3).  The following dimensional zoning standards may be subject to
this type of modification:



         (a)   Accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling unit
size and height standards required in Vol. II, § 1-6-19 of this Chapter may
be modified.



         (b)   Accessory structures.  Accessory structure size,
height, design and setback standards required in Vol. II, § 1-6-5 may be
modified.



         (c)   Landscaping. Landscaping size, type, amount and
location standards required in Vol. II, Article 1-8 may be modified.



         (d)   Signs. Sign size, type, amount and location
standards required in Vol. II, Article 1-11 may be modified.



      (5)   Expiration. CUPs granted by the Commission shall be void
if the use is not commenced within 12 months of the approval date or within
the time stipulated by the Commission.



      (6)   Revocation. An approved CUP may be revoked by the
Commission following public hearing and a finding that there has been
material noncompliance with any condition prescribed in the permit and/or the
use generates a demonstrated public safety, health or welfare concern.



      (7)   Appeal and City Council review. The approval or denial
of a CUP by the Commission shall be final unless, within 20 calendar days
from the date of the Commission's decision, the applicant or any persons
aggrieved by the decision appeals the decision to the Council. The appeal
shall be in writing, filed with the Development Services Department, and
shall indicate how the Commission was in error. The appeal shall be
accompanied by a fee equal to 50% of the original filing fee. The appeal
shall require a Council public hearing and notification provided in the same
manner as required for the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing. The
Council, at its public hearing, shall uphold, modify or overrule the decision
of the Commission. The decision of the Council shall be final.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-13  DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Intent and purpose. A development agreement is a contract
between a local jurisdiction and a person who has ownership or control of
property within the jurisdiction. The purpose of the agreement is to specify
the standards and conditions that will govern development of the property.
The development agreement provides assurance to the developer that he/she may
proceed to develop the project subject to the rules and regulations in effect
at the time of approval and that the development will not be subject to
subsequent changes in regulations. Development agreements must also benefit
the local jurisdiction with sufficient legal consideration. The city may
include conditions (mitigation measures) that must be met to assure that a
project at a specific location does not have unacceptable impacts on
neighboring properties or community infrastructure. The agreement may clarify
how the project will be phased, the required timing of public improvements,
the developer's contribution toward funding system-wide community
improvements, economic incentives and other conditions. The agreement can
also facilitate enforcement of requirements, since it is a contract that
details the obligations of the developer and city.



   (B)   Applicability. The use of development agreements will be based
on a case by case determination by city staff.



   (C)   Administrative responsibility. The city department responsible
for administering development agreements will be assigned on a case by case
basis. If the development agreement is focused on economic development
incentives, the Economic Development Division will be responsible for
administering the agreement. If, however, the development agreement is
focused on land use, infrastructure and zoning requirements, the Development
Services Department's Planning Division will be responsible for administering
the agreement.



   (D)   Legal review. In all cases, the City Attorney shall be
responsible for legal review and modification of the development agreement
prior to City Council consideration.



   (E)   City Council approval required. The City Council has the final
authority in approving or denying development agreements. Development
agreements shall be presented to the Council for consideration at a public
hearing.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-14  ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Intent. The purpose of creating administrative relief from
development standards is to authorize minor administrative deviations from
the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. The intent is to provide the
Director or his or her designee the authority to grant administrative relief
from certain development standards where such deviations will expedite minor
entitlements, maintain or improve the quality of development, and provide
reasonable flexibility with the application of development regulations and
standards.



   (B)   Decision-making authority (10% rule). The Director is
authorized to grant administrative relief, with or without conditions, from
certain dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, not to exceed 10%
of the applicable requirements/standards, subject to all of the following
findings:



      (1)   The administrative relief is consistent and in
conformity with the General Plan.



      (2)   The administrative relief is substantially consistent
with the Zoning Ordinance.



      (3)   The administrative relief applies only to setbacks,
building height, site coverage, sign height, sign size, open space and/or
number of parking stalls.



      (4)   The administrative relief will not create conditions
materially detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare or
will not be injurious to or incompatible with other properties or land uses
in the vicinity.



      (5)   The administrative relief is necessary due to the
physical attributes and conditions of the property and the proposed use or
structure including but not limited to topography, noise exposure, irregular
property boundaries or other unusual circumstances.



      (6)   There are no alternatives to the requested modification
that could provide similar benefits with less potential detriment.



      (7)   The request is not part of multiple applications from an
individual homebuilder for a specific subdivision or planned community.



      (8)   Granting the relief does not impose an undue financial
or administrative burden on the city.



      (9)   The applicant's demonstrated need substantially
outweighs any detriment to the public's needs and interests.



   (C)   Application requirements. An application for administrative
relief shall be filed with the Development Services Director or his or her
designee and shall include all of the following:



      (1)   Legal description of the property and proposed
development, scaled plot plan, conceptual floor plans and preliminary
building elevations of proposed buildings.



      (2)   A property survey prepared by a licensed professional If
deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to accurately determine property
dimensions, size and setbacks.



      (3)   Written justification for proposed relief.



      (4)   Official application form with ownership verification.



      (5)   Filing fees as established by the Apache Junction City
Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4, Fees.



      (6)   Proposition 207 waiver.



   (D)   Violations of conditions. A violation of any condition
stipulated by the Director shall be a violation and shall render the granted
administrative relief null and void. An approval shall also be null and void
if the use has not commenced or if a building permit has not been obtained
within 60 calendar days after relief has been authorized by the Director, or
within any greater or lesser time stipulated by the Director, not to exceed
one 12-month period.



   (E)   Right to appeal. Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of
the Director may appeal the decision to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals,
in accordance with Vol. II, § 1-16-5, within 30 calendar days after receipt
of the Director's decision. Any such appeal shall be subject to a separate
application and fee pursuant to Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4
, Fees.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-15  FEES.



   Fee schedule. Fees associated with development review, approval and
permitting are provided in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4 .
Development fees are provided in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Chapter
7.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 1-16-16  VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violations. Any building, structure or improvement erected,
built, moved or maintained, or any use of property contrary to the provisions
of the Zoning Code is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.



   (B)   Remedies and enforcement powers. Failure to comply with any
provision of this Chapter is hereby declared unlawful. The following remedies
and enforcement powers may be used to administer and enforce this Chapter.



      (1)   Withhold permits. The city may deny or withhold all
permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or
structure or improvements thereon upon which there is an uncorrected
violation of a provision of this Chapter or of a condition or qualification
of a permit, certificate, approval, or other authorization previously granted
by the city. This enforcement provision shall apply regardless of whether the
current owner or applicant is responsible for the violation in question.



      (2)   Permits approved with conditions. Instead of withholding
or denying a permit or authorization the city may grant such authorization
subject to the condition that the violation be corrected.



      (3)   Revoke permits. Any AUP issued under this Chapter may be
revoked when the Zoning Administrator determines any one of the following:



         (a)   That there is departure from the plans,
specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the permit.



         (b)   That the development permit was procured by false
representation or was issued by mistake.



         (c)   That any of the provisions of this Chapter are
being violated. Written notice of such revocation shall be served upon the
owner, the owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the
building or structure for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in
a prominent location; and, thereafter, no such construction shall proceed.



      (4)   Revoke plan or other approval. Where a violation of this
Chapter involves a failure to comply with approved plans or conditions to
which the approval of such plans was made subject, the City Council may, upon
notice to the applicant and other known parties in interest (including any
holders of building permits affected) and after a public hearing, revoke the
plan or other approval or condition its continuance on strict compliance with
this Chapter, the provision of security to ensure that construction is
completed in compliance with approved plans, or such other conditions as the
City Council may reasonably impose.



      (5)   Injunction and abatement. The city may initiate
injunction or abatement proceedings or other appropriate action in a court of
competent jurisdiction against any person who fails to comply with any
provision of this Chapter, or any requirement or condition imposed pursuant
to this Code, to prevent, enjoin, abate, or terminate violations pursuant to
A.R.S. § 9-462.05.B. The city may seek a court order in the nature of
mandamus, abatement, injunction, special declaratory judgment or other action
for proceeding to abate or remove a violation or to otherwise restore the
premises in question to the condition in which they existed prior to the
violation.



      (6)   Criminal filings. It is unlawful to erect, construct,
reconstruct, maintain or use any land in any zoning district in violation of
any regulation or any provisions of this Chapter. Any person, firm or
corporation violating this Chapter or any part thereof, is guilty of a class
one misdemeanor. Each and every day during which the illegal erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use continues is a
separate offense. The City Attorney shall have the sole authority to use his
or her discretion in determining whether a criminal action should be filed.
The penalty for a class one misdemeanor conviction can be up to 6-months jail
time, up to $2,500 fines or restitution, 3 years probation and other terms
the court finds just.



      (7)   Other powers. In addition to the enforcement powers
specified in this Article, the city may exercise any and all enforcement
powers granted by Arizona law. If deemed necessary by the city for public
health and safety reasons, the city may immediately commence all necessary
actions or proceedings for the abatement, enjoinment and removal thereof in
the manner provided by law, and may apply to such court or courts as may have
jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate, enjoin and remove the
building or use and restrain and enjoin any person, firm or corporation from
setting up, erecting, building, moving or maintaining any such building or
using any property contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.



   (C)   Civil enforcement procedures for emergency matters. In the
case of violations of this Chapter that constitute an emergency situation as
a result of safety or public concerns or violations that will create
increased problems or costs if not remedied immediately, the city may use the
enforcement powers available under this Article without prior notice.



   (D)   Enforcement procedures for non-emergency matters. If after an
inspection and informal attempts have failed to gain compliance with this
Chapter in a non-emergency situation, the city shall serve the owner, owner's
statutory or authorized agent, occupant, lessee or person in control of the
property with a notice of violation. This notice shall contain the following:



      (1)   Legal identification of property.



      (2)   Statement of violations in sufficient detail to allow an
owner or responsible party to identify and correct the problem.



      (3)   The expected compliance deadline of at least 21 calendar
days from the date of the notice.



      (4)   A re-inspection date.



      (5)   Address and telephone number of a city representative to
contact.



      (6)   A warning that failure to comply may result in the
filing of a civil or criminal misdemeanor case, depending on whether this
violation is the 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th violation over a 24-month consecutive
period.



      (7)   A warning that failure to comply may also result in an
administrative or court abatement action by the city, which the owner or
responsible person will be financially liable through a lien process that may
include foreclosure of the property.



      (8)   Appeal rights (Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the
protocol thereunder and required fees).



   (E)   Effective date. Any notice issued under this Chapter shall be
deemed effective on the date when written notice is hand-delivered or sent
via first class U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
individuals referenced above. Any recorded notice shall run with the land and
shall constitute legal notice for all purposes of this chapter to all parties
and entities thereafter acquiring an interest in the property. Officers may
use their discretion in granting extensions for compliance with the code,
depending on the violators' efforts to date.



   (F)   Civil citations and complaints. If the owner or other
responsible party fails to comply with the notice of violation, and fails to
appeal the notice, or loses the appeal hearing and fails to pursue other
available appellate courses of action, a civil action to enforce the
provision of this chapter may be commenced and a summons shall be issued in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the Arizona Revised Statutes and
applicable city ordinances. Jurisdiction of proceedings in this Chapter shall
be in the Municipal Court of the City of Apache Junction. The City Manager
and/or his or her designee shall be responsible for filing civil citations
with the Apache Junction Municipal Court subject to the following:



      (1)   Penalties.



         (a)   First offense during 24 consecutive month period:
civil penalty of $250;



         (b)   Second offense during 24 consecutive month period:
civil penalty of $500;



         (c)   Third offense during 24 consecutive month period:
civil penalty of $750.



      (2)   Timing and fines. The 24-month period shall be
calculated from the dates the violations are first committed. The owner or
responsible party shall receive the progressively higher civil penalty upon a
finding of responsibility for any violation of this chapter which was
committed within 24 months of the commission of another violation for which
the owner or responsible party was found responsible. In no event shall the
Court reduce the minimum dollar penalties referenced above. The dollar
amounts noted above are the fines, exclusive of any other Court imposed
penalties.



      (3)   Separate offences. Every day any violation of any
provision of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation or
offense. The owner of record, as reflected in the Pinal or Maricopa County
Recorder's Office, may be presumed to be a person having lawful control over
the building, structure or parcel of land which is the subject of the
violation. If more than 1 person is recorded as the owner of the property,
the persons may be jointly and severally presumed to be the persons having
lawful control over the building, structure or parcel of land.



      (4)   Civil hearing procedure. A person lawfully served with a
civil citation or complaint shall appear at the time and place stated in the
citation or summons, or may appear prior to the time and admit or deny the
allegations of the complaint. Allegations not denied at the time of
appearance are deemed admitted. If the allegations are admitted, the Court
shall enter judgment for the city and impose the minimum dollar sanction as
noted above, exclusive of any additional court fees and costs that the Court
may or is obligated to impose. If the defendant denies the allegations, the
Court shall set the matter for hearing. Civil hearings are to be held
informally and held without a jury, and the city is required to prove the
allegations by a preponderance of the evidence. Technical rules of evidence
do not apply, except for statutory provisions relating to privileged
communications. If the defendant elects to be represented by counsel, the
defendant shall so notify the Court at least 10 court days prior to the
hearing date. Hearings shall be recorded by technological devices, including
tape recording or by stenographer. If the Court finds in favor of the
defendant, the Court shall enter an order dismissing the citation or
complaint. If the Court finds in favor of the city, the Court shall enter
judgment for the city and impose the minimum dollar sanction noted above,
plus any additional court fees and costs that the Court is obligated to add.



      (5)   Appeal of civil court hearing. Any party may appeal the
judgment of the Municipal Court to the Superior Court under A.R.S. § 12-124.
Appeals from civil proceedings shall be in accordance with the Superior Court
Rules of Appellate Procedure - Civil.



   (G)   Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a building or
use permit or approval of plans or specifications under the authority of this
Chapter shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for or an approval of
any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or the amendments
thereto or of any other ordinance or law. No permit presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel any of the provisions of this Chapter or any
existing law shall be issued, and if issued shall not be valid; except
insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful and permitted.



   (H)   Enforcement by city officials. It shall be the duty of the
officers of the city charged with the enforcement of the law to enforce the
provisions of the Zoning Code.



   (I)   Remedies. All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative
and not exclusive. The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder
shall not relieve that person from the responsibility to correct prohibited
conditions or to remove prohibited buildings, structures or improvements, nor
to prevent the enforcement, correction or removal thereof. In addition to
other remedies provided in this Chapter, any adjacent or neighboring property
owner who shall be especially damaged by the violation of any provision of
this Chapter, may institute in addition to other remedies provided by law,
injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate action, proceeding or
proceedings to prevent, abate or remove the unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use.



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)



ARTICLE 1-17:  DEFINITIONS



Section



   1-17-1   Definitions



§ 1-17-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUT. To touch or adjoin along a common border or property line.



   ABUTTING. Two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary
line.



   ACCESS or ACCESS WAY. The means of ingress and egress connecting a
property to the public roadway system.



   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit is an attached or detached
residential  dwelling unit that may provide complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, and which may include provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel where
the primary single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory dwelling unit
may also be known as a secondary dwelling unit, granny flat, property
caretaker's dwelling or guest house, but should not be confused with
"accessory structures".



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A non-habitable structure which is incidental or
subordinate to the main structure or use on the same building site.



   ACCESSORY USE. Incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate
to the primary use of a lot or building, which does not alter the principal
use of the lot or building.



   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. Any action on a development application made
by an authorized city employee, pursuant to this Chapter.



   ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT. Authorization by the Zoning Administrator to
use property in accordance with Zoning Code rules and regulations (see Vol.
II, § 1-2-4).



   ADULT FOSTER CARE. A residential setting which provides room and board
and adult foster care services for up to 10 adults in a family environment.



   ADULT FOSTER CARE HOME. A residential care institution licensed by the
Arizona Department of Health Services, which provides supervisory care,
personal care or custodial care services to not more than 10 adults who are
unrelated to the manager or owner of the home and who require the assistance
of not more than 1 person to walk or to transfer from a bed, chair or toilet,
but who are able to self-propel a wheelchair.



   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS AND USE TERMS.



      (1)   ADULT ARCADE or PEEPSHOW. Any place to which the public
is permitted or invited where coin-operated or slug-operated, or for any form
of consideration, electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled
still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to a person in a
booth or a viewing room where the images so displayed depict or described
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE or ADULT NOVELTY
STORE. A commercial establishment which as one of its principal business
purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any 1 or
more of the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, computer generated images, motion pictures,
video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual
representations that depict or describe specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities; or



         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding
condoms and other birth control and disease-prevention products.



         A commercial establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities and still be categorized as ADULTBOOKSTORE, ADULT VIDEO
STORE or ADULT NOVELTY STORE. Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt these commercial establishments from being categorized as an ADULT
BOOKSTORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE or ADULT NOVELTY STORE so long as one of its
principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which depict or describe specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or other
commercial establishment licensed to serve alcoholic beverages pursuant to
A.R.S. § 4-209(B), which regularly features, exhibits or displays as one of
its principal business purposes:



         (a)   Individuals who appear in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity;



         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or



         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions which depict or describe specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



      (4)   ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL. A hotel or motel or similar
commercial establishment that:



         (a)   Offers public accommodations for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions that depict or describe specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities as one of its principal business
purposes; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of these adult types of photographic
reproductions;



         (b)   Offers a single sleeping room for rent less than
10 hours in a 24-hour period; or



         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sublet the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours in a 24-hour
period.



      (5)   ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. A business that
offers any of the following entertainment:



         (a)   Male or female adult services providers and
employees who are nude or are in a state of nudity;



         (b)   Nude models; or



         (c)   Mud wrestling, wet T-shirt or other similar
entertainment.



      (6)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown as one of its
principal business purposes that depict or describe specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities.



      (7)   ADULT SERVICES. Dancing, service of food or beverage,
modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking, sitting or listening,
or other performances or activities conducted for any consideration in a
sexually oriented business by an individual who is nude or is in a state of
nudity during all or part of the time the person is providing this service.



      (8)   ADULT SERVICES PROVIDER or EROTIC ENTERTAINER. Any
individual who provides any adult services, whether an employee or
independent contractor.



      (9)   ADULT THEATER. A business which regularly features,
exhibits or displays, as one of its principal business purposes, individuals
who appear nude, in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, live or by film, or
plate negative, film or plate positive, film or tape designed to be projected
on a screen for exhibition, or films, glass slides or transparencies, either
in negative or positive form, designed for exhibition by projection on a
screen, or any type of viewing booth or equipment, that expose or depict
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



      (10)   BOOTH. A partitioned area in which coin or token
operated video machines, projectors or other electronically or mechanically
controlled devices are used in the regular course of business to produce
still or moving picture images, that expose or depict specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities.



      (11)   DISCERNIBLY TURGID STATE. Being visibly swollen,
bloated, inflated or distended.



      (12)   EMPLOYEE. Any individual who performs any service on
the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or
contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated as an employee,
independent contractor, agent or otherwise, and whether or not the individual
is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator; does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for delivery of goods to the premises.



      (13)   ESCORT. An individual who, for tips or any other
consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for
another individual or who agrees or offers to privately model or otherwise be
clothed in lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
individual.



      (14)    ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business that furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of his, her, or
its principal business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration.



      (15)   ESTABLISHMENT. The opening or commencement of any
sexually oriented business as a new business; or the conversion of an
existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business; or the addition of any sexually oriented business
to any other sexually oriented business; or the relocation of any sexually
oriented business.



      (16)   FIGURE MODEL. Any individual who, for pecuniary
compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be
observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed or otherwise
depicted.



      (17)   MANAGER'S STATION. A permanently designated area marked
accordingly within a sexually oriented business where a sexually oriented
business manager is located in the normal course of operations.



      (18)    MODELING STUDIO. A business which provides, for
pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward,
figure models who, for the purpose of sexual stimulation of patrons, display
specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted,
sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying this consideration.



      (19)   NUDE, NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft/cleavage
or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or
the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



      (20)   OPERATE A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS; OPERATOR.
Supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling, or
being responsible for, or in charge of, the conduct of activities of a
sexually oriented business.



      (21)    PATRON or CUSTOMER. An individual invited or permitted
to enter and remain upon the premises of a sexually oriented business,
whether or not for consideration.



      (22)    PREMISES. Interior and exterior areas of a sexually
oriented business establishment, including the parking lot.



      (23)   PRINCIPAL BUSINESS PURPOSES. A commercial establishment
that derives over 50% of its gross income from the sale or rental of items in
an adult bookstore, or adult video store, or adult novelty store.



      (24)   SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. A state of dress in
which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps or devices.



      (25)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business that as one of its
principle business purposes offers for any form of consideration physical
contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite
sex, or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex, when 1 or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.



      (26)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult live entertainment establishment, adult
hotel/motel, adult motion picture theater, adult novelty store, adult
theater, adult video store, escort agency, modeling studio, sexual encounter
center, and any combination thereof.



      (27)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS MANAGER, or MANAGER. An
individual on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized
to exercise overall operational control of the business.



      (28)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola;



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered;



         (c)   Any device, costume or covering that simulates any
of the body parts included in divisions (a) and (b) of this definition.



      (29)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Whether performed directly
or indirectly through clothing or other covering:



         (a)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast; or



         (b)   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including human
masturbation, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or



         (c)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or



         (d)   Excretory functions as part of in connection with
any of the other activities described in divisions (a) through (c) of this
definition; or



         (e)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.



   ADVERSE IMPACT. A negative consequence to the physical, social, or
economic environment resulting from an action or project.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON. The city, through the City Council, the Planning and
Zoning Commission, or the Administrator; a county or municipality within an
area designated as a joint planning area; applicants, persons, businesses,
corporations, institutions, governments or other entities having standing to
challenge a development order pursuant to Arizona law.



   AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, raising of crops, horticulture,
viticulture, silviculture, small livestock farming, dairying and/or pasture
and range livestock production, including all uses customarily incidental
thereto but not including slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter, or any other industrial use which is similarly
objectionable because of noise, odor, smoke, dust or fumes. AGRICULTURE does
not include the concentrated single-use operation of feed lots, hog, turkey,
chicken, fur-bearing animals or other similar farms, unless these operations
are operated in conjunction with or are a part of the crop production of the
same or adjoining parcels under common ownership.



   AIRPORT, COMMERCIAL. An airport, landing strip or landing field used by
or available to commercial carriers, flight training schools, private pilots
or owners of noncommercial aircraft on a commercial basis.



   AIRPORT, PRIVATE. An airport, landing strip or landing field owned and
used by owners of noncommercial aircraft, including private bona fide flying
clubs, on a noncommercial basis.



   ALLEY. Any dedicated way, intended for vehicular service to the rear or
side of property served by a street. An ALLEY is not intended for general
traffic circulation.



   ALTERATION.  Changes in materials, additions, remodels, demolitions,
and relocation of buildings or structures, but excluding ordinary maintenance
and repairs.



   AMATEUR RADIO TOWER. A structure, either freestanding or
building-mounted, that may consist of more than a single shaft of steel or
concrete used to elevate an antenna intended for airway communication
purposes by a person holding a valid amateur radio ("HAM") license issued by
the Federal Communication Commission. For the purpose of interpreting this
definition, connecting wires used for transmission and/or reception between
poles, masts, or ancillary supports, shall be considered accessory
appurtenances to the tower and not additional towers. Poles, masts,
cross-wires for transmission/ reception and ancillary supports less than 18'
high, or a maximum of 10' above the highest part of the residence, whichever
is the greater, shall not be considered Amateur Radio Towers.



   ANCILLARY MANUFACTURING USE. A use or operation that is a subsidiary or
secondary to the main use of a building (see Vol. II, § 1-6-26).



   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. A place where animals are given medical or surgical
treatment and are cared for during the time of the treatment; use as kennel
shall be limited to recovery time and shall be only incidental to such animal
hospital use.



   APARTMENT. A residential dwelling unit for rent or lease within a
multiple-family building.



   AREA, GROSS LOT. The area of a lot or parcel, including all easements
and non-dedicated road rights-of-way.



   AREA, NET LOT.  The area of a lot or parcel, excluding all dedicated
and/or non-dedicated public road rights-of-way.



   ARTICLE. Subsections within a Chapter.



   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A residential care institution intended for
occupancy by persons of advanced age or limited ability for self-care, which
may provide food, transportation, recreation, or other services to the
residents thereof, and which is licensed by the Arizona Department of Health
Services to perform supervisory care, personal care, or custodial care
services.



   AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning, body shop
work and the repair and replacement of parts to automobiles.



   AWNING. Roof like cover entirely supported by and extending from a
building for the purpose of protecting openings therein, from the elements.



   BANNER. A temporary sign of fabric, plastic, paper or other pliable
material not enclosed in a rigid frame.



   BAR. Premises used primarily for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic
beverages by the drink for on-site consumption and where food may be
available for consumption as an accessory use. Also known as a tavern or
saloon.



   BARN.  A building used for storing farm or ranch products and/or
sheltering livestock. A horse shade shall not be considered a barn for
purposes of this Chapter.



   BASEMENT. A story partly or wholly underground. A BASEMENT shall be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement where more than ½
of its height is above finished grade.



   BED AND BREAKFAST. A house, or portion thereof, where short-term
lodging rooms and meals are provided for up to 5 guestrooms. The operator of
the inn shall live on the premises or in adjacent premises.



   BILLBOARD. Any sign designated for use with changing advertising copy
and which is normally used for the advertisement of goods produced or
services rendered at locations other than the premises on which the sign is
located.



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals of
the City of Apache Junction, Arizona, which hears appeals from this Chapter,
among other things.



   BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE.  A building where, for compensation and by
pre-arrangement for definite periods, lodging is provided in a single
housekeeping unit for 3 to 20 persons.



   BUILDABLE AREA. The buildable portion of the lot remaining after
deducting all applicable road and alley easements, rights-of-way, and
required building setbacks.



   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or
property of any kind.



   BUILDING, ENCLOSED. A building composed of rigid walls on all sides,
and a roof.



   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The volume of space for building as defined by the
minimum building setbacks and the maximum allowable building height.



   BUILDING FRONT. That side of a building which contains the main
entrance for pedestrian ingress and egress and which faces the street or
access easement. On a corner lot, the side of the building with the smallest
linear dimension containing a main entrance shall be considered the BUILDING
FRONT or building frontage. The front may be designated by the owner if the
orientation is consistent with other lots and improvements in the immediate
vicinity.



   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit required for the erection, construction,
modification, addition to or moving of any building, structure or use in the
incorporated areas of the city, pursuant to building codes adopted by the
City Council.



   BUILDING SITE. A legally created parcel or contiguous parcels of land,
which provides the area and the open space required by this Chapter,
exclusive of all vehicular and pedestrian rights-of-way and all other
easements that prohibit the surface use of the property by the owner thereof.



   BULK REGULATIONS. Dimensional zoning requirements including lot size,
lot width, setbacks, height, lot coverage and density.



   CALIPER. A measurement of diameter taken on a circular tree trunk.



   CAMPGROUND. Any place where any bedding, sleeping bag or other sleeping
matter is placed, established or maintained, whether or not the place
incorporates the use of a tent, lean-to, shack or other structure or vehicle
or part thereof.



   CANOPY. A roof-like structure supported by a permanent foundation and
open on all 4 sides.



   CARETAKER. A person residing on the premises of an employer and who is
receiving meaningful compensation to assume the primary responsibility for
the necessary repair, maintenance, supervision or security of the real or
personal property of the employer which is located on the same or contiguous
lots or parcels of land.



   CARGO CONTAINER. A portable, reusable and prefabricated cargo pod,
shipping container, mobile-mini designed for or used in the packing,
shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods, or
commodities; and/or designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a
rail car or being mounted on a chassis for movement by truck trailer or
loaded on a ship.



   CARPORT. A permanent roofed structure or a portion of a main structure
with not more than 2 enclosed sides used or intended to be used for
automobile storage for the occupants of the premises.



   CARWASH. A facility for the cleaning and washing of motor vehicles
including interior cleaning, vacuuming, waxing and detailing by means of
self-service, automated mechanical equipment, manual labor, or combination
thereof.



   CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead,
and dedicated for such purposes, including columbaria, crematoriums,
mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the
boundaries of the premises.



   CENTERLINE. The centerline established by the City Engineer for any
proposed or dedicated public way.



   CHILD. A person under 18 years of age.



   CHILD CARE HOME. Home based nursery schools, preschools, and day care
facilities for children.



   CHURCH. A building, portion of a building, or group of buildings used
primarily as a place of communion or worship, including convents, religious
educational buildings and parish houses.



   CITY. The City of Apache Junction, Arizona.



   CLUB or LODGE. A regularly constituted association of persons, whether
or not incorporated, regardless of form of ownership; who are bona fide
members paying regular dues, primarily organized for some common social
purpose and which derives not more than ½ of its revenue or income from the
sale of goods and services to its members or others.



   COMMERCIAL HORSE BOARDING.  A properly approved and licensed facility
that commercially rents horse stalls on RS-GR, RS-54 and RS-54M zoned
property with a minimum gross lot area of 2.5 acres.



   COMMERCIAL USE. The buying, selling, repair, leasing or storage of
goods and services. This term shall not include manufacturing, distribution
or general warehousing activities as a primary use.



   COMMISSION. The City of Apache Junction Planning and Zoning Commission.



   COMMUNICATION TOWER. A freestanding structure including appurtenances
(greater than 34 feet in height) used for VHF and UHF television, AM and FM
radio, two-way radio, common carriers, cellular telephone and microwave.



   CONDOMINIUM. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a
separate interest in space in a residential complex located on the real
property. A CONDOMINIUM may include, in addition, a separate interest in
other portions of the real property.



   CONTRACTOR'S YARD. The use of any lot or parcel of land for the
commercial or noncommercial parking, storage, maintenance of commercial
vehicles; and/or more than 1 piece of commercial machinery; and/or outdoor
storage of building materials, aggregates, lumber, piping, vehicle parts,
tires and the like.



   CONVENTIONAL CONSTRUCTION. A site-built building constructed on a
permanent foundation, using individual structural components pursuant to the
International Building Code as adopted by the city, and requiring normal
phase inspection by the City Building Official.



   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona.



   COUNTY. Pinal County or Maricopa County, depending on the
applicability, context and location of a specific parcel of property.



   COUNTY RECORDER. The County Recorder of Pinal and Maricopa Counties,
depending on the applicability, context and location of a specific parcel of
property.



   DAY CARE. The care, supervision and guidance of persons unaccompanied
by parent, guardian or custodian, on a regular basis for periods of less than
24 hours per day in a place other than the person's own home.



   DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility in which day care is regularly provided
for compensation in an appropriate business zoning district.



   DECORATIVE FENCE. Wrought iron, picket, split rail, post and rail,
ornamental aluminum and plastic type fences; does not include wire, stockade
or chain link type fences.



   DECORATIVE WALL. Architectural block, split faced block, split faced
veneer, stucco or slump block that is painted or stained with an earth-tone
color; does not include standard concrete block.



   DECORATIVE WATER FEATURE. Any man-made body of water or a structure
containing a body of water not intended for swimming, diving or recreational
bathing, such as a fish pond, waterfall or fountain, but does not include
water tanks, retention basins, storage ponds or similar functional types of
facilities that are not intended to be primarily decorative in nature.



   DENSITY. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a zoning lot
or property.



   DENSITY, GROSS. Total number of residential units/gross land area.
Gross land area includes non-dedicated road rights-of-way and easements, if
any.



   DENSITY, NET. Total number of residential units/net land area. Net land
area excludes all road rights-of-way.



   DETACHED (FREESTANDING) SIGN. A ground sign with no form of support
other than its own structural members.



   DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. See DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.



   DEVELOPER. A person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, groups or organization who shall participate as owner, promoter,
developer, or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion,
sale or lease of a development.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to the division of a parcel of land into 2 or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill
or land disturbance; and any physical use of land with or without
accompanying buildings or structures.



   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. A contract between a local jurisdiction and a
person/legal entity that has ownership or control of property within the
jurisdiction. The purpose of the agreement is to specify the standards and
conditions that will govern development of the property. The development
agreement provides assurance to the developer that he/she may proceed to
develop the project subject to the rules and regulations in effect at the
time of approval and that the development will not be subject to subsequent
changes in regulations, unless otherwise stated. The city may include
conditions and mitigation measures that must be met to assure that a project
at a specific location does not have unacceptable impacts on neighboring
properties or community infrastructure. The agreement may clarify how the
project will be phased, the required timing of public improvements, the
developer's contribution toward funding system-wide community improvements,
economic incentives and other conditions. The agreement can also facilitate
enforcement of requirements, since it is a contract that details the
obligations of the developer and local jurisdiction.



   DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR. The Department Director of the Apache
Junction Development Services Department, or his or her designated agent.



   DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Autism, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or cognitive
disability.



   DIRECTOR. The Development Services Director of the City of Apache
Junction.



   DISABLED and DISABILITY. Unless otherwise specified, the definition
shall be the same definition as set forth in Arizonans with Disabilities Act
of 1992, as codified in A.R.S. § 41-1492(5), as amended, and/or in the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as codified in 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.
and 47 U.S.C. §§ 225 and 611, which shall include with respect to an
individual,  physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 1 or
more of the major life activities of the individual, a record of such an
impairment or being regarded as having an impairment.



   DORMITORY. A building intended or used principally for sleeping
accommodations, where the building is related to an educational or religious
institution.



   DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT DESIGN GUIDELINES.  The design guidelines
approved by the City Council through Resolution 11-22.



   DRIVEWAY. A private, vehicular access connecting a house, carport,
parking area, garage, or other buildings with the street.



   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively
for residential occupancy, including single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, duplexes, townhouses, triplexes, fourplexes, manufactured homes,
mobile homes, modular homes, and multiple-family dwellings, but not including
hotels, boarding and lodging houses.



   DWELLING, DUPLEX. A building containing 2 single-family dwelling units
totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground
to roof.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building containing 2 or more primary dwelling
units on a single lot. Types of multiple residence dwellings include
duplexes, garden apartments, and multi-story apartment buildings.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A building containing 1 single-family
dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit.



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any structure or part thereof designed to be occupied
as the living quarters with a single housekeeping unit.



   EARTHTONE. A color scheme that draws from a color palette of browns,
tans, and greens natural to the Sonoran Desert environment. The colors in an
earth tone scheme are muted and flat in an emulation of the natural colors
found in dirt, moss or trees, and rocks.



   EASEMENT. A portion of land created by grant or agreement (i.e.,
easement) that provides a specific right or privilege to use the property.
Easements may, for example, be reserved or used for utilities, traffic
access, drainage or other physical operations on the land.



   ELEVATION, ARCHITECTURAL. A two-dimensional scaled drawing of a
building or structure.



   EXCAVATION. The removal of soil, rock, or other matter from a land area.



   FACTORY BUILT BUILDING. A residential or nonresidential building
including a dwelling unit or habitable room thereof which is either wholly or
in substantial part manufactured at an off-site location to be assembled
on-site, except that it does not include a manufactured home, recreational
vehicle or mobile home; also referred to as "modular" buildings or units.



   FAMILY. Any number of related persons, or a group of not more than 10
persons who are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together
within a single housekeeping dwelling unit and using common cooking
facilities.



   FEED LOT. An animal feeding operation which is used in factory farming
for finishing livestock, notably beef cattle, but also swine, horses, sheep,
turkeys, chickens or ducks, prior to slaughter.



   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
stories of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center line of party walls. Included shall be any basement
floor, interior balconies and mezzanines, elevator shafts, and stair wells
and enclosed porches. The floor area of accessory uses and of accessory
buildings on the same lot shall be included.



   FOSTER HOME. A dwelling maintained by an individual or individuals
having care or control of 1 but not more than 6 minor children, other than
those related by blood, marriage or adoption, to those who are legal wards of
such individuals, which is licensed by the Arizona State Department of
Economic Security.



   FOSTER HOME, GROUP. A place suitable for the housing of more than 6 but
not more than 10 minor children which is licensed by the Arizona Department
of Economic Security.



   FREESTANDING/MONUMENT SIGN. See definition and illustrations in the
"City of Apache Junction Commercial Design Guidelines".



   FRONT YARD. The area of the property between the dwelling unit and the
fronting road right-of-way.



   FRONTAGE. The side(s) of a lot abutting on a street.



   FRONTAGE, DOUBLE. A lot which has two or more road frontages.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of the main
building on the same lot for the parking or storage of vehicles of the
occupants of the premises.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Premises used for the storage of cars or other
vehicles, or where the vehicles are equipped for operation, or repaired, or
kept for hire or sale.



   GARAGE, STORAGE. Premises, other than those herein defined as a private
or public garage, used exclusively for the storage of vehicles and for no
other purpose whatever.



   GENERAL PLAN. The most current version of the City of Apache Junction
General Plan and all adopted amendments thereto.



   GRADE PLANE. The average of finished ground level adjoining the
building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from
the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest
points within the area between the building and a point 6 feet from the
building.



   GRANDFATHERED. A provision in an ordinance that, under certain
circumstances, exempts those already involved in a legally regulated activity
or business from the new regulations established by the ordinance; also
referred to as a legal non-conforming use, structure or lot.



   GRAZING. The feeding of domestic livestock on an open range or fenced
pasture for commercial purposes and uses customarily incidental thereto, but
not including commercial slaughterhouses, stockyards, fertilizer yards, bone
yards, or plants for the reduction of animal matter.



   GROSS DENSITY. See DENSITY, GROSS.



   GROSS FLOOR AREA OR "GFA". The sum of the areas of all floor levels of
a building or structure measured within the exterior face of exterior walls
or the centerline of walls separating 2 abutting buildings, but excluding any
space where floor-to-ceiling height is less than 6 feet and 6 inches (6'6").



   GROSS LOT AREA or GROSS LAND AREA or GROSS ACRES. The area of a lot or
parcel, including all non-dedicated road rights-of-way.



   GROUP CARE HOME. A dwelling shared as their residence by handicapped or
disabled persons who reside together as a single housekeeping unit, in which
staff persons may provide supervision, counseling, treatment or therapy for
the residents therein, and which may be licensed by, certified by, registered
with or otherwise authorized, funded or regulated, in whole or in part, by an
agency of the state or federal government. The term shall include adult care
homes, homes for the chronically mentally ill, homes for the developmentally
disabled, group care agencies and similar residential living arrangements for
handicapped or disabled persons, but shall not include boarding houses,
nursing homes, substance abuse treatment facilities, or any facility
providing treatment, counseling or therapy to patients or clients who do not
reside on the premises.



   GUEST HOUSE. Living, eating, and sleeping quarters, not leased for
income production, within an accessory building for the sole use of occupants
of the premises, guests of such occupants, or persons employed on the
premises.



   GUEST RANCH. A resort hotel and/or group of buildings containing
sleeping units, meals, beverages and outdoor recreational activities on
property not less than 3 gross acres in size.



   HALFWAY HOUSE. A group home for recently incarcerated persons.



   HANDICAPPED. The definition under the American with Disabilities Act of
1990, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., 47 U.S.C. §§ 225 and 611.



   HANGING SIGNS.  Those which are located on the underside of a roof
structure which extends out over a sidewalk adjacent to a building.



   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL. Industrial uses that may include outdoor assembly,
manufacturing, processing, repair and/or storage, and that may generate
traffic, noise, vibration, odor, glare, and/or light impacts that need to be
conditionally managed.



   HEIGHT. See Vol. II, § 1-1-4(C)(3)(g).



   HELIPORT. A place designed or designated for the landing and taking off
of helicopters.



   HORSE RENTAL STABLE. Enterprise providing horses and equipment rented
on a temporary basis, and wherein the rented horses are permitted to be
ridden away from the property either by individual renters, with a group or
with a guide.



   HORSE SHADE or MARE MOTEL. An open air structure without walls
consisting of a roof supported by columns and used exclusively for the
shading of livestock and/or equine.



   HOSPITAL. An institution for the diagnosis, care and treatment of human
illness, including surgery, primary treatment, and observation. Some
hospitals may offer as part of their service, 24-hour emergency medical care,
with ambulance receiving facilities.



   HOTEL - MOTEL. A structure or portion thereof, or a group of attached
or detached structures containing completely furnished individual guest rooms
or suites occupied less than 30 calendar days by any 1 individual or group of
individuals, for compensation.



   HUD CERTIFIED PARK MODEL ALTERNATIVE. Department of Housing and Urban
Development certified manufactured home that is oftentimes referred to as an
"park model alternative unit" or "TAG mobile home unit" because it is sized
and designed similar to a park model unit.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Includes all buildings or structures measured at
their greatest extent and so as to include areas overhung by eaves,
balconies, decks and other projecting features of the structure; also all
paved or otherwise hard-surfaced areas such as roads, curbs and gutters,
walks, parking lots and loading areas, and asphalt or concrete aprons for
solid waste containers, signs or outdoor mechanical equipment.



   INDUSTRIAL USE. The excavation, transporting, manufacture, fabrication,
processing, reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity,
or any other treatment thereof in such manner as to change the form,
character or appearance thereof, and including storage elevators, truck
storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and other similar types of
enterprise.



   INFILL. Development of vacant, underdeveloped or remnant lands passed
over by previous development.



   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any whole, dismantled or partially dismantled, or
obsolete vehicle which cannot be started and driven under its own power.



   JUNK YARD. The storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap
material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles,
or other vehicles or machinery parts thereof.



   KITCHEN. Any room or portion thereof in a building or dwelling unit
which is used or intended to be used for cooking or preparation of food.



   LAND SPLIT. A division of land into no more than 3 parcels in
accordance with the city's subdivision regulations.



   LANDSCAPING. The placement of trees, shrubs, vegetative and organic or
inorganic materials including gravel, cinders, rock and bark materials.



   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL. Industrial uses that are located within an enclosed
building and tend to generate moderate and manageable traffic, noise,
vibration, odor, glare and/or light impacts.



   LIVESTOCK, LARGE. Cattle, oxen, horses, mules, donkeys, alpaca, llama,
sheep, goats or similar sized hoofed animals.



   LIVESTOCK/FOWL, SMALL. Rabbits, potbellied pigs, parrots, pigeons,
ducks, hens (not roosters), geese or similar sized animals.



   LIVE/WORK UNITS. A unique type of mixed-use development that combines
residential living space and commercial or office space within one structure
for a single owner/operator; enabling the city to adapt to changes in the
economy and meet the needs of special groups such as artists or new
businesses that need smaller, affordable work and housing space.



   LOT. A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or
other designation shown on a plan or parcel map recorded in the office of the
Pinal or Maricopa County Recorder's Office, or a parcel of real property
delineated on an approved record of survey, parcel map or subdivision map as
filed in the office of the Pinal or Maricopa County Recorder and abutting at
least 1 public street or right-of-way, or easement determined to be adequate
for the purpose of access.



   LOT AREA. The total area of a lot measured in a horizontal plane,
included within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land. Also see GROSS LOT
AREA and NET LOT AREA.



   LOT AREA, MINIMUM. See Vol. II, § 1-1-4(C)(3)(j).



   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of 2 or more streets.



   LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.



   LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot that is not a corner lot.



   LOT LINE. The legal boundary of a lot or parcel.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. On an interior lot, the front lot line is the property
line abutting the street where access is provide. On a corner lot, the front
lot line is the shorter property line abutting a street, except in those
cases where the subdivision or parcel map specified another line as the front
lot line. On a through lot or a lot with 3 or more sides abutting a street or
a corner lot with lot lines of equal length, the Director shall determine
which property line shall be the front lot line for the purposes of
compliance with setback provisions.



   LOT LINE, INTERIOR. A lot line not abutting a street.



   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line not abutting a street which is opposite and
most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular-shaped lot,
a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front
lot line, having a length of not less than 10 feet; also a lot which is
bounded on all sides by streets may have no rear lot lines.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.



   LOT (SITE) COVERAGE. That portion of a lot or building site which is
occupied by any building or structure, excepting paved area, uncovered
decks/patios, uncovered parking areas, driveways, walks, lanai, terraces,
swimming pools and landscaped areas.



   LOT TYPES. See diagram below:



   LOT WIDTH. Lot width is the distance between side lot lines measured
perpendicular to the lot depth at the front setback line.



   MAIN STRUCTURE. In residential zoning districts, typically the primary
dwelling unit, whereas in business and institutional zoning districts, the
building in which business is conducted.



   MAINTENANCE. The replacing or repairing of a minor part or minor parts
of a building or structure which have degraded by ordinary wear or tear or by
the weather.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in 1 or more sections
which is 8 feet or more in width and 40 feet or more in length or when
erected on-site is 400 or more square feet; manufactured after June 15, 1976,
and built to Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") standards
with a HUD seal affixed; and which is designed to be used as a dwelling with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
Modular homes are considered as manufactured homes in this Chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any development providing rental spaces for
manufactured homes.



   MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a manufactured home
park designed for the accommodation of 1 manufactured home, together with its
accessory structures, carports or other off-street parking areas, storage
lockers, ramadas, cabanas, patios, patio covers, awnings and similar
appurtenances.



   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A development designed and intended for
residential use with lots for sale where the residence consists exclusively
of manufactured homes.



   MANUFACTURING. Designing, assembling, fabricating, producing,
constructing or preparing a product or part of a product before sale or use.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA USES. Taken from, in whole or in part, or related to
the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act (A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1).



      (1)    CARDHOLDER. A qualifying patient, a designated
caregiver or a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent who has been
issued and possesses a valid registry identification card.



      (2)    CULTIVATION. The process by which a person grows a
marijuana plant.



      (3)    DESIGNATED CAREGIVER. A person who is at least 21 years
of age, has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marijuana, has
not been convicted of an excluded felony offense, and assists no more than 5
qualifying patients with the medical use of marijuana.



      (4)   DESIGNATED CAREGIVER CULTIVATION LOCATION. An enclosed,
locked facility such as a closet, room, greenhouse or other building where a
designated caregiver and cardholder, whose registration card indicates that
the cardholder has been authorized to cultivate marijuana plants for a
qualifying patient's medical use. The designated caregiver's cultivation
location must be accessory to the designated caregiver's primary residence.
Medical marijuana cultivation as an accessory use to the designated
caregiver's primary residence must not be detectable from the exterior of the
building in which the cultivation takes place.



      (5)   ENCLOSED LOCKED FACILITY. A closet, room, greenhouse,
building or other enclosed area equipped with locks or other security devices
that permit access only by a cardholder.



      (6)   MARIJUANA. All parts of any plant of the genus cannabis
whether growing or not, and the seeds of such plant.



      (7)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA. All parts of the genus cannabis that
may be administered to treat or alleviate a qualifying patient's debilitating
medical condition or symptoms associated with the patient's debilitating
medical condition.



      (8)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA INFUSION (OR MANUFACTURING) FACILITY.
A facility that incorporates medical marijuana (cannabis) by the means of
cooking, blending, or incorporation into consumable/edible goods. An infusion
facility may be an existing commercial-zoned facility such as a bakery,
restaurant or food products factory; or, it may be a "stand-alone" facility
whose sole or primary purpose is to make consumer products such as lotions,
balms or consumable/edible medical marijuana products.



      (9)    MEDICAL USE. The acquisition, possession, cultivation,
manufacture, use, administration, delivery, transfer or transportation of
marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to
treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical
condition or symptoms associated with the patient's debilitating medical
condition.



      (10)   NONPROFIT MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A nonprofit
(not-for-profit) entity that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures,
transfers, transports, supplies, sells, gives, dispenses, or otherwise
provides medical marijuana or related educational materials to cardholders.



      (11)   NONPROFIT MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY AGENT. A
principal officer, board member, employee, or volunteer of a nonprofit
medical marijuana dispensary who is at least 21 years of age and has not been
convicted of an excluded felony offense.



      (12)   NONPROFIT MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY OFF-SITE
CULTIVATION FACILITY. The additional location where marijuana is cultivated
by a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary.



      (13)   QUALIFYING PATIENT. A person who has been diagnosed by
a physician as having a debilitating medical condition.



      (14)   QUALIFYING PATIENT CULTIVATION LOCATION. An enclosed,
locked facility such as a closet, room, greenhouse or other building where a
qualifying patient, who is also a cardholder authorized to cultivate
marijuana plants. The qualifying patient's cultivation location must be
accessory to the qualifying patient's primary residence. Medical marijuana
cultivation as an accessory use to the qualifying patient's primary residence
must not be detectable from the exterior of the building in which the
cultivation takes place, and shall only be permitted if the residence is
located at least 25 miles distance from a state certified nonprofit medical
marijuana dispensary.



      (15)   REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARD. A document issued by the
Arizona Department of Health Services that identifies a person as a
registered qualifying patient, registered designated caregiver or a
registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent.



      (16)   USABLE MARIJUANA. The dried flowers of the marijuana
plant, and any mixture or preparation thereof, but does not include the
seeds, stalks and roots of the plant and does not include the weight of any
non-marijuana ingredients combined with marijuana and prepared for
consumption as food or drink.



   MINIMUM LOT AREA. See Vol. II, § 1-1-4(C)(3)(j).



   MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. See Vol. II, § 1-1-4(C)(3)(h).



   MINING. Includes the land necessary or incidental to digging,
excavating or otherwise procuring minerals and ores found in their natural
state, or the operating of a rock crusher.



   MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT. Non-residential and residential uses on the same
development site.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure generally referred to as being built prior to
June 15, 1976, on a permanent chassis capable of being transported in 1 or
more sections and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation
as a dwelling when connected to on-site utilities, except that it does not
include recreational vehicles and factory-built buildings. See MANUFACTURED
HOME.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. See MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.



   MOBILE HOME SPACE. See MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE.



   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. See MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION.



   MONUMENT SIGN. Any low profile detached sign which is supported by a
solid base of at least 75% of the sign width.



   MOTEL. See HOTEL.



   MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. Two or more units per building.



   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE LANDFILL. Any solid waste landfill that accepts
household waste, household hazardous waste or conditionally exempt small
quantity generator waste, which are defined as:



      (1)   CONDITIONALLY EXEMPT SMALL QUANTITY GENERATOR WASTE.
Hazardous waste in quantities as described in 40 C.F.R. § 261.5,
incorporated by reference and adopted and amended in A.R.S. § 49-701(4), and
in the Arizona Administrative Code, Title 18, Chapters 1 through 13.



      (2)   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Solid waste as described in
40 C.F.R. § 261.4(b)(1), incorporated by reference and adopted and amended
in A.R.S. § 49-701(14), and in Arizona Administrative Code, Title 18,
Chapters 1 through 13.



      (3)   HOUSEHOLD WASTE. Any solid waste including garbage,
rubbish and also sanitary waste from septic tanks that is generated from
households, including single and multiple family residences, hotels and
motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic
grounds and day-use recreation areas, not including construction debris,
landscaping rubble or demolition debris.



   MURAL. An artistic rendering on a building which does not promote a
particular business, service or product.



   NATIVE PLANT. A plant species that occurs naturally in a particular
region, state, ecosystem and habitat without direct or indirect human actions.



   NET DENSITY. See DENSITY, NET.



   NET LOT AREA or NET LAND AREA or NET ACRES. The area of a lot or
parcel, excluding dedicated and non-dedicated public road rights-of-way and
alleys.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this Chapter.



   NIT.  A unit measure of luminance or brightness equal to 1 candela per
square meter, measured perpendicular to the rays of the source.



   NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign which is currently not allowed under this
Chapter, but which when first constructed, was legally allowed by the city.



   NONCONFORMING USE, STRUCTURE AND/OR LOT. See Vol. II, § 1-2-5.



   NURSERY. A place where young trees or other plants are raised for
transplanting or for sale, but does not include commercial fertilizer yard or
processing plant.



   OBSCENE. Offensive or outrageous to accepted standards of decency or
modesty.



   OFFICE. A building or portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical
operations.



   OFF-PREMISE/OFF-SITE ADVERTISING SIGN.  A sign which contains a
message unrelated to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity,
service, or activity primarily sold, manufactured, fabricated, possessed or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located.



   OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to
be subdivided or developed, whether or not in the common ownership of the
applicant for subdivision or development approval.



   ON-PREMISE ADVERTISING SIGN.  A sign which contains a message related
to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service, or activity
primarily sold, manufactured, fabricated, possessed or offered upon the
premises where the sign is located.



   OPEN SPACE. The area or areas of a lot or parcel intended to provide
light and air, and is designed for either scenic, aesthetic or recreational
purposes, excluding buildings, parking, driveways and other vehicular
surfaces.



   OUTDOOR BUSINESS ACTIVITY/OPERATION. The outdoor fabrication,
processing, manufacturing, repair or assembly of products in business zoning
districts.



   PARAPET. That portion of an exterior wall that extends above the roof
line.



   PARK MODEL or PARK TRAILER. A structure built on a single chassis,
mounted on wheels and designed to be connected to the utilities necessary for
the operation of installed fixtures and appliances and that has a gross
interior area of not less than 320 square feet and not more than 400 square
feet when prepared for occupancy.



   PARKING AREA or PARKING LOT. An area designed and constructed for the
parking, storage and maneuvering of vehicles.



   PARKING SPACE. A space within a public or private parking area,
exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, offices and work areas, which space
is for the temporary parking or storage of 1 motor vehicle.



   PERMIT. Any conditional use permit, administrative use permit,
temporary use permit, building permit, license, certificate, approval, or
other entitlement for development and/or use of property as required by any
public agency.



   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The City of Apache Junction Planning
and Zoning Commission. Also referred to as the COMMISSION.



   PLEX RESIDENTIAL. Two to 4 residential units per building.



   POLE SIGN. See definition and illustrations in the "City of Apache
Junction Commercial Design Guidelines".



   PONY WALL. A low wall often used as a garden wall or fence.



   POOL. See SWIMMING POOL.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  A sign that is designed to be moved easily and is not
permanently affixed to the ground, building, structure or vehicle.



   POST AND PANEL SIGN. A freestanding sign fabricated by using 2 visible
posts to support the panel sign.



   PRE-SCHOOL. See DAY CARE.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING or MAIN STRUCTURE or PRINCIPLE STRUCTURE. A building
or buildings in which the dominant use of the lot on which it is situated is
conducted. In any residential district, any dwelling (excluding an accessory
dwelling or accessory apartment) shall be deemed to be the principal or main
building of the lot on which it is situated. In a business zoning district,
the store, shop and or office building shall be deemed the principal or main
building.



   PRINCIPAL USE. The main or primary use of a parcel of land.



   PRIVATE STREET. A street, road or driveway on privately-owned property,
limited to the use of the owner or a group of owners and guests who share the
use and maintain the road without assistance from a government agency. The
distinctions and standards related to private streets, roads, drives or
access ways shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   PROFESSIONAL. Includes but is not limited to accountants, architects,
chiropodists, dentists, engineers, lawyers, naturopaths, osteopaths,
physicians, surgeons, surveyors and veterinarians.



   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a flat wall sign, that projects
more than 12 inches from the face of the building or structure upon which it
is located.



   PROPERTY. Any real or tangible personal property.



   PROPERTY OWNER. The individual, corporation, firm, single
proprietorship, partnership, trust or other legal entity that owns property.



   PYLON SIGN. A freestanding sign with visible support structure, with
the support structure enclosed with a pole cover or some architectural
feature. See illustrations in the "City of Apache Junction Commercial Design
Guidelines".



   QUASI-PUBLIC USE. Uses which are considered to be dedicated to public
service or to culture. Including for the purposes of this Chapter, public
schools, hospitals, universities and churches.



   RAILROAD. Includes the land used for general railroad purposes,
including mainline and switching trackage, repair shops, stations,
communications, equipment, roundhouses, and storage facilities, but does not
include railroad equipment (miniature or otherwise) operated by its owner as
a hobby or as a part of the equipment of an amusement resort.



   RANCH HAND.  See Vol. II, § 1-6-7(D)(7).



   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Those buildings, structures or areas built or
developed for the purpose of entertaining, exercising or observing various
activities participated in either actively or passively by individuals or
organized groups.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle or unit generally described as 1 or
more of the following:



      (1)   Tent camper. Mounted on wheels and constructed with
collapsible partial sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and
unfold for camping.



      (2)   Motor home. Designed to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, and built on or permanently
attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van
that is an integral part of the completed vehicle.



      (3)   Park model. Built on a single chassis, mounted on wheels
and designed to be connected to utilities necessary for operation of
installed fixtures and appliances and has a gross trailer area of not less
than 320 square feet and not more than 400 square feet when it is set up,
except it does not include fifth-wheel trailers.



      (4)   Travel trailer. Mounted on wheels, designed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, of a size
or weight that may or may not require special highway movement permits when
towed by a motorized vehicle and has a trailer area of less than 320 square
feet. This includes fifth-wheel trailers. If a unit requires a size or weight
permit, it must be manufactured to the standards for park trailers in ANSI
A119.5 of the American National Standards Institute Code.



      (5)   Truck camper. Constructed to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational travel or camping use and consisting of a roof,
floor and sides designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a
pickup truck. A RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall not be considered a dwelling nor
be occupied as such, and is not a manufactured home.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Facilities for the temporary storage,
parking and maneuvering of recreational vehicles with adequate roads and
stall sites, including sanitary and water facilities with locations provided
on a day-to-day basis.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE. A plot of ground within a recreational
vehicle park designed for the accommodation of 1 recreational vehicle.



   RECYCLING CENTER. A building within which recoverable resources such as
newspaper, glass and cans are collected, separated and processed essentially
by hand prior to shipment to others for use in the manufacture of new
products.



   REDEVELOPMENT.  The act or process of renewing, rehabilitating,
revitalizing, restoring, and/or renovating pre-existing buildings, structures
and/or property in the city.



   REGULATION. An applicable provision or standard of this Chapter.



   REPAIR. An existing structural or mechanical element of a building or
structure that has failed and needs to be maintained or replaced.



   RESTAURANT. A business establishment where meals and/or refreshments
may be purchased for consumption on or off-site.



   RETAIL. The business of selling personal property directly to the
ultimate consumer for any purpose other than for resale, or providing
services or entertainment to the general public.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Lands which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement,
dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for or dedicated to the
general public for street, highway, alley, public utility, pedestrian
walkway, bikeway, drainage or other purpose.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY, ROAD. Land which by deed, conveyance, agreement,
easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for general public
street, highway, alley, pedestrian walkway or bikeway access.



   ROADWAY. All or part of any platted or designed and reserved public
street, highway, alley, lane, parkway, avenue, road, sidewalk, public utility
easement or other public way.



   ROOF LINE. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is
higher, excluding cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or similar minor projections.



   ROOF SIGN. See SIGN, ROOF.



   SETBACK, FRONT. The minimum required distance between any buildings and
the road right-of-way fronting the property. For properties fronting a
private street, the front setback shall be measured from the private road's
edge of pavement or curb.



   SETBACK, REAR. The minimum required distance between any buildings and
the rear lot line or road right-of-way at the rear of the property, whichever
is less.



   SETBACK, SIDE. The minimum required distance between any buildings and
the side lot line(s) or road right-of-way(s) on the side of the property,
whichever is less.



   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street or cross walkway, paved or otherwise
surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only.



   SIGN. Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color,
form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the
purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.



   SIGN, BUILDING. Any sign attached to, or painted on, any part of a
building.



   SIGN, FREE STANDING/MONUMENT. Any sign supported by structures of
supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are
independent from any building or other structure.



   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. Any sign not located on the property in which it
serves to advertise.



   SIGN, PERMANENT. A sign which is securely attached to the ground or a
structure so that it can not readily be moved.



   SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, which
includes but is not limited to: signs designed to be transported by means of
wheels; A-frame type signs; menu and sandwich board signs; inflatables;
banners; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on
vehicles parked and visible from public rights-of-way, unless said vehicle is
properly parked and used for transportation purposes in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business.



   SIGN, POST AND PANEL. See POST AND PANEL SIGN.



   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign attached to a principle structure and
extending outward from the wall more than 12 inches.



   SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected on a roof, or projecting above the highest
point of the roof line, parapet, or fascia of a building.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted.



   SIGN, WINDOW. Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity,
event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon the window
panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.



   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL. One unit per building.



   SITE-BUILT CONSTRUCTION. A conventionally constructed building on a
permanent foundation, using individual structural components pursuant to the
International Building Code as adopted by the city, and requiring normal
phase inspection by the City Building Official.



   SITE PLAN. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimensioning all of the buildings, structures and uses and the exact
manner of development proposed for a specific parcel of land.



   SOLAR FARM. An installation or area of land in which a large number of
solar panels are set up in order to generate electricity for commercial sale.



   SOLAR PANELS. A panel designed to absorb the sun's rays as a source of
energy for generating electricity or heat.



   SOLID WASTE LANDFILL. A facility, area of land or excavation in which
solid wastes are placed for permanent disposal. SOLID WASTE LANDFILL does not
include a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, compost
pile or waste pile or an area containing ash from the on-site combustion of
coal that does not contain household waste, household hazardous waste or
conditionally exempt small quantity generator waste.



   SPECIFIC PLAN. A document encompassing a specific geographic area of
the city which is prepared for the purpose of specifically implementing the
General Plan by: (1) refining the policies of the General Plan to a specific
geographic area; and (2) containing specific recommendation as to the
detailed policies and regulations applicable to a focused development scheme.
The specific plan shall consist of goals, objectives and policies;
requirements for capital improvements; the level of service required for
public facilities; physical and environmental conditions; transportation;
circulation; housing and land use characteristics of the area; and maps,
diagrams and other appropriate materials showing existing and future
conditions.



   SPORT COURTS. Sport court or game court is a facility that is
constructed to incorporate basketball, paddle tennis, volleyball and other
similar court sports and activities within the same playing area. Sport
courts are usually constructed using a rectangular cement slab with at least
1 basketball goal, center net posts and a net adjustment system to easily
raise and lower the net from paddle tennis height to volleyball height.
Lights, ball containment, hockey goals, shuffleboard markings, and practice
components such as a rebounder are frequently incorporated into the design.
Basketball backboards/hoops attached to the garage or standalone pole in the
driveway are not classified as sport courts for the purposes of zoning
regulation.



   STABLE, COMMERCIAL. A structure or site for horses, mules or ponies
which are rented, used or boarded on a commercial basis for compensation.



   STABLE, PRIVATE. An accessory building for the keeping of horses, mules
or ponies owned by the occupants of the premises and not rented, used or
boarded on a commercial basis for compensation.



   STAFF. Employees of the City of Apache Junction.



   STATE. The State of Arizona and its agents and employees.



   STORAGE YARD. The outdoor storage of RVs, trucks and vehicles.



   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.



   STREET. A public thoroughfare or right-of-way or approved private
thoroughfare or right-of-way determined by the Commission to be adequate for
the purpose of access, which affords the principal means of access for
abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, land, boulevard,
highway, road and any other thoroughfare; including major and secondary
highways, arterials, collectors, and local streets as defined below.



   STREET TYPES.



      (1)   Alley. A public or private way providing vehicular
access to the rear or side of abutting properties.



      (2)   Arterial, major. Designated in the city's approved
Street Classification Plan to carry the highest volumes of traffic across the
city, often connecting to freeways, and providing access to major commercial
and employment areas.



      (3)   Arterial, minor. Designated in the city's approved
Street Classification Plan to carry large volumes of traffic across the city,
not generally connecting to freeways, and providing access to commercial and
employment areas.



      (4)   Collector street. Serves as a connection between local
and arterial streets. Collector streets carry moderate amounts of traffic.



      (5)   Cul-de-sac. Connects to another street at 1 end and
terminating in a vehicular turnaround.



      (6)   Local street. Provides direct access to properties.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in or modification to a structure
involving a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists,
roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, retaining walls or similar
components, or which extends the height, bulk or area thereof.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on
or in the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground,
but does not include freestanding mailboxes, on-grade slabs, walks,
driveways, landscaping materials or fences.



   SUBDIVISION. See Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Chapter 2,
Subdivision Regulations.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any new construction on a vacant lot, and any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other modification of a
structure that exceeds 50% of the existing structure's market value, or
exceeds 50% of the existing structure's floor area, but does not include the
following:



      (1)   Modification of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living and/or working conditions; or



      (2)   Costs of alterations or modifications whose express
purpose is the mitigation of future stormwater damage.



   SWIMMING POOL. Any man-made body of contained water in excess of 18
inches in depth that is intended for the purposes of swimming, diving or
recreational bathing, including in-ground or above-ground swimming pools,
wading pools or any similar body of water.



   TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure that is established for
a fixed period of time, to be discontinued upon the expiration at a
designated time, and that does not involve the construction or alteration of
any permanent structure.



   TENANT FRONTAGE. The width of the leased space fronting the road.



   TRAIL, EQUESTRIAN. A linear path designated for horses.



   TRAIL, MULTI-USE. A linear path designated for pedestrians, bicycles,
and horses.



   TRANSFER FACILITY. A site that is owned, operated or used by any person
for the rehandling or storage for 90 days or less of solid waste that was
generated off-site for the primary purpose of transporting that solid waste,
including those facilities having significant solid waste transfer activities
that warrant the facility's regulation as a transfer facility.



   TRAVEL TRAILER. See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   TRUCK STOP. A facility for the servicing of trucks and tractor
trailers, with or without a convenience market and has 4 or more diesel fuel
pumps, 2 or more truck washing bays and facilities for the repair of diesel
engines.



   TRUCK YARD. The parking, storage or maintenance of 2 or more commercial
vehicles on any given lot or parcel of land.



   UNLICENSED VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which is not currently licensed
in the State of Arizona.



   USE. The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or
intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or
maintained.



   USE, CONDITIONAL. An activity which, because of its unique
characteristics, is not classified as a permitted use by right in a
particular district and must be conditionally controlled to protect
surrounding properties.



   USE, PERMITTED BY RIGHT. Any activity that is or may be lawfully
established in a particular zoning district, provided that it conforms with
all zoning requirements.



   USE, PROHIBITED. An activity not specifically allowed nor analogous to
those specifically allowed in a particular zoning district.



   UTILITY FACILITIES. Buildings, structures, or land used by a utility,
railroad, or governmental agency for uses such as, but not necessarily
limited to, water or sewage treatment plants or pumping stations,
substations, telephone exchanges, and resource recovery facilities, but not
including land, buildings, or structures used solely for storage and
maintenance of equipment and materials.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of the Zoning Code
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited,
generally involving dimensional and locational provisions, but not land use.



   VEHICLE. A device used for transporting people or goods.



   VIEW CORRIDOR. The area or areas along a street, pedestrian path,
hiking trail or other such openings that allow for a clear and unobstructed
view of or frames, highlights or accentuates, a prominent building, object,
site, structure, scene, or panorama, patterns or rhythms of buildings,
objects, sites or structures.



   WAREHOUSE. A building or portion thereof used for the commercial
storage of goods or merchandise and where no retail or wholesale operations
are conducted at the site.



   WAREHOUSING. Loading, unloading, storing or otherwise moving any item
or items to and from trucks, railroad cars, conveyors and buildings.



   WAREHOUSING, MINI. Buildings which are composed of contiguous
individual rooms which are rented to the public for the storage of personal
property and which have independent access and locks under the control of the
tenant; but excluding the storage of explosive, corrosive or noxious
materials, such as dust, fumes, or noise that could be dangerous, injurious,
distasteful, pernicious or obnoxious to man or other organisms or properties;
and further excluding any other use otherwise permitted in the zoning
district.



   WASTE TIRE. Any tire that:



      (1)   Is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose
because of wear;



      (2)   Is removed from a motor vehicle and is retained for
further use;



      (3)   Has been chopped or shredded; and



      (4)   Is otherwise defined in A.R.S. § 49-701(39), as amended.



   WASTE TIRE COLLECTION SITE. A site where waste tires are collected
before being offered for recycling or reuse and where more than 500 tires are
kept on site on any day.



   WATER OR DRAINAGE COURSE. Any lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo,
channel or other course through which waters flow at least periodically. The
term may include specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   WHOLESALING. The selling of any type of goods or materials for the
purpose of resale.



   YARD. Any open space on the same lot with a building or dwelling, which
open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except
for the projections permitted by this Chapter.



   ZONE or DISTRICT. A classification established by this Chapter which
regulates various and specific uses.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator is the city official(s)
established pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.05, as amended, that is charged with
responsibility for interpretation and administration of the Zoning Code. The
Development Services Director ("Director") or his/her designee shall serve as
the Zoning Administrator.



   ZONING ORDINANCE or CODE. The zoning regulations of the City of Apache
Junction, Arizona, set forth in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Chapter
1, Zoning Ordinance; also referred herein as "the Ordinance", "this Chapter",
"this" or "the" "Code".



(Ord. 1402, passed 5-6-2014)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2015 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 2:  SUBDIVISION AND MINOR LAND DIVISION REGULATIONS



      Article




         2-1.   ENACTMENT AND SCOPE OF REGULATIONS,
ADMINISTRATION, CONSTRUCTION, AND TERMS





         2-2.   PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS





         2-3.   SUBDIVISION DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS





         2-4.   CONSTRUCTION ASSURANCES FOR ONSITE IMPROVEMENTS
AND AMENITIES





         2-5.   ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS; LAND SPLITS/ MINOR
LAND DIVISION, LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS, AND LOT COMBINATION





         2-6.   CONDOMINIUM PLATS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS





         2-7.   DEFINITIONS





         APPENDIX:  PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT CONDITIONS




ARTICLE 2-1:  ENACTMENT, SCOPE OF REGULATIONS, ADMINISTRATION, CONSTRUCTION,
AND TERMS



Section



   2-1-1   Short title



   2-1-2   Statement of legislative intent



   2-1-3   Application; authority for local regulations



   2-1-4   Relationship to General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and other
ordinances and laws



   2-1-5   Relationship to official maps



   2-1-6   Minimum requirements



   2-1-7   Application; greater restrictions



   2-1-8   Prohibition of circumvention



   2-1-9   Reference to any portion of this chapter



   2-1-10   Severability



   2-1-11   Continuation of previously granted plats



   2-1-12    Filing fees



   2-1-13   Final plat approval required prior to conveyance



   2-1-14   Prerequisites for issuance of building permits



   2-1-15   Modifications and exceptions



   2-1-16   Resubdivision of land



   2-1-17   Vacation of plats



   2-1-18   Preservation of archaeologic, historic, and natural
features and amenities



   2-1-19   Transfers and assignments



   2-1-20   Cancellation by applicant



   2-1-21   Violations and penalties



   2-1-22   Legal procedures



   2-1-23   Remedies



   2-1-24   Construction; terms



§ 2-1-1  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be referred to and cited as the “Apache Junction
Subdivision and Land Split Regulations”.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-2  STATEMENT OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted to provide for the orderly growth and
harmonious development of the City of Apache Junction, and to preserve,
protect and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare. In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter are intended to provide a common ground for undertaking an equitable
working relationship between public and private interests so that both
independent and mutual objectives can be achieved in the subdivision of land.



   (B)   More specifically, this chapter is adopted in order to achieve
the following objectives:



      (1)   To aid in the implementation of the general plan of the
city, including elements thereof;



      (2)   To accommodate new development in a manner which will
preserve and enhance the city’s living environment through accepted
principles of low impact development, floodplain preservation, riparian
ecosystem protection, reduction of the health impacts of development,
utilizing aging friendly design, multi-modal and non-motorized
transportation, creating quality neighborhood as well as commercial and
industrial development for all age and income groups, and generate high
quality development through skilled subdivision design;



      (3)   To provide lots of sufficient size and appropriate
design for the purposes for which they are to be used, including livability;



      (4)   To provide a coordinated street system having adequate
capacity for the anticipated pedestrian and vehicular traffic which  will
utilize it and ensure that it is designed to promote safe traffic circulation;



      (5)   To provide for water supply, sewage disposal, storm
drainage, stormwater retention, flood control, and other utilities and
facilities which may be required;



      (6)   To ensure and facilitate provisions for adequate school
sites, public parks, recreation areas and other public facilities;



      (7)   To protect and enhance real property values;



      (8)   To promote the conveyance of land by accurate legal
descriptions;



      (9)   To promote logical procedures for the achievement of
these purposes; and



      (10)   To coordinate subdivision activity of the city within
the county in order to facilitate transition from county to municipal
jurisdiction of land which is developed first in unincorporated territory and
may be subsequently annexed into the city; and to ensure unimpeded
development of such new urban expansions as is logical, desirable and in
accordance with the goals, objectives and policies of the city general plan.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-3  APPLICATION; AUTHORITY FOR LOCAL REGULATIONS.



   Pursuant to the powers and jurisdiction vested through A.R.S. Title 9,
Article 6 et seq., and other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances and
resolutions of the State of Arizona, the regulations hereinafter contained in
this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions or parts of subdivisions
hereafter made entirely or partially within the corporate limits of Apache
Junction. The regulations contained in this Article are authorized pursuant
to A.R.S. §§ 9-461 through 9-463.06. The subdivider shall provide a
certificate of assured water supply as required by A.R.S. § 45-576, or
evidence that the area has been designated by the Arizona Department of Water
Resources as having an assured water supply.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-4  RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL PLAN, ZONING ORDINANCE, AND OTHER
ORDINANCES AND LAWS.



   Every subdivision or land split shall conform to the requirements and
objectives of the general plan, when adopted, or any parts thereof as adopted
by the council to the “Apache Junction, Arizona, Zoning Ordinance” and to
other ordinances and regulations of the city, to the city land development
code, to the Arizona Revised Statutes, and to any other ordinances and
regulations which may be adopted which affect the subdivision of lands within
the city.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-5  RELATIONSHIP TO OFFICIAL MAPS.



   A subdivision plat or land split shall conform in all respects to the
Street Classification Plan as prescribed by § 13-2-3 Street Improvements,
Article 13-2 Streets and Sidewalks, Chapter 13 Public Works, Volume I, Apache
Junction City Code, and any amendments thereto.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-6  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-7  APPLICATION; GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   Where these regulations impose a greater restriction upon land
improvement, development or land use than is imposed or required by existing
provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, these regulations shall
prevail.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-8  PROHIBITION OF CIRCUMVENTION.



   As provided in A.R.S. § 9-463.03, it shall be unlawful for any person,
individual, firm, corporation, partnership, organization, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity, for the purpose of circumventing any
of these regulations or otherwise, to offer to sell or lease, to contract to
sell or lease, or to sell or lease any subdivision or part thereof, until a
final plat thereof in full compliance with provisions of this chapter is
recorded in the office of the county recorder of the county wherein the
platted area lies; except that this shall not apply to any parcel or parcels
of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or
sold or leased in compliance with any law or subdivision regulation
regulating subdivision design and improvements of subdivisions in effect at
the time the subdivision was established. Nothing contained in these
regulations shall be construed as releasing a subdivider from full compliance
with the Arizona Revised Statutes, or the rules and regulations of the
Arizona Department of Real Estate Division, Arizona Department of Water
Resources, Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, or the requirements
of other agencies pertaining to the establishment of subdivisions.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)  Penalty, see Apache Junction City Code, Vol.
I, § 1-1-11.



§ 2-1-9  REFERENCE TO ANY PORTION OF THIS CHAPTER.



   Whenever reference is made to any portion of this chapter or to any
other law or ordinance, the reference applies to all amendments and additions
now or hereafter made.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this chapter be held invalid, that invalidity shall
not affect other provisions which can be given effect without the invalid
provision and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-11  CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUSLY GRANTED PLATS.



   All subdivision plats heretofore lawfully existing within the corporate
limits of Apache Junction, or which may be annexed in the future, and which
were approved by the Pinal County or Maricopa County Board of Supervisors,
shall be and are deemed to be approved, provided that approval by the city
shall be subject to all conditions established for all plats that were
approved by Pinal or Maricopa County.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-12  FILING FEES.



   (A)   Fees for an application for plat approval for preliminary
plat, final plat, amendment to final plat and recordation are listed in the
Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4, Fees, Article 4-4: Planning,
Zoning Review and Subdivision Fees.



   (B)   Recordation fee is as established by the county.



   (C)   The filing fee shall also cover filing of an amended or
revised preliminary plat when processed as the same case. If preliminary
approval expires prior to application for final approval, the plat shall be
resubmitted for preliminary approval as a new case and the subdivider shall
pay the required preliminary plat fee.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-13  FINAL PLAT APPROVAL REQUIRED PRIOR TO CONVEYANCE.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of making or effecting a
subdivision within the territorial limits of these regulations, shall make
any deed, will, mortgage, trust deed or contract for the sale or other
transfer of such subdivision or any part thereof, by metes and bounds
description or otherwise, before recordation of the final plat of either the
entire subdivision or phase thereof. A contract for sale which is expressly
made contingent upon obtaining approval by the city council of such final
plat within 1 year from the date of the execution of the contract shall not
be deemed prohibited by the foregoing provision.



   (B)   No person proposing to make or have made a subdivision within
the territorial limits of these regulations shall offer to sell the proposed
subdivision before obtaining the council’s approval of the final plat of
the proposed subdivision; provided however, an offer to sell the subdivision
or phase thereof, which is expressly made contingent upon obtaining approval
of the final plat aforesaid within 1 year from the date of the making of the
offer shall not be deemed prohibited by the foregoing provision.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-14  PREREQUISITES FOR ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.



   The building official shall not issue any building permits for
development on any part of a subdivision until final plat approval is
granted; except that no more than 3 model units are permitted at such time as
the base course for roadway access is completed to the model units site and
upon the approval of the development services director or his or her designee.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-15  MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The principles of design and requirements for the layout of
subdivisions, as set forth in Article 2-3 of this chapter, may be varied by
the council. However, such subdivision shall, in the judgment of the council,
provide adequate provisions for all essential community requirements. No
modifications shall be granted by the council which would conflict with the
goals and objectives of the general plan, zoning ordinance, or with the
intent and purposes of Article 2-3 of this chapter.



   (B)   In any particular case where the subdivider can show that
extraordinary conditions of topography, adjacent development, irregular
parcel shape, floodplain, fissures, or other conditions exist,  strict
compliance with these regulations would cause practical difficulty or
exceptional and undue hardship, the council may modify such requirements to
the extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve the difficulty or
hardship; provided, such relief may be granted without detriment to the
public good and without impairing the intent and purposes of this article or
the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community in
accordance with the general plan, and shall not be contrary to the city
zoning ordinance. Any modification thus granted shall be entered in the
minutes of the council, setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of
the council, justified the modification.



      (1)   In modifying the standards or requirements set forth in
this chapter, as provided above, the council may make additional
requirements, such as but not limited to protective covenants, deed
restrictions or other legal provisions, as are deemed necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified.



      (2)   In providing for modifications, a mere finding or
recitation of the enumerated conditions unaccompanied by the finding of
specific fact, shall not be deemed “findings of fact” and shall not be
deemed in compliance with this chapter.



      (3)   The approval of departures or modifications from the
regulations of this chapter shall not be considered as precedent-setting when
the findings of fact clearly indicate the unique circumstances which
warranted the departure or modification.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-16  RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.



   (A)   Procedure for resubdivision.  For any change in a map of a
recorded subdivision plat, if the change effects any street layout shown on
the map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any exterior lot line,
or if it affects any plat legally reached prior to the adoption of this
chapter, except where the lots involved are made larger and where any
interior lot lines are involved, the parcel shall be approved by the same
procedure, rules and regulations as for a new subdivision.



   (B)   Procedure for subdivisions where resubdivision is indicated.
Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows 1 or
more lots containing enough area that their division into lots according to
the minimum zoning ordinance requirements would create a subdivision as
defined herein, the council may require that such a parcel of land allow for
the future opening of streets and the ultimate extensions of adjacent
streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such
streets may be made a requirement of the plat.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-17  VACATION OF PLATS.



   (A)   When a recorded plat is proposed to be vacated, such an
instrument shall be approved by the council in like manner as plats of
subdivisions, including any such action which abridges or destroys any public
rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys.



   (B)   Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved
and recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of subdivision; and being duly
recorded or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the
streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described
in the plat.



   (C)   The applicant shall also secure all utility extinguishments
from all the utility agencies that were granted easements through the
original platting process. No instrument shall be recorded to vacate any plat
until such time as all utility easements extinguishments are recorded.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-18  PRESERVATION OF ARCHAEOLOGIC, HISTORIC, AND NATURAL FEATURES AND
AMENITIES.



   (A)   Existing features which would add value to residential
development or to the local government as a whole, such as trees, water
courses and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of
the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any
change of the grade of the land effected nor any clearing and grubbing be
allowed, until the improvement plans have been approved by the development
services project engineer or his or her designee and any assurances as
required are provided. The city may issue an at-risk grading permit provided
that the improvement plans have met the technical requirements of the
engineering standards.



   (B)   Upon discovery of any historic, or prehistoric ruin, burial
ground, archaeologic or vertebrate paleontological site, or site including
fossilized footprints, inscriptions made by human agency or any other
historic, paleontologic or archaeologic feature, situated on lands proposed
for subdivision, or during the course of development of such lands, the
subdivider or developer shall notify the planning division of the city and
the State of Arizona to advise as to report the discovery.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-19  TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS.



   If during any stage of the subdivision process the property under
application or any portion thereof is transferred or assigned to another,
that transferee or assignee shall make application for a change of the
application, in which case the city shall hear the application as if it were
a new subdivision.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-20  CANCELLATION BY APPLICANT.



   Cancellation may be initiated by the applicant of the property covered
by the application prior to final plat approval by means of a written notice
of cancellation directed to the planning division. Cancellation of the
application shall become effective immediately upon receipt by the city of
the notice of cancellation in the office of the planning division.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-21  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Penalties for any violation of the Apache Junction Subdivision
Regulations are provided for pursuant to Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I,
§ 1-1-11.



   (B)   The approval of a preliminary plat may be revoked by a
majority vote of the city council upon finding that 1 or more of the plat
stipulations or provisions of the subdivision regulations have been violated.
The council may reinstate approval of the preliminary plat when it is
satisfied that a compliance with the provisions of these regulations or
stipulations has been achieved. If approval of the preliminary plat is
permanently revoked, a request to resume the subdivision shall be treated as
a new application.



   (C)   (1)   The development services director or his or her
designee, by written order setting forth the reasons therefore, may stop all
work on a subdivision if he or she finds that a major violation of the
subdivision ordinance has occurred, creating an immediate or imminent threat
to public health or safety such as danger to life or limb, or damage to
property of the city or to neighboring property owners.



      (2)   After work is stopped, no work on the subdivision,
except to correct the problems specified by the director or his or her
designee, may proceed until written authorization is given by the director or
his or her designee. While work is stopped, the subdivider may appeal, within
thirty days to the city clerk, the director’s stop order to the council
which shall meet at the next regularly scheduled council meeting to consider
the matter. The council, after hearing both sides, may reverse or modify the
director’s order within thirty days if the council finds that the director
has been unreasonable or arbitrary. The burden of proof in such an appeal
shall be upon the subdivider.



   (D)   The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender
from compliance with the requirements of this article.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-22  LEGAL PROCEDURES.



   Any use or development of property contrary to the provisions of the
subdivision ordinance shall be and the same hereby declared to be unlawful,
against the public safety and welfare, and a public nuisance, and the City
Attorney shall, immediately commence all necessary actions or proceedings for
the abatement, enjoinment and removal thereof in the manner provided by law,
shall take such other lawful steps and shall apply to such court or courts as
may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate, enjoin and restrain
any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity from setting up,
developing, erecting, building or maintaining any such building, or using any
property, contrary to the provisions of these subdivision regulations, or
otherwise violating these subdivision regulations.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-23  REMEDIES.



   (A)   All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive. The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not
relieve the person from the responsibility to correct prohibited conditions
or to remove prohibited buildings, structures or improvements, nor prevent
the enforcement, correction or removal thereof.



   (B)   In addition to the other remedies provided in this section,
any adjacent or neighboring property owner who shall be especially damaged by
the violations of any provisions of this subdivision ordinance may institute,
in addition to the other remedies provided by law, injunction, mandamus,
abatement or other appropriate action, proceeding or proceedings to prevent,
abate or remove the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, maintenance or use.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-1-24  CONSTRUCTION; TERMS.



   The following rules of construction shall apply unless inconsistent
with the plain meaning of the context of this chapter:



   (A)   The particular shall control the general.



   (B)   In the event there is any conflict or inconsistency between
the heading of an article, section, division or paragraph of this chapter and
the context thereof, the heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope,
meaning or intent of the context.



   (C)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table or
illustrative table, the text shall control.



   (D)   In case of conflict between regulations, the more restrictive
shall apply.



   (E)   Words used in the present tense shall include the past and
future tenses and vice versa.



   (F)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural,
and the plural the singular, unless the context indicates the contrary.



   (G)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not
discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.



   (H)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves 2 or more items, conditions, provisions or events
connected by the conjunction “and,” “or,” or “either or,” the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:



      (1)   “And” indicates that all the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply.



      (2)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singularly or in any combination.



      (3)   “Either or” indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply singularly but not in
combination.



   (I)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for,”
“designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained for,” or “occupied
for.”



   (J)   The word “includes” or “including” or the phrase
“such as” shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of
like kind or character.



   (K)   The word “oath” includes affirmation.



   (L)   The word “state” shall mean the State of Arizona. The word
“county” shall mean that county having jurisdiction and being either
Pinal County or Maricopa County, Arizona. The word “city” shall mean the
City of Apache Junction, Arizona. The term “city boundary” shall mean the
corporate boundary of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona.



   (M)   The word “council” shall mean the city council of the city.



   (N)   The word “commission” shall mean the planning and zoning
commission of the city.



   (O)   The word “board” shall mean the board of adjustment of the
city.



   (P)   The terms “building official,” “city attorney,”
“city clerk,” “city manager,” “development services director,”
“director of public



works,” “city engineer,” “development services project engineer,”
and “zoning administrator” shall mean the respective officers of the city
or their authorized agents.



   (Q)   The term “Department of Transportation” or “ADOT”
shall mean the State of Arizona Department of Transportation.



   (R)   The term “code” shall mean “The code of the City of
Apache Junction, Arizona,” as adopted by the Council by Ordinance No. 7,
dated June 27, 1979, and as subsequently amended.



   (S)   The term “building code” shall mean the International
Building Code, 2015 Edition.



   (T)   The term “Arizona Revised Statutes” shall mean the Code of
the State of Arizona, 1956, as amended.



   (U)   The word “written” includes handwritten, printed,
type-written, mimeographed or multigraphed matter, email, faxes, and texts.



   (V)   The term “fire code” shall mean the current adopted
edition of the International Fire Code.



   (W)   The phrase “this ordinance” or “this subdivision
ordinance” shall mean the “Apache Junction Subdivision Regulations” as
contained in this Land Development Code of the city as adopted by the council
by ordinance.



   (X)   The term “zoning ordinance” shall mean all portions of the
most current “Apache Junction, Arizona, Zoning Ordinance” as contained in
this Land Development Code of the city, including the Zoning Map.



   (Y)   The term “general plan” shall mean “the most recently
adopted general plan by city council”.



   (Z)   The term “commission” shall mean the planning and zoning
commission as established in Apache Junction City Code, Volume I, Chapter 2,
Article 2-22.



   (AA)   The term “division” shall mean the planning division of
the City of Apache Junction, Arizona.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



ARTICLE 2-2:  PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS



Section



   2-2-1   Outline of platting procedures



   2-2-2   Pre-application conference



   2-2-3   Conceptual subdivision plat (optional)



   2-2-4   Preliminary plat



   2-2-5   Final plat



§ 2-2-1  OUTLINE OF PLATTING PROCEDURES.



   The preparation, submission, review and official action concerning all
subdivision plats proposed within the City of Apache Junction shall proceed
through the following progressive stages:



 


Stage I

 
Pre-Application Conference


Stage II
 
Conceptual Subdivision Plat (optional)


Stage III
 
Preliminary Plat


Stage IV
 
Final Plat



 



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-2-2  PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.



   (A)   Purposes.  The pre-application conference stage of
subdivision planning comprises an investigatory period which precedes actual
preparation of a preliminary plat by the subdivider. During this required
stage, the subdivider makes known his or her intentions to city staff and is
advised of public objectives, platting procedures and requirements as they
may relate to the subject tract.



      (1)   During this stage, it may be determined that a change in
zoning would be required for the subject tract or a part thereof and, in that
case, the subdivider shall consider initiating the necessary rezoning
application.



      (2)   During this stage, it may be determined that
relinquishment would be required of existing public rights-of-way or
extinguishment of easements and, in either case, the subdivider shall
initiate the necessary application.



      (3)   The pre-application conference affords city staff the
opportunity to give informal guidance to the subdivider. Lot layout shall be
governed by the buildable site on the lot, the grading and drainage pattern
of the lot, the natural ecosystem and features, and the coordination of sizes
of lots with requirements for community infrastructure. Staff will discuss
the proposal with the subdivider. Written list of comments is to be provided
by the different city departments and the utility agencies in order that the
subdivider may be informed of the utility agencies and city’s procedures,
design and improvement standards, and general plat requirements. The
information given at a pre-application conference is limited. Any
determinations made will be very tentative and still subject to the formal
process.



      (4)   To facilitate the preliminary plat review and avoid
undue delay, the city will invite representatives of the fire district,
sewer, and water utilities suppliers to the pre-application conference to
learn the general requirement for sewage disposal and for obtaining water
supply and any fire district requirements, as applied to his or her location,
and to determine if any applicable fees are charged by these agencies.



   (B)   Information desired.  In carrying out the purposes of the
pre-application stage, the subdivider and city staff may meet informally and
discuss the proposal. The subdivider shall provide 2 copies of the
pre-conceptual subdivision showing the project location, and proposed street
and lot layout.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-2-3  CONCEPTUAL SUBDIVISION PLAT (OPTIONAL).



   (A)   Purpose. Prior to formal submittal of a preliminary plat as
outlined below, the subdivider shall submit a conceptual subdivision plat for
review by the planning and zoning commission. The purpose of such submittal
is to gain tentative approval prior to expending time and resources on a
preliminary plat. This review process is not binding on either the city or
the subdivider.



   (B)   Criteria. The subdivision design shall reflect the following:



      (1)   Preservation of the character of the land.



      (2)   Economy of construction.



      (3)   Inclusion of special facilities.



      (4)   Variation in design.



      (5)   Privacy and sociability.



      (6)   Individual lot sizes that are practicable and desirable.



      (7)   Low impact development.



      (8)   Energy efficiency and green construction.



      (9)   Mobility and walkability.



   (C)   Conceptual subdivision plat content. The following items shall
be provided by the applicant as part of the conceptual subdivision plat
submittal:



      (1)    Vicinity map.



      (2)    Name of development and sketch plan.



      (3)   Location by section, township and range.



      (4)   Legal description: dimensions are to be shown by either
a metes and bounds description or description by aliquot part or by reference
to a tract or parcel shown on a previously recorded subdivision or results of
Survey plat. There must be a tie (by scale or legal description) to at least
2 aliquot corners (section, quarter-section, etc.), or by reference to a
tract or parcel shown on previously recorded subdivisions or results of
survey plat.



      (5)   Boundaries of development clearly identified.



      (6)   North arrow.



      (7)   Scales (both graphic and equivalent inch to feet) using
standard engineering intervals. Not to exceed 1" = 200'. Sheet size no
smaller than 24" x 36".



      (8)   Date of preparation plus date of any amendments since
original submittal.



      (9)   Contact info: names, addresses, phone numbers and
notation of relationship to development for landowners,
subdivider/development agents, engineers, surveyors, land planners, landscape
architects, architects, hydrologists or others responsible for design
(include registration numbers).



      (10)   Zoning: existing and proposed zoning.



      (11)    Proposed land uses and densities by area as well as
ownership patterns, surrounding land uses and zoning within 300'.



      (12)   Tentative lot and tract layout.



      (13)   Proposed circulation plan: the applicant shall submit a
proposed vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian and equestrian circulation plan. The
circulation plan shall include:



         (a)   Show all existing and proposed streets (public or
private) and their classification (arterial, collector, local street) within
the project proposed connections to the existing streets network. Scale not
to exceed 1" = 500'. The map shall also demonstrate legal primary and
secondary access as well as existing or proposed street right-of-way widths.



         (b)   Existing or proposed sidewalks and pedestrian and
equestrian trail networks and open space features affected by or intended to
be implemented as part of future subdivision design.



      (14)   Land data table: identify in chart or note form on the
conceptual subdivision plat the following:



         (a)   Total acreage, acreage for each use and each phase.



         (b)   Number units/lots for each type of use and phase.



         (c)   Average area per lot/unit proposed.



         (d)   Percent open space, exclusive of streets, building
envelopes, and parking areas.



         (e)   Identify unique site conditions including major
drainage features, fissures, etc).



   (D)   Evaluation of conceptual subdivision plat.



      (1)   Eighteen (18) copies of the conceptual subdivision plat
in an addition to an electronic copy in PDF format shall be submitted to the
development services department. Within 15 working days of submittal, the
conceptual subdivision plat shall be evaluated and discussed in a meeting
that may include the applicant(s), reviewing agency representatives and city
staff.



      (2)   Fees. Application for conceptual subdivision plat
approval shall include payment of the filing fees as set forth in Chapter 4,
Fees, Article 4-4, Vol. I, Apache Junction City Code.



      (3)   The Development Services Department shall route the
conceptual subdivision plat to city’s other departments and agencies.



      (4)   Upon receipt of reviewing departments and agencies
comments, the development services department staff shall compile all
comments and respond to the applicants or agents as the proposed project
relates to the following:



         (a)   Conformance to City of Apache Junction general or
specific area plan(s).



         (b)   Suitability of the site for development,
proposed/existing and potential development opportunities and constraints.



         (c)   The improvements, design and dedications required
by city improvement standards.



         (d)   Zoning requirements.



         (e)   Drainage Requirements.



   (E)   Approval of conceptual subdivision plat.



      (1)   The planning and zoning commission shall make a
recommendation whether or not the conceptual subdivision plat meets the
purposes of these regulations and related city ordinances and design
specifications and shall make specific recommendations to be incorporated by
the applicant into a preliminary plat submittal.



      (2)   Approval of a conceptual subdivision plat is approval of
the proposal in concept only, and is not final project approval.



   (F)   Denial of conceptual subdivision plat. If the planning and
zoning commission determines that the conceptual subdivision plat submittal
is not consistent with the city’s general or specific area plan(s) and/or
determines that the proposed development does not meet city
improvement/design specifications, the planning and zoning commission may
deny the conceptual subdivision plat application or request modifications to
be incorporated into a preliminary plat submittal.



   (G)   Appeal. If the project developer objects to a decision by the
planning and zoning commission to deny a conceptual subdivision plat or
recommended modification to same, the planning and zoning commission decision
may be appealed to the city council. Upon submittal to the development
services director of a written statement of objection, the matter shall be
placed on the agenda for the next available council meeting.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-2-4  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   The preliminary plat stage of land subdivision includes
detailed subdivision planning, submittal, review and approval of the
preliminary plat. The subdivider shall provide the planning division with all
information essential to determine the character and general acceptability of
the proposed development to allow for the establishment of the design
parameters for the final plat and the improvement plans. The preliminary plat
shall conform to the approved conceptual subdivision plat as approved by the
planning and zoning commission and city council, if this optional step was
undertaken. A preliminary plat process may be waived for a proposed platting
of a substantially developed property, as it is in the opinion and approval
of the development services director and/or city engineer or their designees.
Substantially developed includes a build-out property with stormwater
retention and drainage facilities, landscaping, and onsite and offsite
infrastructure improvements.



   (B)   (1)   Preliminary plat submittal.



         (a)   Filing. A complete application for preliminary
plat approval to include 20 copies of the preliminary plat, an electronic
copy in PDF format and other required documents, shall be filed with the
planning division. The submittal of an incomplete application shall be
rejected and the subdivider notified, in writing, of the deficiencies of
application. Upon determination that the submittal is substantially complete,
it shall be assigned a case number and distributed.



         (b)   Fees. Application for preliminary plat approval
shall include payment of the filing fees as set forth in chapter 4, Fees,
Article 4-4 , Vol. I, Apache Junction City Code.



      (2)   Preliminary plat review.



         (a)   Upon receipt of a complete application for a
preliminary plat, inclusive of all fees, the planning division shall log in
the date of submittal and perform its review for compliance to public
objectives, giving special attention to the minimum application requirements
for preliminary plat as set forth in this chapter. The planning division
shall distribute the application and the preliminary plat to the following
staff and agencies for review and written comments that pertain to their area
of expertise and responsibilities:



            1.   Director of Public Works;



            2.   City Engineer;



            3.   Development Services Project Engineer;



            4.   Police Chief;



            5.   Fire District Chief;



            6.   County Health Department;



            7.   Superintendent of School District;



            8.   United States Postmaster at Apache Junction,
Arizona;



            9.   County engineer and Director of County
Planning, if proposed subdivision abuts county areas;



            10.    Where the land abuts a state or federal
highway, to the Arizona Department of Transportation; and



            11.   Utility companies.



         (b)   The reviewing staff and agencies shall transmit
their recommendations to the planning division.



         (c)   The planning division shall consolidate the
reviewing staff and agencies comments and requirements and transmit the same
to the applicant for incorporation of the revisions to the preliminary plat.



         (d)   Once the new preliminary plat substantially
conforms to the provision of this ordinance, the development services staff
shall notify the applicant of meeting dates of planning and zoning commission
and city council to consider the preliminary plat application.



      (3)   Preliminary plat approval. The commission shall meet and
offer its recommendations to the city council on the preliminary plat after
considering the recommendations of city staff and the above agencies and
entities. Public hearings shall be held by both commission and city council.
The city council may, by resolution, approve, conditionally approve or deny a
preliminary plat.



      (4)   Significance of preliminary plat approval. Preliminary
plat approval constitutes authorization for the subdivider to proceed with
preparation of the final plat and the engineering plans and specifications
for public improvements and site development. Preliminary plat approval is
based on the following terms:



         (a)   The basic conditions under which approval of the
preliminary plat is granted will not be changed prior to expiration date;



         (b)   Approval is valid for a period of 12 months from
date of council’s action, within which period the subdivider must file a
complete final plat application. A time extension for an additional 12 months
may be granted by the city council if there had been no change in the
city’s policies or regulations which would affect the subdivision; and



         (c)   Preliminary plat approval, in itself, does not
assure final acceptance of streets for dedication or continuation of existing
zoning requirements for the tract or its environs.



      (5)   Existing developed lands. City may waive the
requirements to prepare a preliminary plat for lands that contain existing
developments that include lots, streets, drainage improvements, and other
existing infrastructures.



      (6)   Form of presentation. The information hereinafter
required as part of the preliminary plat submittal shall be shown graphically
or by note on plans, or by letter, and may comprise several sheets showing
various elements of required data.



   (C)   See Appendix for preliminary plat conditions.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-2-5  FINAL PLAT.



   This stage includes the final design of the subdivision, engineering of
public improvements and site development, and submittal of the plat and plans
by the subdivider for review and for action by the council. The final plat
shall not be denied, if it substantially conforms to the approved preliminary
plat and submitted within 12 months of an approved preliminary plat, and
further provided that the submitted final plat meets all the requirements of
these regulations.



   (A)   Final plat submittal requirements. Prior to the expiration of
the approved preliminary plat, the subdivider shall file a complete final
plat with the planning division consisting of the following.



      (1)   Fifteen 24" x 36" prints of the final plat.



      (2)   Title report issued not more than 30 days prior to the
date of submittal by a state-registered title company.



      (3)   Electronic submittal and 4 sets of the improvement plans
including, paving and street improvement plans, site and drainage improvement
plans, utility plans, stormwater pollution prevention plans (SWPPP), and
street lights plans.  Improvement plans submittal requirements are outlined
in § 10-2-17 Civil Engineering Plan Review Checklist, Engineering Standards,
Vol. II, Apache Junction City Code.



      (4)   The subdivider shall file a streetlight improvement
district application with public works department prior to the approval of
the final plat.



      (5)   Conditions, covenants and restrictions (“CC&Rs”).
The subdivider shall submit 2 copies of the deed restrictions that describe
the responsibilities of the unit owners for maintaining common areas and
facilities and all other pertinent information and requirements as applicable.



      (6)   The director or his or her designee may require an
applicant to adhere to all preliminary plat requirements during the final
plat process, such as, but not limited to, establishing an HOA and including
CC&Rs in its deeds setting forth the perpetual obligation to financially
contribute for the maintenance of all community areas such as private roads,
pools, and playground and recreational areas.



      (7)   Payment of the final plat filing fees as set forth in
Chapter 4, Fees, Article 4-4,  Vol. I, Apache Junction City Code.



   (B)   Final plat review.



      (1)   The planning division, upon receipt of the final plat
and improvement plans submittals, shall immediately record the date of filing
and shall review the final plat and improvement plans for completeness. If
complete, the planning division shall review the final plat and improvement
plans for substantial conformity to the approved preliminary plat and refer
copies of the submittal to the following staff and agencies which will be
requested to make known their recommendations, in writing, addressed to the
Council through the planning division and city manager: see list of reviewing
staff and agencies as shown in § 2-2-4(B)(2)(a) for preliminary plat review.



      (2)   The planning division shall assemble the recommendations
of the various reviewing offices, prepare a concise summary of
recommendations, and submit the summary with the reviewers’ recommendations
back to the applicant or their representative.



      (3)   Once the planning division has transmitted revisions and
recommendations for corrections to the final plat and improvement plans one
or more times, and all revisions are not submitted back to the city within 12
months, a new final plat application and fees shall be required to
re-initiate the final plat process.



      (4)   In the event that the planning division finds that the
final plat does not substantially conform to the preliminary plat as approved
by the city council, the subdivider shall revise to conform to the
preliminary plat or shall be required to submit a new preliminary plat
application.



   (C)   Council hearing and action.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a request for council action by the
planning division, in accordance with procedures established by the City
Clerk, the development services director shall place the final plat on the
council agenda of the next regular meeting, whereupon the council shall
consider the application.



      (2)   Upon approval of the final plat by the city council, the
city clerk shall transcribe a certificate of approval upon the plat, first
making sure that the other certifications required by this section have been
duly signed.



      (3)   When the certificate of approval by the council has been
transcribed on the final plat, the planning division shall retain the copy to
be recorded until the civil engineering improvement plans have been approved,
and the public improvement security has been provided.



      (4)   The planning division shall cause the final plat to be
recorded in the office of the county recorder of the county within which the
platted lands lie and the recordation fee shall be paid thereto.



      (5)   The original Mylar copy of the recorded plat shall be
retained by the Planning division, including the submittal of electronic
copies in PDF and DWG format.



      (6)   If the council rejects the final plat, the reasons shall
be recorded in the minutes and the subdivider shall be notified, in writing,
of the reasons for rejection.



   (D)   See Appendix for final plat conditions.



   (E)   Final plat recordation (including amended plats).



      (1)   All the required improvement plans (grading and
drainage, paving, utilities, etc.) shall be approved by the city prior to
final plat recordation.



      (2)   When the improvement plans have been approved, the final
plat shall be signed by the appropriate city officials to indicate the
city’s approval, and the city shall cause the plat to be recorded in the
appropriate county recorder’s office.



   (F)   Final plat amendment. One of the 3 following methods shall be
utilized to amend a recorded final plat. The developer shall arrange a
meeting WITH development services department staff to determine the method of
amendment. Any amendment to recorded plat may be subject to the currently
adopted city codes or state statutes which may have occurred since the
recordation of the original plat, as determined by city staff .



      (1)   Return to the preliminary plat/final plat procedure
(major changes). This method shall be utilized when there are proposed
changes involving any of the following: zoning, type of lots, number of lots
(4 or more), tracts or common area facilities or a change to the purpose of
any tract common areas. Any changes which substantially alters the original
approved final plat, as determined by city staff, shall require a preliminary
plat and final plat procedure.



      (2)   Re-plat procedure (moderate changes). This method shall
be utilized when there are proposed changes involving any of the following:
the configuration of 3 or more lots, lot line adjustments affecting 3 or more
lots, roadway alignment, abandonment of public rights-of-way, tracts
dedicated for specific purposes, extinguishment of easements, dedication or
rededication of rights-of-way. No preliminary plat is required with this
procedure.



      (3)   Certificate of correction (minor changes). This method
shall be utilized when there are minor changes proposed involving any of the
following: an adjustment to no more than 2 lots or 1 lot and 1 tract, bearing
or distance changes, minor corrections  to language of dedication, notes, or
legal description. Certificate of correction shall be prepared by a
registered land surveyor. Development services department staff shall review
and approve the certificate of correction prior to recordation at the county
recorder’s office (for lot line adjustments, see § 2-5-4).



   (G)   Final plat vacation. Refer to § 2-1-17 of this Subdivision
Regulations.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



ARTICLE 2-3:  SUBDIVISION DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS



Section



   2-3-1   In general



   2-3-2   Street location and arrangement



   2-3-3   Street design



   2-3-4   Block design



   2-3-5   Lot planning



   2-3-6   Easement planning



   2-3-7   Street names



   2-3-8   Street and utility improvement requirements



§ 2-3-1  IN GENERAL.



   (A)   Where the tract to be subdivided contains all or any part of
the site of a park, school site, flood control facility, fire station or
other public area as shown on the city general plan, the site shall be
dedicated to the public and ownership shall be transferred to the appropriate
entity concurrently with final plat recordation. An agreement shall be
reached between the subdivider and the appropriate public agency regarding
time, method and cost of the acquisition. In the event the development
services director or his or her designee determines that such an agreement
has not been reached within the specified period of time, then the
development services director or his or her designee may make a determination
that the requirements of this section have not been met. The final plat shall
not be recorded unless such an agreement is entered into between the parties.



   (B)   Land which is subject to periodic flooding or land which the
development services project engineer or his or her designee determines
cannot be properly drained shall not be subdivided, except that the city
council may approve subdivision of the land upon receipt of evidence from the
development services project engineer or his or her designee that the
construction of specific improvements can be expected to render the land
suitable for subdividing; thereafter, construction upon the land shall be
prohibited until the specified improvements have been planned, designed and
construction guaranteed to the satisfaction of the development services
project engineer or his or her designee . Land within the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (“FEMA”) floodplain areas is administered through §
5-1 Floodplain Management, Chapter 5, Vol. II, Apache Junction City Code.



   (C)   The project’s surveyor/engineer shall submit the compaction
report and the building pad elevation certification prior to the issuance of
the building permit for each lot within the subdivision. A drainage and
retention certification for all related drainage areas shall be submitted
prior to the release of a building clearance for occupancy. As-built plans
shall be provided to the city at the final completion stage of the
subdivision, indicating the finish floor elevation of each structure and all
other pertinent grade elevations within the project. Building structures with
basements shall submit finish floor elevation certification prior to the
release of a building clearance for occupancy.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-3-2  STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a
street designated in the adopted street classification plan, such street
shall be platted in conformance therewith.



   (B)   Street layout shall provide for the continuation or
termination of such streets.



   (C)   Certain proposed public streets, as designated by the 
development services director and the city engineer or their designees, shall
be extended or stubbed to the tract boundary to provide future connection
with adjoining unplatted lands. Easements and improvements for temporary
cul-de-sacs shall be provided. No spite strips are permitted.



   (D)   Local streets shall be so arranged and designed as to provide
connectivity and to discourage their use by through traffic.



   (E)   Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial route, any or all of the following may be required to
preserve the traffic function along the arterial route: access or frontage
streets, or non-access easements along the arterial route, or such other
treatment as may be justified for protection of residential properties from
the nuisance and hazard of high-volume traffic.



   (F)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains the right-of-way of a
limited access highway or an irrigation canal, or abuts a commercial or
industrial land use, the development services director and the city engineer
or their designees may require location of a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of the right-of-way at a distance suitable for appropriate
use of the intervening land. Such distance shall be determined with due
regard for approach grades, drainage, bridges or future grade separation. The
city may require a shared access roadway/drive to serve abutting residential
and commercial/industrial land uses.



   (G)   Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing
topography as to produce desirable lots of maximum utility and streets of
reasonable gradient and to facilitate adequate drainage with due
consideration of traffic safety.



   (H)   The city policy is to discourage alleys in residential
subdivisions. Public alleys shall conform to the requirements of § 10-3-6(F)
Public Alleys, Engineering Standards, Vol. II, Apache Junction City Code.



   (I)   Half-streets shall be discouraged except where necessary to
provide right-of-way required by the street classification plan to complete a
street pattern already begun or to ensure reasonable development of a number
of adjoining parcels. Where there exists a platted half-street abutting the
tract to be subdivided and the half-street furnished the sole access to
residential lots, the remaining half shall be platted.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-3-3  STREET DESIGN.



   Street design shall conform to the requirements of Article 10-3 Street
Design and Construction, Engineering Standards, Vol. II, Apache Junction City
Code.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-3-4  BLOCK DESIGN.



   (A)   Maximum lengths.  The maximum lengths of blocks, measured
along the centerline of the street and between intersecting street
centerlines, is 1,320 feet, except that in development with lot areas
averaging 1/2 acre or more, or where conditions warrant, this maximum may be
1,960 feet. Blocks shall be as long as reasonably possible under the
circumstances within the above maximums in order to achieve depth and
possible street economy and to reduce the expense and safety hazard arising
from excessive street intersections.



   (B)   Cul-de-sac streets. Maximum length of cul-de-sac streets is
750 feet measured from the intersection of right-of-way lines to the extreme
depth of the turning circle along the street centerline, and serve no more
than 24 dwellings. Exceptions may be made where topography, adjacent
platting, or other unusual conditions justify such. No exception shall be
made merely because the tract has restrictive boundary dimensions wherein
provisions  shall be made for extension of street patterns to the adjoining
unplatted parcel and a temporary turn-around installed.



   (C)    Pedestrian ways. Pedestrian ways shall be required where
essential for circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping
centers, transportation and other community facilities. Pedestrian ways may
be used for utility purposes.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-3-5  LOT PLANNING.



   (A)   (1)   Lot width, depth and area shall comply with the
minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance and shall be appropriate for the
location and character of development proposed and for the type and extent of
street and utility improvements being installed.



      (2)   Depth-to-width ratio of the usable area of lot shall
usually be not greater than 3:1.



      (3)   Where steep topography, unusual soil conditions,
drainage problems, abrupt changes in land use or heavy traffic on adjacent
streets prevail, the council may make special lot width, depth and area
requirements which exceed the minimum requirements of the particular zoning
district.



   (B)   Side lot lines shall be at right angles and radial to curves.



   (C)   Every lot shall abut a public or private street at a minimum
30' of frontage. A private street shall possess satisfactory access to other
existing public streets. Private streets shall be owned and maintained by a
private association or corporation and will not be considered for future
dedication and city maintenance if not developed to minimum city standards.



   (D)   Single-family residential lots extending through the block and
having frontage on 2 parallel streets shall not be permitted; backing or
siding of lots to thoroughfares shall be allowed, providing the average lot
depth is increased by 10 feet installation of a ten-foot landscape buffer as
required by the landscape code and a 6-foot high from finished lot grade
masonry wall or other suitable decorative fencing material is constructed at
the right-of-way line. Lots backing or siding upon a thoroughfare or arterial
street shall have a recorded non-access private easement one-foot  wide
along the lot line abutting those streets. Lots fronting on a thoroughfare or
arterial street shall require a frontage road.



   (E)   Lots on curvilinear streets shall have rear lot lines
consisting of a series of straight lines with points of deflection occurring
only at the junction of side lot lines, unless otherwise approved by the 
development services project engineer or his or her designee. Curvilinear
rear lot lines with a minimum radius of 800 feet may be provided, if approved
by the development services project engineer or his or her designee.



   (F)   No flag lots are allowed.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-3-6  EASEMENT PLANNING.



   (A)   The subdivider shall provide utility easements as required by
the serving utilities and is responsible for coordinating such with the
utilities concerned.



   (B)   Except where alleys are allowed and provided, lots shall
provide for front and side utility easements as required by the utility
company.



   (C)   Where alleys are provided in multiple-family, commercial or
industrial areas, a refuse container, transformer and service cabinet
easement shall be provided of sufficient size as determined by the
development services project engineer or his or her designee and/or utility
company.



   (D)   Drainage and other easements shall be indicated as required by
the development services project engineer or his or her designee.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-3-7  STREET NAMES.



   The subdivider shall indicate the proposed street names subject to
approval by the city council at the preliminary plat stage. Street naming
shall be in compliance with the manual “Procedures for Street Naming and
Address Assignment, City of Apache Junction, Arizona,” following council
adoption of same.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-3-8  STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   The Engineering Standards set forth in Apache Junction City Code, Vol.
II, Chapter 10, Article 10-3 Street Design and Construction shall govern all
such requirements.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



ARTICLE 2-4:  CONSTRUCTION ASSURANCES FOR
ONSITE IMPROVEMENTS AND AMENITIES



Section



   2-4-1   Default



   2-4-2   Inspection and release



§ 2-4-1  DEFAULT.



   In the event that the subdivider fails or neglects to satisfactorily
install the required improvements within the time agreed upon for
performance, the city shall withhold the issuance of building permits until
such time as the improvements are installed and inspected per the city
approved plans.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-4-2  INSPECTION AND RELEASE.



   (A)   The subdivider, using the services of an Arizona registered
professional civil engineer and plans as approved by the city development
services project engineer or his or her designee, shall be responsible for
the quality of all materials and workmanship. At the completion of the work,
the subdivider’s engineer of record shall make an inspection of the
improvements and shall submit a set of ‘as-built’ construction plans if
complete or a report on the status of improvements if only partially complete
to the city development services project engineer or his or her designee. The
development services project engineer or his or her designee will review the
as-built plans and/or report and notify the developer of any non-compliance
with the approved construction plans or with any regulations.



   (B)   The following certification shall be sealed, signed and dated
by the subdivider’s engineer of record, or any licensed civil engineer in
the State of Arizona, on the as-built plans. The as-built plans shall be
approved by the development services project engineer or his or her designee.
The certification statement shall read as follows: “In my professional
opinion, the constructions of all required improvements have been completed
in substantial conformance with the city approved plans and specifications
including changes and addendums. My professional opinion is based, in part,
upon the completion of certain tests and measurements and/or the review of
the results of such tests and measurements completed by others.”



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



ARTICLE 2-5:  ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS; LAND SPLITS/MINOR LAND DIVISION,
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT, AND LOT COMBINATION



Section



   2-5-1   Applicability



   2-5-2   Enforcement



   2-5-3   Land split application and approval procedures



   2-5-4   Lot line adjustment



   2-5-5   Lot combination



§ 2-5-1  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The regulations contained in this Article shall apply to all
divisions of land created for sale or lease within the corporate limits of
Apache Junction, defined by this Article to be a land split.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or other
legal entity to create for sale or lease any parcel that is subject to the
requirements of this Article until a recorded land split map and accompanying
deeds complying with the provisions of this article has been approved by the
city.



   (C)   An approved land split map shall be null and void, if the
appropriate deeds regarding said land split are not recorded within 12 months
of city approval.



   (D)   The following are the requirements for the division of land
that shall proceed through the subdivision process:



      (1)   The division of any property into 2 or more parcels, if
a new public street is involved.



      (2)   The division of any property, the boundaries of which
have been fixed by a recorded subdivision plat, into more than 2 parcels.



      (3)   The creation of 4 or more units having the right of
exclusive occupancy coupled with an undivided interest in the land, such as
in a condominium, horizontal property regime, cooperative, community
apartment, townhouse or similar project.



   (E)   The creation of up to 3 units having the right of exclusive
occupancy coupled with an undivided interest in the land, such as in a
condominium, horizontal property regime or similar project, shall proceed
through the land split map process.



   (F)   Where land is taken from platted or unplatted parcel(s) is
added to an adjacent parcel through recording a deed, a boundary adjustment
need not be filed with the city, provided that the proposed adjustment does
not:



      (1)   Create any new lots;



      (2)   Render any existing lots substandard in size or shape;



      (3)   Render substandard the setbacks of existing development;
or



      (4)   Impair any existing access, easements or public
improvements.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-5-2  ENFORCEMENT.



   Apache Junction City Code, Volume II, §§ 2-1-21, 2-1-22 and 2-1-23
shall apply.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-5-3  LAND SPLIT APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Approval of map. The division of land defined by this article
requires the approval of a land split map by the development services
director or his or her designee or the city council.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of the land split map review is to
determine the appropriateness of the access and lot design with respect to
the contours of the land, to determine if the setbacks of existing
development are being rendered nonconforming with the creation of new lot
lines, to determine if a subdivision is being created, and to determine
whether or not the proposed land split conforms with city policies and
ordinances.



   (C)   Pre-application conference.



      (1)   The pre-application conference stage of the land split
review is an investigatory period which precedes the preparation and the
submittal of the application. The applicant shall present his or her proposal
to the planning division, which shall advise the applicant of specific public
objectives, standards and regulations related to the property and the
procedure for land split review.



      (2)   This stage of processing affords the planning division
the opportunity to give informal guidance at a time when potential conflicts
can be most easily resolved, additional requirements or may be discussed, and
undue expense and delay are saved by the applicant.



   (D)   Application requirements. Applicants requesting land split map
approval shall submit the following to the planning division:



      (1)   A completed application form;



      (2)   Fees as specified in the Apache Junction City Code, Vol.
I, Chapter 4, Fees, Article 4-4;



      (3)   Three 18" x 24" blueline or blackline prints folded into
a 9"x12" size.  One Mylar print (shall be submitted later, but prior to
final approval of the land split map);



       (4)   Proof of ownership, such as a copy of the deed to the
land, and a signed statement in the application form affirming current
ownership. If discrepancies arise in verification, then applicant may be
required to provide additional proof of ownership, such as a vesting or title
report; and



      (5)   After final review and all corrections have been made,
one 18"x24" Mylar final land split map shall be submitted for development
services director’s signature.



   (E)   Planning Division review.  The planning division shall review
the application and make a determination as to its completeness. The planning
division shall advise the applicant of deficiencies if the application is
determined to be incomplete.



   (F)   Recommendations. Upon determining that an application is
complete, the planning division may distribute materials to the following
agencies for their recommendations:



      (1)   Other city departments;



      (2)   Fire District Chief; and



      (3)   Any other relevant agency.



   (G)   Land split map requirements.



      (1)   The final land split map shall be submitted on a
reproducible Mylar film drawn with India ink, or similar permanent ink, at a
scale large enough to show all details clearly (normally 1 inch = 100 feet or
larger) on a sheet 18" x 24". A line shall be drawn around the sheet leaving
a margin of 1 inch, and a left margin of 2 inches.



      (2)   The land split map shall show or contain the following
information:



         (a)   A title to read: “Apache Junction Land Split Map
(case number);



         (b)   Graphic and written scale, north indicator, and
date of preparation;



         (c)   Legal description of the parent parcel, and each
proposed new lots;



         (d)   Location and description of existing and proposed
monuments to which all bearings, dimension, angles and similar data shall be
referenced. Such data shall be tied to the city datum system;



         (e)   Boundaries of the property fully balanced and
closed, showing all bearings and distances (in feet and decimals thereof),
determined by an accurate survey in the field. Boundary closure calculations
are required with error of closure;



         (f)   By note or a legend, identify any symbols used on
the map;



         (g)   Bearings and dimensions of all existing parcel
lines and proposed lot lines, with each new lot identified by letter and
indicating the net area in square feet of each lot;



         (h)   Name, course, length and width of existing and
proposed street dedications;



         (i)   Location, length; and width of existing and
proposed access, utility, public service and drainage easements. No more than
1 lot or parcel may be granted a private access easement across another
abutting lot;



         (j)   The identification of adjacent subdivisions and
land split maps by record data;



         (k)   Flood zone information and delineation on the map
of any areas identified on the flood insurance rate map as special flood
hazard areas. Also, tributary washes outside the special flood hazard areas
shall be delineated;



         (l)   The location of existing structures;



         (m)   Name of owner or trustee;



         (n)   Engineer’s or surveyor’s certificate:



   “This is to certify that the survey and the map of the division of
land described herein was accurately done under my direction and that all
lots are staked or will be staked and all monuments are set or will be set
within 1 year after recordation.



___________________________________________



Signature    Date      Registration No.            Seal”



         (o)   Certificate of approval:



   “This is to certify that this map complies with the requirements of
the City of Apache Junction; and that this land split map is hereby approved
on this _________ day of ___________, 20__.



    By:  __________________________



      Development Services Director”



   (H)   Evaluation criteria. The development services director or his
or her designee and the city council (in the case of an appeal), in
evaluating and making decisions on land split proposals, shall consider the
following criteria:



      (1)   The land split proposal’s consistency with the
city’s general plan;



      (2)   The proposal’s conformity to the city’s zoning
ordinance;



      (3)   The proposal’s conformity to Vol. II, Articles 2-3 and
2-4 of this chapter and other applicable sections of the city’s subdivision
regulations;



      (4)   The proposal’s conformity with the city’s street
classification plan;



      (5)   The proposal’s lot size and design in respect to the
site’s topography;



      (6)   The identification of any setback problems with respect
to any existing development on the property and the new lot boundaries to be
created;



      (7)   A determination from the title information and
lot/street design that a subdivision is not being created;



      (8)   That the signatures on the land split map have been
affixed with India ink, or similar permanent ink, and other requirements for
recordation are complied with; and



      (9)   Other pertinent criteria.



   (I)   Decision. The development services director or his or her
designee shall render a decision on the proposed land split. If approved,
then 1 finalized Mylar land split map shall be submitted to the development
services director or his or her designee for final signature and recordation,
and a copy of the recorded land split shall be sent to the applicant. If the
proposed land split is denied, a notice of the decision shall be sent to the
applicant advising him or her that he or she may appeal the decision of the
director or his or her designee to the city council. If approved, the
applicant shall submit the following:



      (1)   A final, recordable, reproducible, mylar map 18" x 24"
consistent with the approved land split map.



      (2)   The format for recording shall meet all requirements of
the county recorder’s office.



      (3)   Once approved by the city, the city shall record the
land split map with the county recorder’s office within 60 days of
approval. The original mylar of the recorded land split map shall become the
property of the city.



      (4)   Within 1 year of land split map approval, the
owner/applicant shall record deeds for the new lots and shall utilize the
approved legal descriptions for the newly created lots, as transcribed on the
approved land split map.



      (5)   Owner/applicant shall provide the planning division with
copies of the recorded deeds within 1 year. Failure to record the new deeds
within 1 year of approval shall render the approved land split null and void.



   (J)   Appeal. An appeal of the director’s decision must be filed,
in writing, with the city clerk’s office within 30 days of the date of
decision. The council shall consider the appeal no earlier than 14 days nor
later than 45 days from the date of the filing of the appeal.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-5-4  LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The lot line adjustment is an
agreement between adjoining property owners to adjust a common boundary line
which does not result in a net gain in the number of lots or parcels. For
purposes of this article, a lot line adjustment shall conform to the
following provisions:



      (1)   A lot line adjustment between owners of adjoining
properties within the same recorded final plat solely for the purpose of
revisions to common boundary lines; and



      (2)   Additional lots or parcels are not being created; and



      (3)   All lots remaining after the lot line adjustment shall
contain conforming setbacks and minimum lot size, width, depth, and frontage
as required by the zoning ordinance, and shall meet all other lot development
standards of the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   The council hereby grants the development services director or
his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as “director,” the power and
authority to administratively review and approve or disapprove of minor
adjustments of lot line boundaries for parcels within the city, as per the
regulations contained herein.



   (C)   General standards.



      (1)   All lot line adjustments shall comply with all the
requirements of the specific zoning district in which the divisions are
located. This includes compliance with the following standards, if applicable:



         (a)   Minimum lot size.



         (b)   Minimum lot width.



         (c)   Minimum setbacks.



         (d)   Minimum yard or frontage requirements.



      (2)   No lot line adjustment shall result in more dwelling
units than are permitted by the zoning district for which the lot or parcel
is located.



      (3)   No lot line adjustment shall result in a split zoning
classification on a single lot or parcel.



      (4)   No lot line adjustment shall result in the creation of a
non-conforming structure or use.



      (5)   No lot line adjustment shall result in a lack of legal
access as defined by city standards to any lots or parcels created by the
division.



   (D)   Application requirements. This section outlines the minimum
information needed to enable the city to make informed and expeditious
decisions regarding applications for lot line adjustments. Unless exempted by
the director or his/her designee, the information contained in this section
shall be provided by each applicant. All mapped data shall be drawn to a
scale of not greater than 1 inch equals 100 feet (1" = 100'). Unless
otherwise directed, the map data shall be drawn on a sheet size of 18 inches
by 24 inches (18" x 24").



   (E)   Lot line adjustment application process.



      (1)   Completed city lot line adjustment application form
shall be submitted to the director.



      (2)   Lot line adjustment survey submittal: 2 copies completed
by a registered land surveyor in the State of Arizona.



      (3)   Payment of an application fee as set by the council
under the Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4, Fees, Article 4-4.
Recording fees are separately applied by the county recorder’s office.



      (4)   If necessary to accurately review the application, the
director may require additional information to be shown on the lot line
adjustment map, including buildings, structures, streets, driveways, and
other information. If rejected, written notice shall be provided to the
applicant via first class mail. The written notice shall specify the reasons
for denial.



   (F)   Decision. The director shall render a decision to approve or
reject the application of the proposed lot line adjustment within 30 days
after submittal. If  approved, then 1 finalized Mylar lot line adjustment
map shall be submitted to the director for final signature and recordation,
and a copy of the recorded lot line adjustment map shall be sent to the
applicant. If the proposed lot line adjustment is denied, a notice of the
decision shall be sent to the applicant advising him or her that he or she
may appeal the decision of the director to the Board of Adjustment. If
approved, the applicant shall submit the following:



      (1)   A final, recordable, reproducible, Mylar map 18 inches
by 24 inches 18" x 24" consistent with the approved lot line adjustment map.



      (2)   The format for recording shall meet all requirements of
the county recorder’s office.



      (3)   Once approved by the city, the city shall record the lot
line adjustment map with the county recorder’s office within 30 days of
approval. The original Mylar of the recorded lot line adjustment map shall
become the property of the city.



      (4)   Within 1 year of lot line adjustment map approval, the
owner/applicant shall record deeds for the new lots and shall utilize the
approved legal descriptions for the newly created lots, as transcribed on the
approved lot line adjustment map.



      (5)   Owner/applicant shall provide the planning division with
copies of the recorded deeds within 1 year. Failure to record the new deeds
within 1 year of approval shall render the approved lot line adjustment null
and void.



   (G)   Appeal. An appeal of the director’s decision to the Board of
Adjustment shall be filed, in writing, with the development services
department within 30 days from the date of the Board’s decision. The Board
of Adjustment shall consider the appeal as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-462.06.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-5-5  LOT COMBINATION.



   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The lot combination process allows
an owner of 2 or more contiguous lots, which are not in a platted subdivision
and/or in a planned development zoning district, to combine the lots into 1
lot without a subdivision plat amendment. For purposes of this article, a lot
combination shall conform to the following provisions:



      (1)   The proposed lot combination shall not violate any
provision of the city land development code, or other provisions of
applicable ordinances and regulations.



      (2)   The proposed lot combination shall not substantially
reduce the amount of privacy currently enjoyed by nearby property owners.



      (3)   The proposed lot combination shall not substantially and
adversely affect traffic or traffic circulation, drainage, sewage treatment
systems, or other such systems.



      (4)   The lot combination does not create a situation where
the proposed use of the property will create a hazard or nuisance.



      (5)   The lots being combined shall be contiguous, and if in a
platted subdivision, shall not include lots located in another separate
subdivision.



      (6)   The lots shall have the same owner.



      (7)   The lots being combined shall have the same zoning
designation.



      (8)   The applicant shall obtain a new assessor parcel number
through the county assessor’s office.



   (B)   The council hereby grants the development services director or
his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as “director,” the power and
authority to administratively review and approve or disapprove a lot
combination of parcels within the city, as per the regulations contained
herein.



   (C)   General standards.



      (1)   All lot combinations shall comply with all the
requirements of the specific zoning district in which the divisions are
located.



      (2)   No lot combination shall result in more dwelling units
than are permitted by the zoning district for which the lot or parcel is
located.



      (3)   No lot combination shall result in a split zoning
classification on a single lot or parcel.



      (4)   No lot combination shall result in the creation of a
non-conforming structure or use.



      (5)   No lot combination shall result in a lack of legal
access as defined by city standards to any lots or parcels created by the
combination.



   (D)   Application requirements. This section outlines the minimum
information needed to enable the city to make informed and expeditious
decisions regarding applications for lot combinations. Unless exempted by the
director, or his/her designee, the information contained in this section
shall be provided by each applicant. All mapped data shall be drawn to a
scale of not greater than 1 inch equals 100 feet (1" = 100'). Unless
otherwise directed, the map data shall be drawn on a sheet size of 18 inches
by 24 inches (18" x 24").



   (E)   Lot combination application process.



      (1)   Completed city lot combination application form shall be
submitted to the director.



      (2)   Lot combination survey submittal: 2 copies completed by
a registered land surveyor in the State of Arizona.



      (3)   Payment of an application fee as set by the council
under the Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, Chapter 4, Fees, Article 4-4.
Recording fees are separately applied by the county recorder’s office.



      (4)   If necessary to accurately review the application, the
director may require additional information to be shown on the lot
combination map, including buildings, structures, streets, driveways, and
other information. If rejected, written notice shall be provided to the
applicant via first class mail. The written notice shall specify the reasons
for denial.



    (F)   Decision. The director shall render a decision to approve or
reject the application of the proposed lot combination within 30 days after
submittal. If approved, then 1 finalized Mylar lot combination map shall be
submitted to the director for final signature and recordation, and a copy of
the recorded lot combination map shall be sent to the applicant. If the
proposed lot combination is denied, a notice of the decision shall be sent to
the applicant advising him or her that he or she may appeal the decision of
the director to the Board of Adjustment. If approved, the applicant shall
submit the following:



      (1)   A final, recordable, reproducible, Mylar map 18 inches
by 24 inches 18" x 24" consistent with the approved lot combination map.



      (2)   The format for recording shall meet all requirements of
the county recorder’s office.



      (3)   Once approved by the city, the city shall record the lot
combination map with the county recorder’s office within 30 days of
approval. The original Mylar of the recorded lot combination map shall become
the property of the city.



      (4)   Within 1 year of lot combination map approval, the
owner/applicant shall record a deed for the new combined lot and shall
utilize the approved legal description for the newly created lot combination,
as transcribed on the approved lot combination map.



      (5)   Owner/applicant shall provide the planning division with
copy of the recorded deed within 1 year. Failure to record the new deed
within 1 year of approval shall render the approved lot combination null and
void.



   (G)   Appeal. An appeal of the director’s decision to the Board of
Adjustment shall be filed, in writing, with the development services
department within 30 days from the date of the Board’s decision. The Board
of Adjustment shall consider the appeal as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-462.06.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



ARTICLE 2-6:  CONDOMINIUM PLATS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS



Section



   2-6-1   Purpose



   2-6-2   Applicability



   2-6-3   General standards



   2-6-4   Application process



   2-6-5   Final plat approval



§ 2-6-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section to establish requirements and procedures
for new condominium developments and condominium conversions for existing
development so as to provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare through adherence to development standards as provided in this
chapter and other applicable city codes and ordinances, including adequate
provision of utilities, water supply, sanitary sewerage and similar common
facilities.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-6-2  APPLICABILITY.



   Condominium and condominium conversion is subject to the regulations as
described by A.R.S. Title 33, Chapter 9, Condominiums, and Title 9, Chapter
6.2, Municipal Subdivision Regulations. The creation of a condominium form of
ownership for properties shall be through the subdivision platting process.
There must be a minimum of 4 units in order to qualify for a condominium
through subdivision platting.



(ARS §§ 33-1201 et seq., and 9-463 et seq.).



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-6-3  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   General. The council shall not refuse approval of a final plat
of a project described as a condominium under provisions of  this chapter
because of location of buildings on the property shown on the plat and not in
violation of this chapter or on account of the manner in which airspace is to
be divided in conveying the condominium. Fees and lot design requirements
shall be computed and imposed with respect to such plats on the basis of
parcels or lots on the surface of the land shown thereon as included in the
project. Plats of such projects may be based on building footprints but, as
per state statute, they do not need to show the buildings or the manner in
which the buildings or airspace above the property are to be divided. This
subsection does not limit the power of the council to regulate the location
of buildings in such a project by or pursuant to a zoning ordinance.



   (B)   New condominium development. New condominium development shall
be subject to the standard procedures and requirements for development, as
established by the city, including compliance with zoning ordinances,
building codes, design review and other applicable codes and ordinances.



   (C)   Condominium conversion. Condominium conversion of existing
development shall be subject to final plat approval by the commission and
council.



      (1)   Disclosure report requirements: the subdivider shall
submit an affidavit stating that the units to be converted meet the
applicable standards of the building code, and city code. Any subdivider who
files a final plat for a condominium, cooperative, community apartment,
townhouse development, or manufactured home subdivision, whether for the
purpose of new development or the subdivision of an existing development,
shall submit a copy of a report on the physical condition of all buildings,
structures, and other improvements to the property to be subdivided prior to
approval of a final plat by the mayor and council. This report shall be made
available by the subdivider to all prospective purchasers of the initial
condominium units prior to execution of a binding contract of purchase. The
disclosure report shall be recorded with the appropriate county recorder at
the same time as the final plat. The report shall contain the following:



         (a)   A report describing the physical condition of
elements of the structure, equipment, or appliances in a unit, the repair or
replacement of which will be the responsibility of the purchaser. The report
shall state the approximate date on which the element, equipment, or
appliance was originally constructed or installed; the approximate date on
which it was subsequently replaced or will likely require replacement; and
the current estimated cost of replacement.



         (b)   This report shall not be construed to create any
warranties, express or implied.



         (c)   A report containing information to be obtained
from the fire district describing the extent to which the buildings and
structures to be converted by the plat submitted by the subdivider deviate
from applicable requirements of the fire code, and the city code in the
following specified areas of fire safety:



            1.   Accessibility of buildings and structures to
fire-fighting equipment; and



            2.   Proximity and frequency of fire hydrants; and



            3.   Description of the building construction
rating for “party walls” and fire barriers between units.



         (d)   A statement of the estimated fees or assessments,
if any, that the purchaser of a unit will pay, on a monthly and yearly basis,
for at least a 2 year period following purchase.



         (e)   A report from a licensed pest control operator on
each building or structure and each unit within the building or structure. A
statement of the unit’s average monthly utility costs, including water,
sewer, trash collection, electricity and natural gas, based on the preceding
12 month period, where the subdivider has access to such utility cost data.



      (2)   Certificate of occupancy: prior to final plat Approval,
evidence of building permits and/or certificate of occupancy for the original
construction must be submitted or the applicant must provide plans of the
site with the water distribution system and wastewater drainage system shown
on as-built plans “signed and sealed” by an Arizona registered
professional engineer. Copies of the required Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality (“ADEQ”) application for such may be submitted to
fulfill this requirement. The professional registrant shall also submit a
“signed and sealed” statement that indicates that the existing systems
are properly installed and located as per building safety requirements. The
statement shall indicate the year the structure was built, the building codes
in effect at the time of construction completion, if known, and the results
of independent testing of the “party walls” or fire barriers between
units. Independent testing of at least 10% of the units in the overall
project, including at least 1 unit in each separate building shall be
required. This may require some site investigation by contractors to verify
sizes and locations of systems and the physical condition of building
components. The results shall be provided for the building official to review
at the time the applicant applies for final plat approval.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-6-4  APPLICATION PROCESS.



   General requirements.



   (A)   Sanitary sewage, water supply and refuse disposal. It is the
responsibility of the subdivider to provide the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality (“ADEQ”) with plans and applications for the design
and operation of sanitary sewer facilities, water supply and refuse disposal,
as required.



   (B)   New condominium development. For condominium projects being
developed through new construction, the procedures for processing the
application shall be the same as with other new development with the
exception that the subdivision may be submitted directly for final plat
review to the commission and council after preliminary approval by staff that
the plat complies with all technical requirements. The following steps are
required for the review of new condominium development:



      (1)   Development Review Committee.



      (2)   Submittal of final plat for technical review by staff.



      (3)   Submittal of final plat to commission for review.



      (4)   Submittal of final plat to mayor and council for review
and approval.



   (C)   Condominium conversion. Conversion of existing buildings to
condominiums may proceed through an expedited process; however, such
proposals still require review by various city departments and applicable
agencies to ensure compliance with local and state requirements. Buildings
constructed prior to issuance of building permits or certificates of
occupancy may be required to provide evidence of adequacy of water
distribution and wastewater drainage systems, as well as disclosure of
building conditions as they relate to building and fire codes through the
preparation of a building condition report by an Arizona registered
professional that includes mechanical, electrical, and structural engineering
analyses. The following steps are required for the review of condominium
conversion projects:



      (1)   Development Review Committee.



      (2)   Submittal of final plat for technical review by staff.



      (3)   Submittal of final plat to commission for review.



      (4)   Submittal of final plat to mayor and council for review
and approval.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



§ 2-6-5  FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.



   (A)   The  commission and mayor and council shall review the final
plat submittal for the condominium and make their determination for approval,
approval with conditions or denial based on the requirements and procedures
indicated in the subdivision regulations, and subject to the following:



      (1)   That the proposed condominium subdivision conforms to
the adopted goals, objectives and policies of the city.



      (2)   That the proposed condominium subdivision will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare.



      (3)   That the proposed condominium subdivision is consistent
with the provisions and intents of the zoning code, as applicable to the
property.



      (4)   That the proposed condominium subdivision conforms to
the design standards set forth in this chapter and other applicable city,
county, state and federal regulations.



   (B)   After the applicant has received the required approvals, the
final plat for the condominium development may be submitted to the
development services director for recording.



      (1)   Time limit. The applicant/subdivider shall have 6 months
from the date of approval by the council to submit all required materials and
to demonstrate all conditions have been met.



      (2)   Copies. Three reproducible sets of the final plat shall
be submitted to the development services director.



      (3)   Fees. All development fees for subdivision and recording
shall be received prior to the recording of the final plat. Recording fees
shall be made payable to the appropriate county recorder.



      (4)   Conditions, covenants and restrictions (“CC&Rs”).
The subdivider shall submit 2 copies of the deed restrictions that describe
the responsibilities of the unit owners for maintaining common areas and
facilities and all other pertinent information and requirements as applicable.



      (5)   The director or his or her designee may require an
applicant to adhere to all preliminary plat requirements during the final
plat process, such as, but not limited to, establishing an HOA and including
CC&Rs in its deeds setting forth the perpetual obligation to financially
contribute for the maintenance of all community areas such as private roads,
pools, and playground and recreational areas.



   (C)   Assurances. Any assurances required for improvements in
accordance with these regulations shall be received and approved prior to
recording of the final plat.



   (D)   Certificate of occupancy. After recording of the final plat
the applicant may then apply for certificate(s) of occupancy for the newly
created condominiums from the development services department and sell the
units as condominiums in accordance with the requirements of the State of
Arizona Department of Real Estate.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



ARTICLE 2-7:  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. If not
defined herein or within other sections of this chapter, words and phrases
used in this chapter shall have the meanings provided in any standard
dictionary as determined by the development services director or his or her
designee.



   ABUT.  To touch or adjoin along a common border or property line.



   ABUTTING.   Same as ADJOINING.



   ACCESS.  The way or means by which pedestrians and vehicles enter or
leave property.



   ADJACENT.  Next to or having a common boundary.



   ADJOINING.  Touching or bounding at a point or line.



   AGENT.  A person authorized, in writing, by an owner, to act in the
owner’s behalf for the purposes of representing the owner’s interest
before an official city body with regard to the development or
non-development of the owner’s land.



   ALLEY.  A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of
vehicular access to properties adjoining the ALLEY and being on the side or
rear of such properties.



   AMENDMENT.  Any repeal, modification or addition to a regulation; any
new regulation; any change in the numbers, shape, boundary or area of a
district or in a plat; or any repeal or abolition of any map, part thereof or
addition thereto.



   APPELLANT.  That person or agency filing appeals, paying fees, and
complying with the procedural requirements as stated in this chapter.



   APPLICANT.  That person or agency initiating action for changes or
amendments, paying fees, and complying with the procedural requirements as
stated in this chapter.



   APPROVED LENDING INSTITUTION.  Any of the following listed
institutions, and  any other lending institution approved by the city
engineer:



      (1)   Bank;



      (2)   Credit union; or



      (3)   Mortgage lending company currently approved by the
Federal Housing Administration to act as a mortgagee, and qualified to
transact business in the State of Arizona, and having a business office
within the Phoenix metropolitan area.



   BLOCK.  A piece of land, or parcel of land, or group of lots, entirely
surrounded by public streets, private streets, water courses, parks,
greenways, or a combination thereof.



   CC&R.  Conditions, covenants and restrictions. See also PROTECTIVE
COVENANT.



   CEMETERY.  Any one or combination of more than one of the following,
in a place dedicated and used or intended to be used for cemetery purposes:



      (1)   A burial park, for earth interment;



      (2)   A mausoleum, for crypt or vault entombments; or



      (3)   A crematory, or a crematory and columbarium, for
cinerary interments.



   CHANNEL.  A natural or artificial water course, including dry washes,
at perceptible extent with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct
continuously or periodically flowing water.



   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.  An affirmative action indicating that approval
will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of certain specified stipulations or
conditions.



   CONDOMINIUM.  Any real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of the separate portions. Real estate is not a
condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested
in the unit owners.



   CONSERVATION EASEMENT.  A power invested in a qualified private land
conservation organization or government to constrain, as to a specified land
area, the exercise of rights otherwise held by a landowner, so as to achieve
certain conservation purposes.



   CONSERVATION LANDS.  Retention or acquisition of land for the purposes
of preservation and public use.



   CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY.  A divided expressway, including an
interstate highway, which provides at least 2 moving lanes in each direction
and for which curb cuts are prohibited and access is fully controlled. These
generally serve high-speed interregional traffic or traffic which has either
its origin or destination outside the city. Intersections have grade
separations and are fully controlled. These routes are continuous throughout
the area.



   CROSS SLOPE.  The percent of slope measured at right angles to the
natural contours along a line passing through the center of a probable
building site. The lot CROSS SLOPE shall include the differences in the
elevation of the natural grade and the elevation of the street giving access
to the lot where this inclusion is necessary to provide safe and convenient
access to the lot cut.



   DESIGN.  The street alignment, grades and widths, alignments and
widths of easements and rights-of-way for drainage and utility locations and
the arrangement and orientation of lots.



   DEVELOPER.  The person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, syndication, trust or other legal entity or his, her or its
successor, assignee or heir who intends to develop land for commercial,
industrial or multiple-family or other residential purposes in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



   DRAINAGEWAY.  An alignment for the purpose of routing stormwater.



   EASEMENT.  An interest in a defined area of land granted to or owned
by another that entitles its holder to specific limited uses and/or purposes.



   ENGINEERING PLANS.  Plans, profiles, cross-sections and other required
details, including narrative or reports, for the construction of
improvements, prepared by a registered engineer in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat and in compliance with standards of design and
construction approved by the city.



   EXCEPTION.  In legal descriptions of the area to be subdivided, that
portion of lands to be deleted or excluded from the subdivided land.



   FILL.  The placing, storing or dumping of any material, such as (by
way of illustration, but not of limitation) earth, clay, sand, concrete,
rock, rubble or waste of any kind upon the surface of the ground which
results in increasing the natural ground surface elevation.



   FILL, SOLID.  Any non-combustible material insoluble in water, such as
soil, rock, sand or gravel that can be used for grading land or filling
depressions.



   FINAL APPROVAL.  Approval by the council of the final plat as
evidenced by the signatures required to complete the certifications necessary
for final plat authorization to record the plat.



   FINISH GRADE.  The final grade or elevation of the ground surface
after grading is completed.



   FLAG LOT.  A long, slender strip of land resembling a flag pole that
extends from the typically rectangular main section of the lot or the
“flag” to the street.



   FREEBOARD.  A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
design flood level for flood protection.



   GENERAL PLAN.  An official public document adopted by the council in
accordance with A.R.S. § 9-461 and which is a comprehensive, general and
long-range policy guide for present and future development with any
supplements thereto and which may include elements on but not limited to land
use, housing, recreation, streets, schools, governmental services, utility
provisions and environmental considerations.



   GRADE.  The degree of inclination or declination.



   GRADING.  Any excavating or filling or combination thereof, including:



      (1)   The conditions resulting from any excavation or fill;



      (2)   Any alteration of the natural drainage pattern; or



      (3)   The removal or rearrangement of surface soil.



   GROSS LOT AREA.  The area of a lot or parcel, including all
non-dedicated road rights-of-way and easements.



   HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION.  An association of real property owners
having responsibilities with respect to common property of a project or
specific area or subdivision, including but not limited to condominium
associations.



   IMPROVED LOT OR PARCEL.  A lot or parcel of a subdivision upon which
there is a residential, commercial, industrial or public building or
structure, or concerning which a valid building permit is in effect to erect
such an improvement.



   IMPROVEMENTS.  Such street work and utilities required to be installed
or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on land to be used for public or
private streets, highways, alleys, pedestrian ways and easements as are
necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local
neighborhood and for through traffic and drainage needs, and required as a
condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final plat map, 
and may include but is not limited to street improvements-survey monuments,
street name signs, guardrails, barricades, safety devices, fire hydrants,
grading, retaining walls, storm drains, and flood control channels, erosion
control structures, landscaping, sanitary sewers, streetlights, and other
facilities as are required by the council, as well as utility installations
(water, electric, gas, telephone).



   IRRIGATION FACILITIES.  Canals, laterals, ditches, conduits, gates,
pumps and allied equipment necessary for the supply, delivery and drainage of
irrigation water and the construction, operation and maintenance of such.



   LAND SPLITS.  The division of improved or unimproved land the area of
which is 2.5 acres or less into 2 or 3 tracts or parcels of land for the
purposes of sale or lease.



   LOT.  A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or
other designation shown on a plan or parcel map recorded in the office of the
Pinal or Maricopa County Recorder’s Office, or a parcel of real property
delineated on an approved record of survey, parcel map or subdivision map as
filed in the office of the Pinal or Maricopa County Recorder and abutting at
least one public street or right-of-way, or easement determined to be
adequate for the purpose of access. The word LOT is synonymous with the word
PLOT or PARCEL.



   LOT AREA.  The total area of a lot measured in a horizontal plane,
included within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land. Also see GROSS LOT
AREA and NET LOT AREA.



   LOT AREA, MINIMUM.  See Vol. II, § 1-1-4(C)(3)(j), Zoning Ordinance.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot abutting on 2 or more intersecting streets where
the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees.



   LOT DEPTH.  The average horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (see also LOT, THROUGH). An interior lot abutting
2 parallel or approximately parallel streets.



   LOT, FRONTAGE.  A lot boundary line at any point where it abuts a
street, right-of-way or easement.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  Any lot that is not a corner lot.



   LOT, KEY.  An interior lot, one side of which is contiguous to the
rear line of a corner lot.



   LOT LINE.  The legal boundary of a lot or parcel.



   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.  A procedure that may be used under certain
specified circumstances as a method for making minor revisions to property
lines between 2 or more existing lots within the same subdivision.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  On an interior lot, the front lot line is the
property line abutting the street where access is provided. On a corner lot,
the front lot line is the shorter property line abutting a street, except in
those cases where the subdivision or parcel map specified another line as the
front lot line. On a through lot or a lot with 3 or more sides abutting a
street or a corner lot with lot lines of equal length.



   LOT LINE, INTERIOR.  A lot line not abutting a street.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  A lot line not abutting a street which is opposite
and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular-shaped
lot, a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the
front lot line, having a length of not less than 10 feet; also a lot which is
bounded on all sides by streets may have no rear lot lines.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any lot boundary line, not a front or rear lot line.
In the case of a corner lot, the lot line abutting the street side and which
is not the front lot line shall be termed an EXTERIOR SIDE LOT LINE; all
other side lot lines are termed INTERIOR SIDE LOT LINES.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a legal subdivision recorded in
the office of the county clerk in the county in which the lot is located, or
a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, or by a rectangular survey
system.



   LOT OF RECORD, PREEXISTING NONCONFORMING.  A tract of land on the date
of adoption of this chapter that:



      (1)   Has less than the prescribed minimum lot size, width or
depth, or any combination thereof, for the zoning district within which it is
located;



      (2)   Is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been owned
separately and individually when creation of a lot of such size, width or
depth, or any combination thereof existed at that location; and



      (3)   Has remained in separate and individual ownership from
adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that creation of
such a lot has been prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations.



   LOT, THROUGH.  An interior lot abutting 2 parallel or approximately
parallel streets.



   LOT, USABLE AREA.  That portion of a lot usable for or reasonably
adaptable to the normal use for which the lot is intended and not including
area which is covered by water, is excessively steep, or has its normal use
restricted by certain types of easements or setbacks.



   LOT WIDTH.  The distance between side lot lines measured perpendicular
to the lot depth at the front setback line.



   LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT.  Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes that result in the infiltration, evapotranspiration or use
of stormwater in order to protect water quality and associated aquatic
habitat.



   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET.  A residential or non-residential street
parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare, which provides access to
abutting properties with protection from through traffic.



   NET LOT AREA.  The area of lot or parcel, excluding dedicated and
non-dedicated public road rights-of-way.



   OBSTRUCTION, ARTIFICIAL.  Any hindrance which is not naturally
existing.



   OPEN SPACE LANDS.  The area or areas of a lot, parcel, or tract
intended to provide light and air, and is designed and set aside for either
scenic, aesthetic, conservation, or recreational purposes, excluding
buildings, parking, man-made retention areas,  driveways and other vehicular
surfaces.



   OWNER.  The person or legal entity who has the right to possess and
use real property to the exclusion of others.



   PARENT PARCEL.  A large parcel of land from which smaller parcels have
been subdivided.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public walk dedicated entirely through a block from
street to street or parallel to a street and/or providing access to a school,
park, recreation area or shopping center.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, company, firm,
association or any other form of multiple organizations which may carry on
business, foreign or domestic, or its successors or assignees, or the agent
of any of the aforesaid.



   PLAT.  A map of a subdivision.



   PLAT, FINAL.  A final map, including supporting data and attachments
of all or part of a subdivision essentially conforming to an approved
preliminary plat and prepared in accordance with this Chapter and any other
applicable statutes.



   PLAT, PRELIMINARY.  A preliminary map, including supporting data and
attachments, indicating a proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with
this chapter and any other applicable statutes.



   PLAT, RECORDED.  A final plat, including supporting data and
attachments, and containing all of the certificates of approval required by
this chapter and the state of Arizona and recorded in the county recorder’s
office of the county within which the subdivision is located.



   PRINTS.  To include but not limited to making reproductions of the
original document by blueline or blackline (ozalid) prints.



   PRIVATE ACCESS WAY.  Any private street or private way of access to 
one or more lots which is owned and maintained by an individual or group of
individuals and has been improved in accordance with city standards and plans
approved by the  development services project engineer.     



   PROTECTIVE COVENANT.  A restriction on specified uses of private
property within a subdivision for the purpose of providing mutual protection
against undesirable aspects of development, usually in the form of  an
express agreement between the lot purchasers and the lot sellers (usually
subdivider).



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (ENGINEERING STANDARDS).  A
set of regulations setting forth the details, specifications and instructions
to be followed in the planning, design and construction of certain public
improvements in the city.



   RECLAMATION.  A process of restoring land to its former or other
productive use which achieves a stable ecological state, and which does not
contribute substantially to environmental deterioration or the degradation of
surrounding aesthetic values.



   RETENTION BASIN/AREA.  A pond, pool, basin, or area used for the
permanent storage of water runoff.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The entire strip of land lying between the property
lines of a street, thoroughfare, or alley dedicated to the public and over
which exists a legal right of passage by other persons.



   SALE or LEASE.  Every disposition, transfer or offer, or attempt to
dispose of or transfer land in a subdivision or an interest therein by a
subdivider or his or her agent, including the offering of such property as a
gift or prize if a monetary charge or consideration for whatever purpose is
required by the subdivider or his or her agent.



   SEPTIC SYSTEM.  A sewage system usually consisting of a septic tank,
distribution box, and septic field or dry-well with service connecting pipes.



   SPITE STRIP.  Strip of land which a grantor reserves in title for
himself/herself when transferring a larger interest in land with the intent
of compromising the transaction or any development.



   STREET.  A way designated or intended for general public use, accepted
by the council, as a public right-of-way open to vehicular and pedestrian
travel or a street shown on a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or
approved by official action; or a street on a plat duly recorded in the
county recorder’s office. It shall not include a controlled access highway,
thoroughfare, alley, private street or private driveway, but shall include
“avenue,” “boulevard,” “circle,” “court,” “drive,”
“lane,” “place,” “road,” “row,” “walk” and other similar
designations.  Also included is the land between the right-of-way lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, viaducts, bridges, utilities, lawns and parking areas.
Street types shall include the following:



      (1)   ARTERIAL.  Provides for through traffic movement
between areas of the city and which is used or is intended to be used as part
of the principal network for through traffic within the city.



      (2)   COLLECTOR.  That which is used or is intended to
provide for the movement of traffic between major arterials and local streets
within the city and may have direct access to abutting property.



      (3)   CUL-DE-SAC.  A local street having only one outlet for
vehicular traffic with a turn-around at the opposite end.



      (4)   FRONTAGE.  A local street which is parallel to and
adjacent to an arterial, limited access highway or thoroughfare, and which
provides access to abutting land while relieving them of the effects of
through traffic on the adjacent parallel facility. (Also referred to as
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET.)



      (5)   LOCAL.  Used primarily for providing direct access to
abutting land and for local traffic movement connecting to collector and/or
arterial streets.



   STREET, CENTERLINE OF.  A line established as a centerline of a street
by any state, county, municipality or other official agency or governing body
having jurisdiction thereof and shown as such on an officially adopted or
legally recorded map. Where street lines are indeterminate or where no
official centerline of a street exists, the CENTERLINE shall be established
by the director of public works or his or her designee.



   STREET CLASSIFICATION PLAN.  A plan which provides for the development
of a system of major streets and highways, including the location, width and
alignment of existing and proposed thoroughfares.



   STREET LINE.  A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and
separating the street from abutting property or lots. If on the Street
Classification Plan duly adopted by the council a street is scheduled for
future widening, the proposed right-of-way line shown on the plan shall be
the STREET LINE.



   STREET WIDTH.  The distance between street lines, measured at a right
angle to the centerline of the street.



   SUBDIVIDER.  A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndication, trust or other legal entity that files the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and any other applicable ordinance or statute,
except that an individual serving as agent for such legal entity is not a
SUBDIVIDER.



   SUBDIVIDER AGREEMENT.  A written document submitted to and approved by
the city setting forth certain agreements as to the development of the
subdivision.



   SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVIDED LANDS.



      (1)   Improved or unimproved land or lands divided or proposed
to be divided for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate
or future, into 4 or more lots, tracts or parcels of land or, if a new street
is involved, any such property as is divided into  2 or more lots, tracts or
parcels of land or any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed
by a recorded plat which is divided into more than  2 parts. SUBDIVISION
also includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or
similar project containing  4 or more parcels in which an undivided interest
in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit
located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the buildings or
the manner in which the buildings or airspace above the property shown on the
plat are to be divided.



      (2)    SUBDIVISION does not include the following:



         (a)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or
between adjoining property owners if the sale or exchange does not create
additional lots;



         (b)   The partitioning of land in accordance with other
statutes regulating the  partitioning of land held in common ownership; or



         (c)   The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or
similar space within a building or trailer park, nor mineral, oil or gas
leases.



   SURVEYOR.  A registered land surveyor authorized to practice in the
State of Arizona under A.R.S. Title 32.



   TRACT.  A defined area of land regardless of size.



   UNIMPROVED LOT OR PARCEL.  A lot or parcel of a subdivision which has
no development.



   UTILITIES.  Installations or facilities, underground or overhead,
furnishing for the use of the public (e.g., communication, drainage,
electricity, gas, water, sewer, stormwater disposal, solid waste disposal and
steam) which are owned and operated by any person, firm, corporation,
municipal department or board duly authorized by state or municipal
regulations. UTILITY or UTILITIES may also refer to such persons, firms,
corporations, departments or boards as sense requires.



   WALKWAY, COMMON.  Any parcel of land privately owned, contained within
a building site area, and appropriated to the passage of tenants, employees
or owners, but not a private walkway.



   WALKWAY, PRIVATE.  Any parcel of land or extension of a dwelling unit
appropriated to the passage of the resident of that dwelling unit to a common
walkway, public walkway, driveway or street.



   WALKWAY, PUBLIC.  Any parcel of land appropriated and dedicated by
action of the council to the free passage of the general public.



   WATER SUPPLY.  Such system and distribution facilities as are
necessary to provide a reliable and adequate amount for private use and
public fire protection services.



   ZONING.  The public regulation of the character and intensity of the
use of real estate.



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



APPENDIX:  PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT CONDITIONS



   The preliminary and final plat shall conform to the city’s zoning
ordinance requirements, specific zoning stipulations, and subdivision
regulations. The following information shall be provided on the preliminary
and final plat:



      Legend



      X   =   Required



      –    =   Not Required



      S   =   Requirement Satisfied



 



Required Submittal
 
Pre- Plat
 
City Review
 
Final Plat
 
City Review


Submittal Requirements


(1) The maximum allowable drawing size is 24" x 36". 
 
X
 
 
X
 


(2) Scale no smaller than 1 inch = 100 feet. The scale shall be noted on each
sheet.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(3) The minimum height of all text and lettering shall be 0.125 inch (1/8
inch), provided in full density black ink.
 
X
 
 
X
 


Cover sheet information


(4) The subdivision’s name.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(5) The subdivisions location as defined by its section, township, range, and
county shall be shown on the final plat. This information shall be included
in the heading portion of the cover sheet. If the subdivision is located in
part or total over a previously recorded plat, make appropriate record
reference in the heading statement.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(6) Vicinity map with city limit lines shown, if adjacent to the proposed
subdivision.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(7) Sheet Index is required when the preliminary/final plat contains more
than 2 sheets.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(8) Developer’s name, address and phone number.
 
X
 
 
–
 


(9) The design professional’s name, address and phone number.
 
X
 
 
–
 


(10) All elevations shown on the preliminary plat shall be referenced to an
approved city benchmark per NAVD 88. The benchmark number, description and
elevation shall be shown.
 
X
 
 
–
 


(11) Site data to include: gross area, net area, open space percentage,
number of lots, existing and proposed zoning, density percentage, lot area
table in square feet and acres, curve and line data table, tract use and area
table in square feet and acres showing all tracts that will be dedicated to
the city.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(12) Property legal description for the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision.
 
X
 
 
-
 


(13) Add the following notes:

a) All tracts not dedicated to the City of Apache Junction shall be improved
in accordance with the approved plans and deeded to the Homeowners’
Association upon recordation of the final plat. Tracts shall not be conveyed
to any private or public entity without prior City Council approval.

b)  The maintenance of landscaping and drainage areas either within the
public right-of-way and/or up to a perimeter wall or fence or private yard
shall be the responsibility of the homeowners’ association or the abutting
lot, tract or parcel owner.

c)  Construction within utility easements shall be limited to utilities,
fences and driveways.

d) No structures, earthwork or other construction shall be carried out in
drainage paths or retention basins as shown on the approved improvement plans
and, except as may be approved by the Development Services Project Engineer.
Fencing shall be limited to wire-strand or break-away sections that cannot
impede water flow or collect debris which would impede water flow. Vegetation
shall not be planted nor allowed to grow within drainage paths, easements or
retention basins which would impede the flow of water.       

e) Maintenance of the drainage areas within the tracts and easements shall be
the responsibility of the ____________________ Homeowners’ Association.
Should the Association not adequately maintain them, the governing entity
having jurisdiction over the area in which the tract or the easement is
located, at its discretion, may enter upon and maintain the drainage areas,
and assess the Homeowners’ Association, its successors and/or benefiting
properties the cost of maintenance.

f) The overhead utility lines on or adjacent to the site shall be
undergrounded as outlined in § 1-8-6(K), Relocation of Overhead Wires and
Equipment, Zoning Ordinance, Vol. II, Apache Junction City Code. All existing
and proposed onsite overhead utility lines shall be placed underground.
 
X
 
 
X
 


g) The city or any governing entity having jurisdiction over the final plat
shall have the right to enforce all notes shown and associated with the final
plat on the Homeowners’ Association or all future owners, assigns and
successors in interest and/or benefiting properties.

h) Should the Homeowners’ Association not pay property taxes on any tract
they own within the subdivision at any time in the future and lose the
property through tax foreclosure or forfeiture or dissolve, the city or the
governing entity having jurisdiction over the area in which the tract or the
easement is located, shall assess, lien, and/or collect from any successor in
interest and/or benefiting properties the cost of maintenance of all
improvements, drainage facilities, landscaping and amenities. 
 
 
 
 


(14) The basis of bearings shall be shown with a reference to appropriate
horizontal control as outlined in § 10-1-4(B)(2) Horizontal and Vertical
Control, Engineering Standards, Vol. II, Apache Junction City Code.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(15) A key map shall show all tracts, parcels and lots by number or letter.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(16) The name, address and registration number of the registered land
surveyor preparing the final plat shall be shown on the plat with the state
of Arizona seal, signature, and date provided.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(17) Street right-of-way dedication to the city and a note referencing
drainage, utility, roadway easements stating: “Easements are dedicated for
the purposes shown” shall be mentioned in the dedication statement.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(18)  Add the following certifications:
 
 
 
 


   a)   This is to certify that this final plat is a correct
representation of all the exterior boundaries of land surveyed and the
subdivision of it; that I have prepared the description of the land shown on
the final plat and I hereby certify to its correctness, and that all lots are
staked or will be staked and all monuments are set or will be set within 1
year after recordation.

___________________________

Seal and signature of the Arizona registered land surveyor 
 
 
 
 


   b)   This final plat has been checked for conformance with the
requirements of the Land Development Code and any other applicable ordinance
and regulations and that assurances have been provided for improvements in
the amount of $_____________________.

_____________________________________

Development Services Project Engineer    Date
 
–
 
 
X
 


   c)   Approved by the Council of the City of Apache Junction, Arizona
this ______ day of ______________, 20__. And the City Council accepts the
rights-of-way dedicated herein on behalf of the Public. The subdivider has
provided a Certificate of Assured Water Supply as required by Arizona Revised
Statues (ARS) § 45-576 or evidence that the area has been designated by the
Arizona Department of Water Resources as having an assured water supply.

BY: ______________________________

         Mayor

Attest: ____________________________

         City Clerk
 
 
 
 


(19) The following statement shall appear in the dedication statement:

   Tracts _______, ________ and _________, (include all applicable tracts)
are not to be construed to be dedicated to the public or city, but are deeded
to _______________ Homeowners’ Association for its use and enjoyment as
more fully set forth in the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and
Restrictions and said Association shall be responsible for the maintenance
thereof in perpetuity, and shall not be redeveloped for any other non-amenity
or non-drainage purpose.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(20) The dedication statement shall be signed by the land owner. If the owner
is a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company, the Article of
Incorporation or a certified copy of a resolution by the Board of Directors
authorizing the individuals signing the final plat to act on its behalf is
required.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(21) All holders of deeds of trust shall sign a lienholder ratification
statement as a beneficiary, if lands being subdivided are encumbered. The
following lienholder ratification statement shall be shown:

   Lienholder Ratification

   Know All Men By These Presents:

   That The Undersigned as Beneficiary of That Certain Deed Of Trust
Recorded In Fee No. ______________________, Records Of Pinal County, Arizona,
Hereby Ratifies, Affirms And Approves This Final Plat, The Declaration Of
Restrictions Recorded Concurrently Herewith And Each And Every Dedication
Contained Herein.

   IN Witness Whereof, The Undersigned Have Signed Their Names This ______
Day Of ____________, 20__.

   [Beneficiary Name as Shown in the Title Report]

    By:________________________

    Its _________________________
 
–
 
 
X
 


(22)  The following notary public acknowledgment statement is required for
the dedication statement and the lienholder ratification statement:

   Acknowledgment

    State of      )

            ) SS

   County of       )

   On this _____________day of ___________, 20__, before me, the
undersigned, personally appeared ____________________, who acknowledged
himself/herself to be the person whose name is subscribed to the instrument
within, and who executed the foregoing instrument for the purposes therein
contained.

   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and official seal.

   __________________________

   NOTARY PUBLIC

   My Commission Expires:

   __________________________
 
–
 
 
X
 


Plat layout sheet information


(23) North arrows shall be shown on each sheet.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(24) A “Legend” for all symbols utilized on the plat shall be shown on
each sheet.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(25) The existing topography shall be represented by a 2' maximum contours or
better data, if available.
 
X
 
 
-
 


(26) All existing buildings and significant structures shall be shown. Any
modifications shall be noted.
 
X
 
 
–
 


(27) All wells, washes, canals, irrigation laterals and ditches, lakes and
other water features. Any modifications shall be noted, along with an
indication of any building or structure which shall remain.
 
X
 
 
–
 


(28) The subdivision boundary shall extend to the monument lines of adjacent
streets, if the rights-of-way are not dedicated.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(29) Existing fire hydrants within 500 feet and streetlights within 200 feet
of the site shall be shown.
 
X
 
 
–
 


(30) Proposed water, sewer, streetlight improvements, sidewalks, paths,
entrance features/monument sign, and public and private community facilities
such as parks, schools, fire stations, library, police station, community
buildings, etc. shall be shown.
 
X
 
 
–
 


(31) City corporate limit to be outlined when they are adjacent to or near
the subdivision.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(32) The names of all subdivisions adjacent to the subject property shall be
shown, along with the recording information and zoning classification.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(33) The property owners’ names of all adjacent parcels (non-subdivision)
to the proposed subdivision shall be shown along with the parcel number and
zoning classification.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(34) Proposed phasing shall be shown.
 

X
 
 

X
 


(35)  Typical detail of lot dimension and setbacks.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(36) Curvilinear back lot lines are discouraged. Every effort shall be made
to avoid them.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(37)  All lots shall be numbered consecutively beginning with Lot No. 1, and
tracts and parcels be lettered consecutively beginning with Tract or Parcel
“A”. Exception parcels shall be labeled with the boundary traverse data
and area to be noted.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(38) Private streets shall be designated as tracts with 24-foot minimum width
of pavement; 2-foot (2') curb and gutter, and 4-foot (4') sidewalk on both
sides of the street and shade trees. Structural Pavement section for private
streets shall conform to public street standards, as outlined in Appendix
10-D, Standard Details AJ-20.1 through AJ-20.2, Engineering Standards, Vol.
II, Apache Junction City Code.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(39) Rights-of-way to be dedicated to the city shall be shown.  All
rights-of-way which expand on existing dedicated rights-of-way shall be
defined and dimensioned.
 
X
 
 
X
 


Survey Requirements


(40) Two (2) separate survey ties to 2 section corners or quarter-section
corners are required. The type of monumentation shall be defined. Survey ties
shall meet the criteria shown in § 10-1-4(B)(2) Horizontal and Vertical
Control, Engineering Standards, Vol. II, Apache Junction City Code.
Subdivision’s boundary and survey shall be tied into the City GDACS grid.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(41) Survey data is required for the entire subdivision boundary traverse and
streets centerlines. For tangents this consists of bearings and distances.
For curves this consists of radii, delta angles and curve lengths. On
non-tangent curves, show radial bearings.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(42) Show names of existing and proposed public and private streets.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(43) Boundary closure calculations are required with error of closure for the
subdivision’s exterior boundaries, tracts, parcels, and lots.
 
–
 
 
X
 


Street design requirements


(44) Show plan’s layouts for public and private streets, and easements.
 
X
 
 
-
 


(45) The sizes, depth, and types of all existing utility infrastructure
within and adjacent to the subdivision shall be shown. Dimensional ties to
street centerlines are required for all utility lines.
 
X
 
 
–
 


(46) 20' x 20' triangular corner cutoffs shall be dedicated to the city at
all streets lines and alleys intersections to accommodate a sidewalk ramp and
provide a space for traffic signal equipment such as poles and/or cabinets,
if needed. It also creates an area for a site visibility triangle by
preventing land owners from building walls blocking view of traffic.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(47) 33' x 33' feet sight triangle measured at the intersection of lot lines
is to be provided where streets, alleys, or driveways intersect. Also, the
sight distances shall be calculated to assure that no structure or planting
higher than 36 inches is allowed in the area. 
 
X
 
 
X
 


(48) Show typical cross sections for proposed improvements of exterior and
interior streets.
 
X
 
 
-
 


(49) Proper turnarounds are required at all dead-end streets and alleys.
Cul-de-sac and turnaround geometrics for public and private streets shall
meet the city and the fire district requirements. Connections to abutting
subdivisions to create connectivity and walkability shall be provided. 
 
X
 
 
X
 


(50) Public streets rights-of-way widths and cross-sections shall comply with
city standards unless exceptions are required or approved by the City
Engineer or the City Council.
 
X
 
 
X
 


(51) Provide Traffic Impact Analysis as outlined in ADOT publication 35-209,
and a traffic circulation study. 
 
X
 
 
X
 


(52) The street light district shall be established prior to final plat
recordation.
 
–
 
 
X
 


Easements and Rights-Of-Way Requirements


(53) Show existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements widths. 
Proposed extinguishment and abandonment of rights-of-way and easements shall
be noted. 
 
X
 
 
X
 


(54) 1' vehicular non-access easement is required for streets and lots
abutting retention basins and lots abutting perimeter streets rights-of-way.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(55) Easements to be extinguished shall include the following:

   a)   A letter from the utility companies agreeing to the abandonment.

   b)   A legal description and Pinal County recording information and
limits of the abandonment.

   c)   The following statement located above the Mayor’s approval
block  is required on the final plat:

      “By acceptance of this final plat, the City of Apache Junction
agrees to the extinguishment of the easements described and shown hereon”.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(56) Existing right-of-way to be abandoned/extinguished shall include the
following:

   a)   The City Engineer shall approve the abandonment/ extinguishment.

   b)   The City Attorney shall approve as to form of the
abandonment/extinguishment resolution.

   c)   A filing fee and appraisal fee shall be paid.

   d)   The abandonment shall be in accordance with the requirements
and procedures of the Public Works Department.
 
–
 
 
X
 




 



 

Drainage Design and Requirements


(57) Flow drainage arrows shall be shown for all drainage areas, storm
drains, and streets.
 
X
 
 
-
 


(58) All portions of the development within the FEMA 100-year flood zones
shall be identified. FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) on or adjacent to
the subject subdivision shall be drawn and labeled, including any determined
floodway boundaries. Provide flood zone information per the following table:
 

X
 
 

X
 


Comm- unity Number
 
Panel Number
 
Suffix
 
Date  of FIRM
 
Flood Zone
 
Base Flood Elevation




(59) Submit a preliminary drainage report in accordance with Article 10-4
Stormwater Management, Engineering Standards, Vol. II, Apache Junction City
Code. Adequate details are required to demonstrate the layout feasibility.
 
X
 
 
–
 


(60) The storm drainage system shall comply with the standards presented in
Article 10-4 Stormwater Management, Engineering Standards, Vol. II, Apache
Junction City Code. All retention areas and drainage channels along with
their cross sections shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
 
X
 
 
–
 



 



 

Required Submittal
 
Pre- Plat
 
City Review
 
Final Plat
 
City Review




Drainage Design and Requirements


(61) Each sheet of the preliminary and final plat shall be sealed and signed
by the design registered professional in the State of Arizona.
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 


(62) Submit a current Title Report, no older than 6 months at preliminary
plat submittal. An updated report no older than 30 days is required to be
submitted prior to final plat recordation. Include Schedules “A” and
“B” together with an ALTA survey.
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 


(63) A detailed infrastructure analysis is required and shall include
traffic, water and wastewater.
 
X
 
 
 
–
 
 


(64) Name changes to the development will only be allowed:

   a)   After verifying any name conflicts through the Arizona
Department of Real Estate and providing the city with a copy; and

   b)   Prior to the preliminary plat approval by the City Council.
 
X
 
 
 
–
 
 


(65) Areas within the subdivision that may represent soil or topographical
hazardous conditions or requiring special precautions shall be identified to
insure that the proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such
conditions, such as natural features, rock outcrop, fissure, riparian
corridors, etc.
 
X
 
 
-
 
 


(66) The final plat shall provide private cross access easements for
pedestrian, vehicular, drainage access.
 
-
 
 
X
 


(67) Phasing of the final plat and the improvement plans shall be allowed
only for large tracts greater than 40 acres, and if approved by the
Development Services Project Engineer.
 
-
 
 
X
 


(68) Engineer’s Cost Estimate shall be provided for the construction of all
public improvements to determine the amount of construction assurance
required.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(69)  The construction assurance shall be submitted and approved by the
Public Works Department, prior to the approval of the improvement plans and
the recordation of the final plat.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(70)  Submit copies of the approvals to construct water and sewer issued by
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (“ADEQ”), as required per
Item 13(g), § 10-2-17 Civil Engineering Plan Review Checklist, Engineering
Standards, Vol. II, Apache Junction City Code.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(71) Submit a copy of the Assured Water Certificate for the 100 year water
supply, issued by Arizona Department of Water Resources (“ADWR”) for
sites located within the Arizona Water Company, or a Designation of Assured
Water Supply letter for sites located within the Water Utilities Community
Facilities District (“WUCFD”). 
 
–
 
 
X
 


(72) All official seals and stamps affixed to the final plats shall be in
black ink or as required by the Pinal County Recorder’s Office.
 
–
 
 
X
 


(73) A 4 mil Mylar of the final plat shall be submitted to the Development
Services Project Engineer for final approval and recordation, along with an
electronic copy in DWG and PDF formats.
 
-
 
 
X
 




 



(Ord. 1452, passed  - -2017)



CHAPTER 3:  STREET IMPROVEMENTS [RESERVED]



Editor's note:



   Information on special provisions for construction of street
improvements is provided in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Chapter 10.



CHAPTER 4:  UNDERGROUND UTILITIES [RESERVED]



Editor's note:



   Information on special provisions for installation of underground
utilities is provided in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Chapter 10.



CHAPTER 5:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND STORMWATER REGULATIONS



      Article




         5-1.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT





         5-2.   STORMWATER REGULATIONS




ARTICLE 5-1:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section



General Provisions



   5-1-1   Statutory authorization



   5-1-2   Findings of fact



   5-1-3   Statement of purpose



   5-1-4   Methods of reducing flood losses



Definitions



   5-1-5   Definitions



Administration



   5-1-6   Lands to which this Article applies



   5-1-7   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   5-1-8   Compliance



   5-1-9   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   5-1-10   Interpretation



   5-1-11   Disclaimer of liability



   5-1-12   Statutory exceptions



   5-1-13   Unlawful acts



   5-1-14   Violations



   5-1-15   Declaration of public nuisance



   5-1-16   Abatement of violations



   5-1-17   Severability



Floodplain Administrator; Permits



   5-1-18   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator



   5-1-19   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



   5-1-20   Establishment of development permit



Standards



   5-1-21   Standards of construction



   5-1-22   Standards for storage of materials and equipment



   5-1-23   Standards for utilities



   5-1-24   Additional development standards, including subdivisions



   5-1-25   Standards for manufactured homes



   5-1-26   Standards for recreational vehicles 



   5-1-27   Floodways



Variances



   5-1-28   Nature of variances



   5-1-29   Appeal Board



   5-1-30   Conditions for variances



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 5-1-1  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-3610, the Arizona State Legislature has
enabled the city to adopt regulations in conformance with A.R.S. §§ 48-3601
et seq., designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of
its citizenry.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 1.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-2  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights
and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas.
Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from
flood damage, also contribute to the flood loss.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 1.02)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-3  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this Article to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize blight
areas caused by flooding;



   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
an area of special flood hazard;



   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions; and



   (I)   Maintain eligibility for disaster relief.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 1.03)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-4  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this Article includes methods and
provisions to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve those uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 1.04)  (Ord. passed - -)



DEFINITIONS



§ 5-1-5  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
Article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this Article its most reasonable application.



   A ZONE. See Special Flood Hazard Area.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, LOW-COST AND SMALL. A structure that is:



      (1)   Solely for the parking of no more than 2 cars; or
limited storage (small, low-cost sheds); and



      (2)   No more than 400 square feet in size, costing no more
than $20,000 to build.



   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.



   ALLUVIAL FAN. A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or
fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been
eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows and then deposited on
the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity
flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel
migration.



   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this Article or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
These areas are designated as Zone A, AE, AO, AH, and A1-30 on the FIRM and
other areas determined by the criteria adopted by the Director of the Arizona
Department of Water Resources (ADWR). See Special Flood Hazard Area.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD. The land within a
community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion
losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the FIRM.



   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year (also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD).



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the FIRM for Zones
AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.



   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade – i.e.,
below ground level – on all sides.



   BUILDING. See Structure.



   CITY. The City of Apache Junction.



   COMMUNITY. Any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any
Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or authorized native
organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management
regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.



   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain,
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of landmasses.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) have been in
existence or have been completed no later than April 30, 1987.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of floodwaters;



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source; and/or



      (3)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels, or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in FLOODING as defined in this definition.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which FEMA or FIA
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by FEMA that
includes flood profiles, FIRMs, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. See Flood or Flooding.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The City Engineer of the city.



   FLOODPLAIN BOARD. The City Council at such times as engaged in the
enforcement of this Article.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This Article and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other
application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas.
This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.



   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.



   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA or FLOOD-RELATED EROSION PRONE AREA. A land
area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the
composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven
currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.



   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related
erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODWAY. The area of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. Also referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the
regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.



   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related to this Article, any granted
variance must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining
this requirement, the city will consider the fact that every newly
constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part
of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be
constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years
to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property
and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience,
danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition,
future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to
potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance
rates.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   GOVERNING BODY. The Mayor and City Council of the City of Apache
Junction.



   HARDSHIP. As referenced in this Article, the exceptional hardship that
would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The variance
shall be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere
economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience,
aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the
disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an
exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other
means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive,
or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a
different use than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or
levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
the basement. See Basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's LOWEST FLOOR,
provided that the enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Article.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in 1 or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a "recreational vehicle."



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MARKET VALUE. Shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the
structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of
depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed.



      (1)   (a)   The cost of replacement of the structure shall
be based on a square-foot cost factor determined by reference to a building
cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry.



         (b)   The amount of depreciation shall be determined by
taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and
functional obsolescence as approved by the Floodplain Administrator, but
shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence.



      (2)   Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors
different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides
may be considered only if those factors are included in a report prepared by
an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation
of the differences.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to those structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the city.



   OBSTRUCTION. Including but not limited to any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along,
across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its
location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.  See Base Flood.



   PERSON. An individual or the individual's agent, a firm, partnership,
association or corporation, or an agent of the aforementioned groups, or this
state or its agencies or political subdivisions.



   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community's floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective
implementation of those floodplain management regulations.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. As related to this Article, the granting of
a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health
of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use in the customary
manner of any navigable lake or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light-duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION (RFE). An elevation 1 foot above the base
flood elevation for a watercourse for which the base flood elevation has been
determined and shall be determined by the criteria developed by the Director
of ADWR for all other watercourses.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.



   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other
development.



   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook or wash.



   SHEET FLOW AREA. See Area of Shallow Flooding.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFRA). An area in the floodplain subject to
a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on a Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days
from the date of the permit. The ACTUAL START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50%of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred; or flood-related damages sustained by a structure on 2
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This is also known
as REPETITIVE LOSS.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this Article which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
Article.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications
or other evidence of compliance required in this Article is presumed to be in
VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the NGVD of 1929,
NAVD of 1988 or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies
in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 2.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 5-1-6  LANDS TO WHICH THIS ARTICLE APPLIES.



   This Article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within
the corporate limits of the city.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-7  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific
and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the city
dated March 30, 1982," with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs) revised March 19, 1990, and all
subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this Article. This FIS and attendant mapping is the
minimum area of applicability of this Article and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas which allow implementation of this Article and which
are recommended to the Floodplain Board by the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Board shall delineate (or may, by rule, require developers of land
to delineate) for areas where development is ongoing or imminent, and
thereafter as development becomes imminent, floodplains consistent with the
criteria developed by FEMA and the Director of ADWR. The FIS and FIRM panels
are on file at the Department of Public Works at 575 E. Baseline Avenue,
Apache Junction, Arizona, or any other location deemed by the City Manager as
an appropriate filing location in the event the public works yard is moved.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.02)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-8  COMPLIANCE.



   All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or
industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain
areas is subject to the terms of this Article and other applicable
regulations.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.03)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-9  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Article and
any ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.04)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-10  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this Article, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.05)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-11  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Article does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Article
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, the state or FEMA, for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.06)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-12  STATUTORY EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(H), unless expressly
provided, this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this Article do not
affect:



      (1)   Existing legal uses of property or the right to
continuation of that legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land or a
building or structure is discontinued for 12 months, or destroyed to the
extent of 50% of its value as determined by a competent appraiser, any
further use shall comply with this Article and regulations of the city;



      (2)   Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the
purposes for which the property was legally used on August 3, 1984, or any
regulations affecting the property takes effect, except that any alteration,
addition or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would
result in increasing its flood damage potential by 50% or more shall be
either floodproofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation;



      (3)   Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the
written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613; and



      (4)   Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a
certificate of environmental compatibility issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title
40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2.



   (B)   Before any authorized construction begins for the exceptions
listed below, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction
to the Floodplain Board for review and comment. In accordance with A.R.S. §
48-3613, written authorization shall not be required, nor shall the
Floodplain Board prohibit:



      (1)   The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other
structures necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and
streets intersecting or crossing a watercourse;



      (2)   The construction of storage dams for watering livestock
or wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or
damage to adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct
the natural channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of
floodwaters as permitted by A.R.S. Title 45, Chapter 6;



      (3)   Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas
for use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This division
does not exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert, retard or
obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and
acquiring authorization from the Floodplain Board pursuant to regulations
adopted by the Floodplain Board under this Article;



      (4)   Other construction upon determination by the Floodplain
Board that written authorization is unnecessary;



      (5)   Any flood control district, county, city, town or other
political subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. Title
48, Chapter 21, Article 1;



      (6)   The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other
auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and
recreation facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and



      (7)   The construction and erection of poles, towers,
foundations, support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to
power transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service
corporation or a political subdivision.



   (C)   In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided
by law, this state, a political subdivision or a person who may be damaged or
has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation or
obstruction of a watercourse has the right to commence, maintain and
prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate or
otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate this
section or regulations adopted pursuant to this Article. If a person is found
to be in violation of this section, the court shall require the violator
either to comply with this section if authorized by the Floodplain Board or
remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original state. The
court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to the injured
parties resulting from the violation including reasonable costs and attorney
fees.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.07)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-13  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to divert,
retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates a hazard
to life or property without securing the written authorization required by
A.R.S. § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is
unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of waters without
securing written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.08)  (Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see
Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, § 1-1-11



§ 5-1-14  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The city may issue a warning to any person who violates any
provision of this Article. The person receiving a warning shall take
affirmative steps to address the violation. The city shall allow a person who
has been issued a warning a maximum of 14 calendar days to correct the
violation. If the violation has been corrected to the city's satisfaction
within 14 days, the city shall not proceed with continued enforcement of this
Article.



   (B)   If, after 14 calendar days, a person who has received a
warning for any violation of this Article has not corrected the violation,
the city may issue a civil action in Municipal Court. A civil violation of
this section is subject to a fine of not more than $2,500.



   (C)   If, after being assessed a civil penalty for a violation of
this section and the violation has not been corrected to the city's
satisfaction within 14 calendar days, a person violating this Article shall
be subject to a criminal action and shall be guilty of a Class One
Misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty and multiple charging
provisions set forth in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.09)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-15  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   All development located or maintained within any area of special flood
hazard after August 8, 1973, in violation of this Article, is a public
nuisance per se and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of the
city.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.10)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-16  ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Within 30 days of discovery of a violation of this Article,
the Floodplain Administrator shall submit a report to the Floodplain Board
which shall include all information available to the Floodplain Administrator
which is pertinent to that violation.



   (B)   Within 30 days of receipt of this report, the Floodplain Board
shall do 1 of the following:



      (1)   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of
such violation;



      (2)   Issue a variance to this Article in accordance with the
provisions of this Article;



      (3)   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation
exists to provide whatever additional information may be required for their
determination. Such information must be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator within 30 days of the order, and the Floodplain Administrator
shall submit an amended report to the Floodplain Board within 20 days. At the
next regularly scheduled public meeting, the Floodplain Board shall either
order the abatement of the violation or it shall grant a variance in
accordance with the provisions of this Article; or



      (4)   Submit to FEMA a declaration for denial of insurance,
stating that the property is in violation of a cited state or local law,
regulation or ordinance, pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.11)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-17  SEVERABILITY.



   This Article and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any section of this Article be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, that decision shall not affect the validity of
the Article as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.12)  (Ord. passed - -)



FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; PERMITS



§ 5-1-18  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement and
enforce this Article by granting or denying development permits in accordance
with its provisions.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 4.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-19  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but not be limited
to:



   (A)   Permit review.  Review all development permits to determine
that:



      (1)   The permit requirements of this Article have been
satisfied;



      (2)   All other required state and federal permits have been
obtained;



      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and



      (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the
carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined
but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this Article,
ADVERSELY AFFECT means that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than 1 foot at any point.



   (B)   Substantial improvement and substantial damage  procedures.



      (1)   Develop detailed procedures for identifying and
administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial
damage, to include defining market value; and



      (2)   Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments
and divisions and implemented by community staff.



   (C)   Use of other base flood data.  When base flood elevation data
has not been provided in accordance with this Article, the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer the provisions under this Article. Any such information shall be
consistent with the requirements of FEMA and the Director of ADWR and shall
be submitted to the Floodplain Board for adoption.



   (D)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection:



      (1)   The certified regulatory flood elevation required in
this Article;



      (2)   The floodproofing certification required in this Article;



      (3)   The flood vent certification required in this Article;



      (4)   The elevation certification required for additional
development standards, including subdivisions, in this Article;



      (5)   The floodway encroachment certification required in this
Article;



      (6)   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
biennial report submitted to FEMA.



      (7)   Obtain and maintain improvement calculations.



   (E)   Notification of other entities.



      (1)   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:



         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and ADWR prior to the
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of the
notification to FEMA through appropriate notification means; and



         (b)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity of the
altered or relocated portion of the watercourse be maintained.



      (2)   Base flood elevation and rate of flow due to physical
alterations:



         (a)   Base flood elevations may increase or decrease
resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as
practicable, but not later than 6 months after the date the information
becomes available, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA of the
changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with 44
C.F.R. § 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of
those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.



         (b)   Within 120 days after completion of construction
of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during
the flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from
or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation
of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions
affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the
project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted
by the Director of ADWR.



      (3)   Corporate boundary changes: Notify FEMA and ADWR of
acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of additional
areas of jurisdiction.



   (F)   Map determinations.  Make interpretations, where needed, as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in this Article.



   (G)   Remedial actions. Take actions on violations of this Article
as required in this Article.



   (H)   Biennial report.  Complete and submit a biennial report to
FEMA.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 4.02)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-20  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any
area of special flood hazard established in this Article. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain
Administrator and may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn
to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area
in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.



   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:



      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. In Zone AO, elevation of
existing highest adjacent natural grade and proposed elevation of lowest
floor of all structures;



      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to
which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;



      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure
meet the floodproofing criteria in this Article;



      (4)   Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or
other development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres; and



      (5)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 4.03)  (Ord. passed - -)



STANDARDS



§ 5-1-21  STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are
required:



   (A)   Anchoring.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy; and



      (2)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring
standards of this Article.



   (B)   Construction materials and methods.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



      (3)   All new construction, substantial improvement and other
proposed new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
and



      (4)   Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be
constructed around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.



   (C)   Elevation and floodproofing.



      (1)   Residential construction. 



         (a)   Residential construction, new or substantial
improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:



            1.   In an AO Zone, elevated to or above the
regulatory flood elevation, or elevated at least 2 feet above the highest
adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.



            2.   In an A Zone where a BFE has not been
determined, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation or be
elevated in accordance with the criteria developed by the Director of ADWR.



            3.   In Zones AE, AH and A1-30, elevated to or
above the regulatory flood elevation.



         (b)   Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of
the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the city's Building
Inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



      (2)   Nonresidential construction. Nonresidential
construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to
conform with this Article or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:



         (a)   Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended
under this Article so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;



         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. This
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



      (3)   Flood openings.  All new construction and substantial
improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement
must meet or exceed the following criteria:



         (a)   Have a minimum of 2 openings, on different sides
of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or



         (b)   If it is not feasible or desirable to meet the
openings criteria stated above, a registered engineer or architect may design
and certify the openings.



      (4)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall also meet
the standards in this Article.



      (5)   Garages and low-cost accessory structures.



         (a)   Attached garages.



            1.   A garage attached to a residential structure,
constructed with the garage floor slab below the regulatory flood elevation,
must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See
division (C)(3) of this section. Areas of the garage below the regulatory
flood elevation must be constructed with flood-resistant materials. See
division (B) of this section.



            2.   A garage attached to a nonresidential
structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed.



         (b)   Detached garages and accessory structures.



            1.   Accessory structure used solely for parking
(2-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost
sheds), as defined in Vol. II, § 5-1-5, may be constructed such that its
floor is below the regulatory flood elevation, provided the structure is
designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:



               a.   Use of the accessory structure must be
limited to parking or limited storage;



               b.   The portions of the accessory structure
located below the regulatory flood elevation must be built using
flood-resistant materials;



               c.   The accessory structure must be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;



               d.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in
the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the
regulatory flood elevation;



               e.   The accessory structure must comply
with floodplain encroachment provisions in Vol. II, § 5-1-27; and



               f.   The accessory structure must be
designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with
division (C)(3) of this section.



            2.   Detached garages and accessory structures not
meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all
applicable standards in division (C)(3) above.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-22  STANDARDS FOR STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious
to human, animal or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is
prohibited in special flood hazard areas.



   (B)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or
if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood
warning.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.02)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-23  STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.



   (A)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.



   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



   (C)   Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or
partially in a regulatory floodway.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.03)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-24  ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS, INCLUDING SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development
(including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater
than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:



      (1)   Identify the area of the special flood hazard area and
the elevation of the base flood; and



      (2)   Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the
proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood
elevation, the final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by
a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.



   (B)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (D)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.04)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-25  STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.



   All manufactured homes that are placed on site or substantially
improved shall:



   (A)   Be elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame or the
lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above
the regulatory flood elevation; and



   (B)   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include but are not to be limited to use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.05)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-26  STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   All recreational vehicles placed on site shall:



   (A)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;



   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or



   (C)   Meet the permit requirements of this Article and the elevation
and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in this Article.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.06)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-27  FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
this Article are areas designated as floodways.



   (B)   Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:



      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



      (2)   If this provision is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this Article.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.07)  (Ord. passed - -)



VARIANCES



§ 5-1-28  NATURE OF VARIANCES.



   (A)   The variance criteria set forth in this section of the Article
are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a
piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted
for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that
complying with the requirements of this Article would create an exceptional
hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The
characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent
parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to
the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.



   (B)   It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from
flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation are so
serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in
the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and
reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly
limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this Article are more
detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance
can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those
situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 6.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-29  APPEAL BOARD.



   (A)   The Floodplain Board of the city shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this Article.



   (B)   The Floodplain Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made
by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
Article.



   (C)   In passing upon such applications, the Floodplain Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this Article, and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system and streets and
bridges.



   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors and the purposes of this
Article, the Floodplain Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Article.



   (E)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property; and



      (3)   The land upon which the variance is granted shall be
ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to any state sponsored flood
relocation and land exchange program. A copy of the notice shall be recorded
in the office of the Pinal County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner
so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.



   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance and report such
variances issued in its biennial report submitted to FEMA.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 6.02)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-1-30  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   (A)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size,
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood elevation, provided the procedures of this Article have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond 1/2 acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.



   (B)   Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



   (C)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a:



      (1)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;



      (2)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;



      (3)   Showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This
includes only facilities defined in Vol. II, § 5-1-5 in the definition of
Functionally Dependent Use; and



      (4)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. I, § 6.03)  (Ord. passed - -)



ARTICLE 5-2:  STORMWATER REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   5-2-1   Definitions



Discharges



   5-2-2   Illicit discharges to the stormwater system



   5-2-3   Prohibited nonstormwater discharges



Requirements; Construction Management



   5-2-4   Construction site stormwater management



   5-2-5   Requirement for approved stormwater pollution prevention
plans



   5-2-6   Requirement to install and maintain erosion prevention and
sediment control measures



   5-2-7   Requirement to control construction and sanitary waste



   5-2-8   Right of entry; construction site inspections



Post-Construction



   5-2-9   Post-construction stormwater management



   5-2-10   Requirement to implement and maintain post-construction
stormwater measures



   5-2-11   Right of entry; post-construction inspections



Violations; Enforcement



   5-2-12   Violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 5-2-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARIZONA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY or ADEQ. The Arizona state
agency established pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-102.



   ARIZONA POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or AZPDES. The program
established by the State of Arizona by provisions in A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter
2, Article 3.1 to control the discharge of pollutants to waters in Arizona.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Those activities or structural
improvements that help reduce the quantity and improve the quality of
stormwater runoff.



   CITY. The City of Apache Junction, located in Pinal and Maricopa
Counties, Arizona.



   CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the permitting
authority that allows discharges to stormwater from construction activities
as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26.



   CONSTRUCTION SITE OPERATOR. The primary operator of a construction site
within the corporate limits of the city.



   DESIGNEE. A person designated for a specific purpose by the Apache
Junction Public Works Director.



   DIRECTOR. The Apache Junction Public Works Director.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The federal agency that is
empowered by the U.S. Congress to regulate stormwater and delegate that
authority to ADEQ.



   EROSION. The wearing away of land due to the actions of water and wind.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the stormwater system that is not
entirely composed of stormwater or is not specifically authorized by this
Article.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or MS4. A publicly-owned
conveyance or system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or
conveying stormwater which is not a combined sewer and which is not part of a
publicly owned treatment works.



   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES. The surface
water quality program authorized by Congress as part of the 1987 Clean Water
Act.



   NOTICE OF INTENT or NOI. Document submitted to the permitting authority
in order to obtain coverage under the construction general permit.



   PERMITTING AUTHORITY. The NPDES-authorized state agency or EPA regional
office that administers the NPDES stormwater permit program.



   POLLUTANT. Substances defined in A.R.S. § 49-201(29).



   POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE. A site at which land-disturbing activities
related to construction have been substantially completed and at which
post-construction stormwater management measures have been implemented.



   POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE OPERATOR. The owner or entity legally
responsible for the maintenance of post-construction stormwater management
measures.



   STORMWATER. Precipitation that accumulates in natural or man-made
storage systems during and after a precipitation event.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN or SWPPP. A plan to describe a
process though which a facility thoroughly evaluates potential pollutant
sources at a site and selects and implements appropriate measures designed to
prevent or control the discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff.



   STORMWATER SYSTEM. All or part of the city-owned and maintained system
of roads, catch basins, curbs, streets, storm drains, drywells and other
features designed, used and maintained for collecting, holding or conveying
stormwater.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 1.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



DISCHARGES



§ 5-2-2  ILLICIT DISCHARGES TO THE STORMWATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Illicit discharges to the city stormwater system can cause
excessive discharges of pollutants to surface waters and groundwater. These
discharges can negatively impact public health, welfare and the environment
by potentially impacting human health by transporting and depositing
pollutants. The intent of this Article is to address these illicit discharges.



   (B)   The purposes of this Article are to establish an inspection
and enforcement program to address illicit discharges to protect public
health, welfare and the environment, and to enable the city to comply with
illicit discharge prevention provisions of NPDES and AZPDES.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 2.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-2-3  PROHIBITED NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Unless specifically authorized in this Article, no person
shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substance to the stormwater
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.



   (B)   Unless specifically authorized in this Article, no person
shall use, store, spill, dump, discharge or dispose of materials that could
reasonably be expected to cause or contribute to the addition of pollutants
in stormwater.



   (C)   This section does not prohibit the following nonstormwater
discharges from entering the city's MS4: water line flushing, landscape
irrigation, diverted stream flows, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
discharges of potable water, foundation drains, air conditioning condensate,
irrigation or lawn watering water, water from crawlspace pumps, footing
drains, residential car washing, riparian and wetlands flows, dechlorinated
swimming pool discharges, street wash water and discharges from firefighting
activities.



   (D)   A number of discharges associated with potable and reclaimed
water systems, subterranean dewatering, well development, aquifer testing,
hydrostatic testing of specific pipelines, charitable car washes, building
and street washing, and dechlorinated swimming pool water are regulated
presently in Arizona by the AZPDES de minimus general permit, and hence the
city will rely on the state regulatory agency to enforce compliance with
these requirements.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 2.02)  (Ord. passed - -)



REQUIREMENTS; CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT



§ 5-2-4  CONSTRUCTION SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Land-disturbing activities related to construction can cause
discharges of pollutants to the city stormwater system, which in turn can
cause excessive discharges of pollutants to surface waters and groundwater.
These discharges can negatively impact public health, welfare and the
environment by potentially impacting human health by transporting and
depositing pollutants. The intent of this Article is to address discharges
from construction sites to the stormwater system.



   (B)   The purposes of this Article are to establish an inspection
and enforcement program to address discharges from construction sites in
order to protect public health, welfare and the environment, and to enable
the city to comply with construction site-related stormwater provisions of
NPDES and AZPDES.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-2-5  REQUIREMENT FOR APPROVED STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.



   (A)   Any entity applying for a city permit, authorization, license
or permission for construction activity that will disturb 1 or more acres of
land shall prepare a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for the
management of stormwater discharges from the proposed construction site. A
copy of the SWPPP must be kept at the construction site at all times.



   (B)   The applicant shall submit to the city proof of Notice of
Intent (NOI) submitted to the permitting authority which seeks authorization
under the construction general permit.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.02)  (Ord. passed --)



§ 5-2-6  REQUIREMENT TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN EROSION PREVENTION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURES.



   All land-disturbing activities at the construction site shall be
conducted in accordance with the approved SWPPP. The permittee shall
implement all BMPs as described in the SWPPP and periodically inspect them to
ensure that they are operating as designed and have not been damaged and/or
altered.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.03)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-2-7  REQUIREMENT TO CONTROL CONSTRUCTION AND SANITARY WASTE.



   All operators of construction sites shall control wastes and properly
dispose of wastes, including construction and sanitary wastes. Construction
wastes include but are not limited to discarded building materials, concrete
truck washout, chemicals and litter.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.04)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-2-8  RIGHT OF ENTRY; CONSTRUCTION SITE INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Director or designee is authorized upon presentation of
identification to enter construction sites at reasonable hours in order to
conduct inspections for the purpose of determining compliance with the
construction general permit. The Director or designee is authorized to take
photographs and collect other information reasonably necessary to determine
compliance with this Article.



   (B)   If the Director or designee is refused access to any
construction site and can demonstrate a probable cause to believe that a
violation of this Article has occurred or is occurring, the Director may
request the issuance of a search warrant from the Apache Junction Municipal
Court.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.05)  (Ord. passed - -)



POST-CONSTRUCTION



§ 5-2-9  POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Post-construction stormwater management measures must be
implemented in order to minimize discharges of pollutants to the city's
stormwater system and excessive discharges of pollutants to surface waters
and groundwater. These discharges can negatively impact public health,
welfare and the environment by potentially impacting human health by
transporting and depositing pollutants. The intent of this Article is to
address these discharges to the stormwater system.



   (B)   The purposes of this Article are to establish an inspection
and enforcement program to address post-construction stormwater management in
order to protect public health, welfare and the environment, and to enable
the city to comply with post-construction related stormwater provisions of
NPDES and AZPDES.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 4.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-2-10  REQUIREMENT TO IMPLEMENT AND MAINTAIN POST-CONSTRUCTION
STORMWATER MEASURES.



   Owners of properties must maintain post-construction stormwater
management measures to address post-construction stormwater runoff to the
stormwater system. These measures may be structural or nonstructural BMPs.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 4.02)  (Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-2-11  RIGHT OF ENTRY; POST-CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Director or designee is authorized upon presentation of
identification to enter properties at reasonable hours in order to conduct
inspections of post-construction stormwater measures, such as retention and
detention facilities, dry wells and storm drains. The Director or designee is
authorized to take photographs and collect other information reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this Article.



   (B)   If the Director or designee is refused access to any property
and can demonstrate a probable cause to believe that a violation of this
Article has occurred or is occurring, the Director may request the issuance
of a search warrant from the Apache Junction Municipal Court.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 4.03)  (Ord. passed - -)



VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT



§ 5-2-12  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The city may issue a warning to any person who violates any
provision of this Article. The person receiving a warning shall take
affirmative steps to address the violation. The city shall allow a person who
has been issued a warning a maximum of 14 calendar days to correct the
violation. If the violation has been corrected to the city's satisfaction
within 14 days, the city shall not proceed with continued enforcement of this
Article.



   (B)   If, after 14 calendar days, a person who has received a
warning for any violation of this Article has not corrected the violation,
the city may issue a civil action in Municipal Court. A civil violation of
this section is subject to a fine of not more than $2,500.



   (C)   If, after being assessed a civil penalty for a violation of
this section and the violation has not been corrected to the city's
satisfaction within 14 calendar days, a person violating this Article shall
be subject to a criminal action and shall be guilty of a Class One
Misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty and multiple charging
provisions set forth in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, § 1-1-11.



(Prior Document, Ch. 5 Art. II, § 5.01)  (Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 6:  LANDSCAPING [RESERVED]



Editor's note:
  Information regarding landscaping and screening requirements is set forth
in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Art. 1-8.



CHAPTER 7:  DEVELOPMENT FEES



      Article




         7-1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         7-2.   STREET FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES





         7-3.   POLICE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES





         7-4.   PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES





         7-5.   LIBRARY FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES




         APPENDIX 7-A:  DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE



ARTICLE 7-1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   7-1-1   Title



   7-1-2   Legislative intent



   7-1-3   Purpose and administration



   7-1-4   Definitions



   7-1-5   Applicability



   7-1-6   Service areas



   7-1-7   Authority for development fees



   7-1-8   Fund accounting for development fees



   7-1-9   Land use assumptions



   7-1-10   Infrastructure improvements plan



   7-1-11   Adoption and modification procedures



   7-1-12   Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure
improvements plan and the land use assumptions



   7-1-13   Collection of development fees



   7-1-14   Expenditure of development fees



   7-1-15   Development fee credits and credit agreements



   7-1-16   Development agreements



   7-1-17   Relief procedures and hearings



   7-1-18   Development fee as supplemental regulation to other
financing methods



   7-1-19   Refunds of development fees



   7-1-20   Oversight of development fee program



   7-1-21   Calculation of development fees based on fee schedule



Editor’s note:



   Effective date for this Chapter is August 4, 2014.



§ 7-1-1  TITLE.



   This Chapter of the Apache Junction City Code, shall be known as the
"Apache Junction City Code Volume II, Land Development Code, Chapter 7
Development Fees" and may be referred to herein as "this Ordinance" or "this
Chapter".



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-2  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.



   (A)   This Chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of Apache
Junction by:



      (1)   Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share
of the costs incurred by the city that are associated with providing
necessary public services to new development.



      (2)   Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and
assessing development fees consistent with the requirements of Arizona
Revised Statutes ("A.R.S.") § 9-463.05.



      (3)   Setting forth procedures for administering the
development fee program, including mandatory offsets, credits, and refunds of
development fees. All development fee assessments, offsets, credits, or
refunds must be administered in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.



   (B)   This Chapter shall not affect the city's zoning authority or
its authority to adopt or amend its General Plan, provided that planning and
zoning activities by the city may require amendments to development fees
pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-3  PURPOSE AND ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   This Chapter assesses development fees to offset the costs to
the city associated with providing necessary public services to a
development.  The fees shall:



      (1)   Result in a beneficial use to the development;



      (2)   Bare a rational relationship to the burden of the
developer; and



      (3)   Be assessed in a non-discriminatory manner.



   (B)   The development fees to be paid by each new development
pursuant to this Chapter are to be proportional to the impact that the new
development will have on the types of facilities for which the fees are
charged.



   (C)   The city official with primary responsibility for
administering this Chapter is referred to herein as the "Development Fee
Administrator." The Development Fee Administrator shall be the Director of
Development Services unless another person is so designated by the City
Manager. The Development Fee Administrator may delegate authority conferred
by this Chapter to other city staff.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-4  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Singular terms shall include their plural.



   APPLICANT.  A person who applies to the city for a building permit.



   APPURTENANCE.  Any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other
fixture, including integrated hardware, software or other components,
associated with a capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the
operation, use, or maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding
replacement of the same after initial installation.



   AQUATIC CENTER.  A facility primarily designed to host
non-recreational competitive functions generally occurring within water,
including, but not limited to, water polo games, swimming meets, and diving
events. Such facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof,
and includes all necessary supporting amenities, including but not limited
to, locker rooms, offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures.



   BUILDING PERMIT.  Any permit issued by the city that authorizes
vertical construction, increases square footage, authorizes changes to land
use, or provides for the addition of a residential or non-residential point
of demand to a water or wastewater system.



   CAPITAL FACILITY.  An asset having a useful life of 3 or more years
that is a component of 1 or more categories of necessary public service
provided by the city. A capital facility may include any associated purchase
of real property, architectural and engineering services leading to the
design and construction of buildings and facilities, improvements to existing
facilities, improvements to or expansions of existing facilities, and
associated financing and professional services. Wherever used herein,
INFRASTRUCTURE shall have the same meaning as CAPITAL FACILITIES.



   CATEGORY OF DEVELOPMENT. A specific category of residential,
commercial, office, industrial, or institutional development against which a
development fee is calculated and assessed. The city assesses development
fees against the following categories of development: residential,
commercial, office, industrial, and institutional.



   CATEGORY OF NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICE.  A category of necessary public
services for which the city is authorized to assess development fees, as
further defined by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   CITY.  The City of Apache Junction, Arizona.



   COMMERCIAL LAND USE.  The buying, selling, repair, leasing or storage
of goods and services. This term shall not include manufacturing,
distribution or general warehousing activities as a primary use.



   CREDIT.  A reduction in an assessed development fee resulting from
developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications for
capital facilities included in an Infrastructure Improvements Plan pursuant
to A.R.S. § 9-463.05 (or as otherwise permitted by this Chapter).



   CREDIT AGREEMENT.  A written agreement between the city and the
developer(s) of subject development that allocates credits to the subject
development pursuant to Vol. II, § 7-1-15 of this Chapter. A credit
agreement may be included as part of a development agreement pursuant to Vol.
II, § 7-1-16 of this Chapter.



   CREDIT ALLOCATION.  A term used to describe when credits are
distributed to a particular development or parcel of land after execution of
a credit agreement, but are not yet issued.



   CREDIT ISSUANCE.  A term used to describe when the amount of an
assessed development fee attributable to a particular development or parcel
of land is reduced by applying a credit allocation.



   DEVELOPER.  An individual, group of individuals, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation,
state agency, or other person or entity undertaking land development
activity, and their respective successors and assigns.



   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.  An agreement prepared in accordance with the
requirements of Vol. II, § 7-1-16 of this Chapter, A.R.S. § 9-500.05, and
any applicable requirements of the City Code.



   DEVELOPMENT FEE REPORT.  A written report developed pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 9-463.05 that identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of
each development fee, explains the relationship between the development fee
to be assessed and the cost per service unit calculated in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, and which meets other requirements set forth in A.R.S. §
9-463.05.



   DIRECT BENEFIT.  A benefit to a service unit resulting from a capital
facility that: (a) addresses the need for a necessary public service created
in whole or in part by the service unit; and that (b) meets either of the
following criteria: (i) the capital facility is located in the immediate area
of the service unit and is needed in the immediate area of the service unit
to maintain the level of service; or (ii) the capital facility substitutes
for, or eliminates the need for a capital facility that would have otherwise
have been needed in the immediate area of the service unit to maintain the
city's level of service.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE OR 2+ UNIT LAND USE.  A building containing 2 or
more primary dwelling units on a single lot. Types of multiple residence
dwellings include duplexes, garden apartments, and multi-story apartment
buildings.



   DWELLING, SINGLE UNIT - MANUFACTURED HOMES LAND USE.  A single unit
dwelling unit located in a manufactured home park and designed exclusively
for residential occupancy in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform
Building Code adopted and amended by the city, and shall be interpreted as
the creation of a new mobile home or recreational vehicle (as defined in
A.R.S. § 41-2142(26)) space in a mobile home or recreational vehicle park.



   DWELLING, SINGLE UNIT OR SINGLE-FAMILY LAND USE.  A detached or
attached building containing 1 single-family dwelling unit constructed on a
single lot.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A house, apartment, mobile home or trailer, group of
rooms, or single room occupied as separate living quarters or, if vacant,
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.



   EQUIPMENT.  Machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not
including vehicles, that are needed by a capital facility to provide the
level of service specified by the Infrastructure Improvement Plan, but
excluding replacement of the same after initial development of the capital
facility.



   EXCLUDED LIBRARY FACILITY.  Library facilities for which development
fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including that
portion of any library facility that exceeds 10,000 square feet, and
equipment, vehicles or appurtenances associated with library operations.



   EXCLUDED PARK FACILITY.  Parks and recreational facilities for which
development fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including
amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums, arenas, arts and
cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities, bathhouses,
boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than 3,000 square feet in
floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian facilities, golf
course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks, water
reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.



   FINANCING OR DEBT.  Any debt, bond, note, loan, inter-fund loan, fund
transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the development or
expansion of a capital facility.



   GENERAL PLAN.  The most current version of the City of Apache Junction
General Plan and all adopted amendments thereto.



   GROSS DEVELOPMENT FEE. The total development fee to be assessed against
a subject development on a per unit basis, prior to subtraction of any
credits.



   INDUSTRIAL LAND USE.  The excavation, transporting, distribution,
manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or destruction of any
article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such
manner as to change the form, character or appearance thereof, and including
storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and
other similar types of enterprise.



   INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.  A document or series of documents
that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including those
adopted pursuant to Vol. II, § 7-1-10 of this Chapter to cover any category
or combination of categories of necessary public services.



   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.  Projections of changes in land uses, densities,
intensities and population for a service area over a period of at least 10
years, and developed pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   LEVEL OF SERVICE.  A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a
necessary public service that is to be provided by the city to development in
a particular service area, defined in terms of the relationship between
service capacity and service demand, accessibility, response times, comfort
or convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures.
Level of service may be measured differently for different categories of
necessary public services, as identified in the applicable Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.



   LIBRARY FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services in which
literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials are kept (materials may
be kept in any form of media such as electronic, magnetic, or paper) for
non-commercial use by the public in a facility providing a direct benefit to
development. Libraries do not include excluded library facilities, although a
library may contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded
library facility.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  Any development providing rental spaces for
occupancy on a non-permanent basis for manufactured homes and/or recreational
vehicles.



   NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICES.  Shall have the meaning prescribed in
A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(7), as amended.



   NONRESIDENTIAL LAND USES.  Shall be defined according to the
descriptions of land uses in the most current edition of Trip Generation,
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, provided that retail
uses not separately identified shall be classified in the shopping center
category, and institutional uses not separately identified shall be
classified in the general office category.



   OFFICE LAND USE.  A building or portion of a building wherein services
are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional, or
clerical operations.



   OFFSET.  An amount which is subtracted from the overall costs of
providing necessary public services to account for those capital components
of infrastructure or associated debt that have been or will be paid for by a
development through taxes, fees (except for development fees), and other
revenue sources, as determined pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. A category of necessary public
services including but not limited to parks, multi-use recreational trails,
swimming pools and related facilities and equipment located on real property
not larger than 30 acres in area, as well as park facilities larger than 30
acres where such facilities provide a direct benefit. Parks and recreational
facilities do not include excluded park facilities, although parks and
recreational facilities may contain, provide access to, or otherwise support
an excluded park facility.



   PLEDGED.  Where used with reference to a development fee, a
development fee shall be considered "pledged" where it was identified by the
city as a source of payment or repayment for financing or debt that was
identified as the source of financing for a necessary public service for
which a development fee was assessed pursuant to the then-applicable
provisions of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   POLICE FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services, including
vehicles and equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies to preserve
the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders,
protect the rights of persons and property, regulate and control motorized
and pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and maintain
police records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. Police
facilities do not include vehicles and equipment used to provide
administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. Police facilities do
not include any facility that is used for training officers from more than 1
station or substation.



   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL.  Any 1 of the following: (a) a professional
engineer, surveyor, financial analyst or planner, or other licensed
professional providing services within the scope of that person's education
or experience related to city planning, zoning, or impact development fees
and holding a license issued by an agency or political subdivision of the
State of Arizona; (b) a financial analyst, planner, or other non-licensed
professional that is providing services within the scope of the person's
education or experience related to city planning, zoning, or impact
development fees; or (c) any other person operating under the supervision of1
or more of the above.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK.  Facilities for the temporary storage,
parking and maneuvering of recreational vehicles with adequate roads and
stall sires, including sanitary and water facilities with locations provided
on a day-to-day basis.



   RESIDENTIAL LAND USE.  A building or portion thereof designed
exclusively for residential occupancy in conformance with the provisions of
the Uniform Building Code adopted and amended by the city.



   SERVICE AREA.  Any specified area within the boundaries of the city
within which:



      (1)   The city will provide a category of necessary public
services to development at a planned level of service; and



      (2)   Within which: (i) a substantial nexus exists between the
capital facilities to be provided and the development to be served; or (ii)
in the case of library facilities or a park facility larger than 30 acres, a
direct benefit exists between the library facilities or park facilities and
the development to be served, each as prescribed in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.



      (3)   Some or all of the capital facilities providing service
to a service area may be physically located outside of that service area
provided that the required substantial nexus or direct benefit is
demonstrated to exist.



   SERVICE UNIT.  A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation
or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated
pursuant to generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a
particular category of necessary public services.



   STREET FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services including
arterial or collector streets or roads, traffic signals, rights-of-way, and
improvements thereon, bridges, culverts, irrigation tiling, storm drains, and
regional transportation facilities.



   SUBJECT DEVELOPMENT.  A land area linked by a unified plan of
development, which must be contiguous unless the land area is part of a
Development Agreement executed in accordance with Vol. II, § 7-1-16 of this
Chapter.



   SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS.  A substantial nexus exists where the demand for a
category of necessary public services that will be generated by a service
unit can be reasonably quantified in terms of the burden it will impose on
the available capacity of existing capital facilities, the need it will
create for new or expanded capital facilities, and/or the benefit to the
development from those capital facilities.



   SWIMMING POOL.  A public facility primarily designed and/or utilized
for recreational non-competitive functions generally occurring within water,
including, but not limited to, swimming classes, open public swimming
sessions, and recreational league swimming/diving events. The facility may be
indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary
supporting amenities.



   USEFUL LIFE.  The period of time in which an asset can reasonably be
expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will
continue to be owned and operated by the city over the entirety of such
period.



   VEHICLE. Any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for
transportation in the course of providing a particular category of necessary
public services at a specified level of service, excluding helicopters and
other aircraft.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-5  APPLICABILITY.



   The collection of development fees shall apply to all new development
in the city, unless excepted in accordance with Vol. II, § 7-1-13(C).



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-6  SERVICE AREAS.



   (A)   For the purpose of all development fees, the service area
shall be all of the incorporated area of the city.



   (B)   Development fees shall be assessed only on new development
located within the service area.



   (C)   Development fees collected within the service area shall be
spent within the service area.



   (D)   The appropriateness of the designation and boundaries of the
service area(s) shall be reviewed by the city as part of the development fee
revision process pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05. Following such review and a
public hearing, the service area(s) may be amended.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-7  AUTHORITY FOR DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   Development fee report and implementation. The city may assess
and collect a development fee for costs of necessary public services,
including all professional services required for the preparation or revision
of an Infrastructure Improvements Plan, Development Fee Report, development
fee, and required reports or audits conducted pursuant to this Chapter.
Development fees shall be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   The city shall develop and adopt a Development Fee
Report that analyzes and defines the development fees to be charged in each
service area for each capital facility category, based on the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



      (2)   Development fees shall be assessed against all new
residential, commercial, office, and industrial developments, provided that
the city may assess different amounts of development fees against specific
categories of development based on the actual burdens and costs that are
associated with providing necessary public services to that category of
development. No development fee shall exceed the cost per service unit for
any category of development.



      (3)   No development fees shall be charged, or credits issued,
for any capital facility that does not fall within 1 of the categories of
necessary public services for which development fees may be assessed as
identified in Vol. II, § 7-1-10 of this Chapter.



      (4)   Costs for necessary public services made necessary by
new development shall be based on the same level of service provided to
existing development in the same service area. Development fees may not be
used to provide a higher level of service to existing development or to meet
stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to
the extent that these are applied to existing capital facilities that are
serving existing development.



      (5)   Development fees may not be used to pay the city's
administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.



      (6)   Projected interest charges and financing costs can only
be included in development fees to the extent they represent principal and/or
interest on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the
construction or expansion of a capital facility identified in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



      (7)   All development fees shall meet the requirements of
A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   (B)   Costs per service unit. The Development Fee Report shall
summarize the costs of capital facilities necessary to serve new development
on a per service unit basis as defined and calculated in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, including all required offsets, and shall recommend a
development fee structure for adoption by the city. The actual development
fees to be assessed shall be disclosed and adopted in the form of development
fee schedules described in this Chapter.



   (C)   Defined terms in any previously established fee schedule shall
be interpreted according to the ordinance in effect at the time of their
adoption.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-8  FUND ACCOUNTING FOR DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   The City Finance Department shall establish a separate
accounting fund in which the development fees collected for a particular type
of capital facility within the service area shall be credited. Such fees
shall be invested by the city and the yield on those fees, at the actual rate
of return to the city, shall be credited to such accounting fund periodically
in accordance with the accounting policies of the city. The funds need not be
segregated from other city monies for banking purposes.



   (B)   (1)   Any yield on such accounting fund into which the fees
are deposited shall accrue to that fund and shall be used for the purposes
specified for that fund.



      (2)   Limitations on use of fees. Development fees and any
interest thereon collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be spent to provide
capital facilities associated with the same category of necessary public
services in the same service area for which they were collected, including
costs of financing or debt used by the city to finance such capital
facilities and other costs authorized by this Chapter that are included in
the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



   (C)   The City Finance Department shall maintain and keep financial
records for the accounting fund showing the revenues to the fund and the
disbursements from that fund, in accordance with normal city accounting
practices. The records of the fund shall be open to public inspection in the
same manner as other financial records of the city.



   (D)   Annual Report. The city shall issue as part of the report
required in Vol. II, § 7-1-20 of this Chapter an unaudited accounting of all
development fee funds.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-9  LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.



   (A)   The Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall be consistent with
the city's current land use assumptions for each service area and each
category of necessary public services as adopted by the city pursuant to
A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   (B)   Renewal and updating of the land use assumptions. The land use
assumptions shall be developed, adopted, and modified subject to the
procedures required by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-10  INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.



   (A)   Infrastructure Improvements Plan contents. The Infrastructure
Improvements Plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be
based upon or incorporated within the city's Capital Improvements Plan,
when/if available, and/or other capital facilities plans.



   (B)   (1)   The Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall comply
with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05, and shall:



      (2)   Specify the categories of necessary public services for
which the city will impose a development fee, which may include any or all of
the following:



         (a)   Street facilities.



         (b)   Police.



         (c)   Parks and recreational facilities.



         (d)   Libraries.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-11  ADOPTION AND MODIFICATION PROCEDURES.



   Adopting or amending the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. The
Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the
procedures required by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-12  TIMING FOR THE RENEWAL AND UPDATING OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN AND THE LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.



   Renewal and updating procedure. All necessary renewals and updates of
the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and land use assumptions shall comply
with procedures required by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-13  COLLECTION OF DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   Collection. Development fees, together with administrative
charges assessed pursuant to division (A)(5) of this section, shall be
calculated and collected prior to issuance of permission to commence
development; specifically:



      (1)   Except as set forth in division (A)(2) below, the
development fees for all new development shall be calculated and collected in
conjunction with the application for the first building permit or electrical
permit, certificate of compliance or occupancy, or other permit subsequent to
development plan approval for such development, whichever occurs first in
time. However, in no case shall the Development Fee Administrator allow
prepayment of development fees in order to avoid higher fees which the
Council has passed but have yet to go into effect. At the time the
development fees are paid in full, a permit shall be issued.



      (2)   For other uses not ultimately requiring a building
permit, electrical permit, certificate of compliance or occupancy, or other
permit, the fee shall be calculated and collected at such time as determined
by the Development Fee Administrator. However, in no case shall the
Development Fee Administrator allow prepayment of development fees in order
to avoid higher fees which the Council has passed but have yet to go into
effect. At the time the development fees are paid in full, a permit shall be
issued.



      (3)   If the building permit is for a change in the type of
building use, an increase in square footage, or a change to land use, the
development fee shall be assessed on the additional service units resulting
from the expansion or change, and following the development fee schedule
applicable to any new use type.



      (4)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued if a development fee is not paid as directed in the previous division.



      (5)   For issued permits that expire or are voided,
development fees and administrative charges shall be as follows:



         (a)   If the original permittee is seeking to renew an
expired or voided permit, and the development fees paid for such development
have not been refunded, then the permittee shall pay the difference between
any development fees paid at the time the permit was issued and those in the
fee schedule at the time the permit is reissued or renewed.



         (b)   If a new or renewed permit for the same
development is being sought by someone other than the original permittee, the
new permit applicant shall pay the full development fees specified in the fee
schedule in effect at the time that the permits are reissued or renewed. If
the original permittee has assigned its rights under the permits to the new
permit applicant, the new permit applicant shall pay development fees as if
it were the original permittee.



   (B)   Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks.
Development fees for mobile/manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks
shall be assessed for the entire development, based on the number of
manufactured home and recreational vehicle spaces created at the time of
application for the first building, electrical or other permit for the
development. No additional development fees shall be assessed on subsequent
building or electrical permits in the manufactured home or recreational
vehicle park unless additional spaces are created. Development fees for
mobile/manufactured homes placed on single parcels shall be assessed in the
same manner as site-built or conventional homes.



   (C)   Exceptions. Development fees shall not be owed under any of
the following conditions:



      (1)   Development fees have been paid for the development and
the permit(s) which triggered the collection of the development fees have not
expired or been voided.



      (2)   Modifications requiring approval are made to existing
development, or vacant property that previously accommodated any legal
development and do not: (a) add new service units; (b) increase the impact of
previous or existing service units on existing or future capital facilities;
or (c) change the land-use type of the previous or existing development to a
different category of development for which a higher development fee would
have been due. To the extent that any modification does not meet the
requirements of this division, the development fee due shall be the
difference between the development fee that was or would have been due on the
previous or existing development and the development fee that is due on the
development as modified.



      (3)   Placing on a lot or parcel in the city a temporary
construction trailer or office, but only for the life of the building permit
issued for the construction served by the trailer or office.



      (4)   Expansion, upgrade or repair of a legally existing
residential dwelling unit or structure.



      (5)   Construction or installation of a development on vacant
property that previously accommodated any legal development, subject to the
terms of division (C)(2) above.



      (6)   Any development, including but not limited to the mere
subdivision of land, installation of utilities, or the use of land for
limited recreational, agricultural, filling or dredging purposes which, in
the opinion of the Development Fee Administrator, will not result in a net
increase of more than 1 one-way average daily trip.



   (D)   Temporary exemptions from development fee schedules. New
developments in the city shall be temporarily exempt from increases in
development fees that result from the adoption of new or modified development
fee schedules as follows:



      (1)   Residential uses. On or after the day that the first
building permit is issued for a single unit residential development, the city
shall, at the permittee's request, provide the permittee with an applicable
development fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24 months
beginning on the day that the first building permit is issued, and which
shall expire at the end of the first business day of the 25th month
thereafter. During the effective period of the applicable development fee
schedule, any building permit issued for the same single unit residential
development shall not be subject to any new or modified development fee
schedule.



      (2)   Commercial, office, industrial, and 2+ unit dwelling
unit structures. On or after the day that the final approval, as defined in
A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(4), is issued for a commercial, office, industrial or
2+ unit development, the city shall provide an applicable development fee
schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24 months beginning on the
day that final development approval of a site plan or final subdivision plat
is given, and which shall



expire at the end of the first business day of the 25th month thereafter.
During the effective period of the applicable development fee schedule, any
building permit issued for the same development shall not be subject to any
new or modified development fee schedule.



      (3)   Other development. Any category of development not
covered under divisions (D)(1) and (2) of this section shall pay development
fees according to the fee schedule that is current at the time of collection
as specified in division (A) of this section.



      (4)   Changes to Site Plans and Subdivision Plats.
Notwithstanding the other requirements of this division, if changes are made
to a development's final Site Plan or subdivision plat that will increase the
number of service units after the issuance of a grandfathered development fee
schedule, the city may assess any new or modified development fees against
the additional service units. If the city reduces the amount of an applicable
development fee during the period that a grandfathered development fee
schedule is in force, the city shall assess the lower development fee.



   (E)   Option to pursue special fee determination. Where a subject
development is of a type that does not closely fit within a particular
category of development appearing on an adopted development fee schedule, or
where a subject development has unique characteristics such that the actual
burdens and costs associated with providing necessary public services to that
development will differ substantially from that associated with other
developments in a specified category of development, the city may require the
applicant to provide the City Development Fee Administrator or authorized
designee with an alternative development fee analysis. Based on a projection
of the actual burdens and costs that will be associated with the subject
development, the alternative development fee analysis may propose a unique
fee for the development based on the application of an appropriate service
unit factor to the applicable cost per service unit, or may propose that the
development be covered under the development fee schedule governing a
different and more analogous category of development. The City Development
Fee Administrator or authorized designee shall review the alternative impact
fee analysis and shall make a determination as to the development fee to be
charged. Such decision shall be appealable pursuant to Vol. II, § 7-1-17 of
this Chapter. The City Development Fee Administrator or authorized designee
may require the applicant to pay an administrative fee to cover the actual
costs of reviewing the special fee determination application.



   (F)   Individual assessment of development fees. If any applicant
believes that the impact of the proposed development will be substantially
less than would be indicated by using the fee schedule, the person may
request to perform an individual assessment of the impact of the proposed
development at his or her own cost. A request for an individual assessment
must be made before submitting an application for a building permit.



      (1)   The individual assessment shall be subject to the
following special standards and procedures:



         (a)   Street facilities development fees (as set forth
in Vol. II, Article 7-1);



         (b)   Police facilities development fees (as set forth
in Vol. II, Article 7-2);



         (c)   Parks and recreational facilities development fees
(as set forth in Vol. II, Article 7-3);



         (d)   Library facilities development fees (as set forth
in Vol. II, Article 7-4); and



      (2)   If the Development Fee Administrator accepts the
computations of the individual assessment under this Chapter, the applicable
fee shall be determined from the individual assessment.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-14  EXPENDITURE OF DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   Development fees may only be spent on qualifying improvements,
as follows:



      (1)   Street facilities development fees shall be spent as set
forth in Vol. II, § 7-1-3;



      (2)   Police facilities development fees shall be spent as set
forth in Vol. II, § 7-2-3;



      (3)   Parks and recreational facilities development fees shall
be spent as set forth in Vol. II, § 7-3-3;



      (4)   Library facilities development fees shall be spent as
set forth in Vol. II, § 7-4-3;



   (B)   Time limit. Development fees collected after August 3, 2014
shall be used within 10 years of the date upon which they were collected for
all categories of necessary public services.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-15  DEVELOPMENT FEE CREDITS AND CREDIT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Eligibility of capital facility. All development fee credits
must meet the following requirements:



      (1)   One of the following is true:



         (a)   The capital facility, or the financial
contribution toward a capital facility that will be provided by the developer
and for which a credit will be issued, must be identified in an adopted
Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Development Fee Report as a capital
facility for which a development fee was assessed; or



         (b)   The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the city that, given the class and type of improvement, the subject
capital facility should have been included in the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan in lieu of a different capital facility that was included in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan and for which a development fee was
assessed. If the subject capital facility is determined to be eligible for a
credit in this manner, the city shall amend the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan to (i) include the subject replacement facility and (ii) delete the
capital facility that will be replaced.



      (2)   Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure
provided by a developer if the cost of such infrastructure will be repaid to
the developer by the city through another agreement or mechanism. To the
extent that the developer will be paid or reimbursed by the city for any
contribution, payment, construction, or dedication from any city funding
source including an agreement to reimburse the developer with future
collected development fees pursuant to Vol. II, § 7-1-16 of this Chapter,
any credits claimed by the developer shall be: (a) deducted from any amounts
to be paid or reimbursed by the city; or (b) reduced by the amount of such
payment or reimbursement.



   (B)   Eligibility of subject development. To be eligible for a
credit, the subject development must be located within the service area of
the eligible capital facility.



   (C)   Calculation of credits.



      (1)   Credits will be based on that portion of the costs for
an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted Infrastructure
Improvements Plan for which a development fee was assessed pursuant to the
Development Fee Report. If the gross development fee for a particular
category of necessary public service is adopted at an amount lower than the
cost per service unit, the amount of any credit shall be reduced in
proportion to the difference between the cost per service unit and the gross
development fee adopted. A credit shall not exceed the actual costs the
applicant incurred in providing the eligible capital facility.



      (2)   Credits will be based on the included costs in the
calculation of the cost per service unit for each category of necessary
public service, including costs of land acquisition, improvements,
engineering and architectural services, studies leading to design, design,
construction, financing, and administrative costs, as well as projected costs
of inflation.



   (D)   Allocation of credits. Before any credit can be issued to a
subject development (or portion thereof), the credit must be allocated to
that development by executing a credit agreement between the developer and
the city stating the total amount of the credits resulting from provision of
an eligible capital facility.



      (1)   It is the responsibility of the developer to request
allocation of development fee credits through an application for a Credit
Agreement (which may be part of a Development Agreement entered into pursuant
to Vol. II, § 7-1-16 of this Chapter).



      (2)   If a building permit is issued, and a development fee is
paid prior to execution of a Credit Agreement for the subject development, no
credits may be allocated retroactively to that permit. Credits may be
allocated to any remaining permits for the subject development in accordance
with this Chapter.



      (3)   If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility
sells or relinquishes a development (or portion thereof) that it owns or
controls prior to execution of a Credit Agreement or Development Agreement,
credits resulting from the eligible capital facility will only be allocated
to the development if the entity legally assigns such rights and
responsibilities to its successor(s) in interest for the subject development.



      (4)   If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital
facility, both entities must enter into a single Credit Agreement with the
city, and any request for the allocation of credit within the subject
development(s) must be made jointly by the entities that provided the
eligible capital facility.



   (E)   Credit Agreement. Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a
Credit Agreement executed in accordance with division (D) of this section.
The City Manager or authorized designee is authorized by this Chapter to
enter into a Credit Agreement with the controlling entity of a subject
development, subject to the following:



      (1)   The developer requesting the Credit Agreement shall
provide all information requested by the city to allow it to determine the
value of the credit to be applied.



      (2)   An application for a Credit Agreement shall be submitted
to the city by the developer within one year of the date on which ownership
or control of the capital facility passes to the city.



      (3)   The developer shall submit a draft Credit Agreement to
the City Manager or authorized designee(s) for review. The draft Credit
Agreement shall include, at a minimum, all of the following information and
supporting documentation:



         (a)   A legal description and map depicting the location
of the subject development for which credit is being applied. The map shall
depict the location of the capital facilities that have been or will be
provided.



         (b)   An estimate of the total service units that will
be developed within the subject development depicted on the map and described
in the legal description.



         (c)   A list of the capital facilities, associated
physical attributes, and the related costs as stated in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.



         (d)   Documentation showing the date(s) of acceptance by
the city, if the capital facilities have already been provided.



         (e)   The total amount of credit to be applied within
the subject development and the calculations leading to the total amount of
credit.



         (f)   The credit amount to be applied to each service
unit within the subject development for each category of necessary public
services.



      (4)   Calculation and payment of credits not involving
transfer of land, non-contiguous parcels, or delayed fee payments shall be
approved by the City Manager or authorized designee(s). Credit Agreements for
all other subject development shall be approved by the City Manager prior to
its execution. The City Manager's determination of the credit to be allocated
is final.



      (5)   Upon execution of the Credit Agreement by the city and
the applicant, credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development.



      (6)   Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement
must be initiated within 2 years of the city's final acceptance of the
eligible capital facility for which the amendment is requested.



      (7)   Any Credit Agreement approved as part of a Development
Agreement shall be amended in accordance with the terms of the Development
Agreement and Vol. II, § 7-1-16 of this Chapter.



   (F)   Issuance of credits. Credits allocated pursuant to division
(D) of this section may be issued and applied toward the gross development
fees due from a development, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only
be applied to the development fee due for the applicable category of
necessary public services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another
category of necessary public services.



      (2)   Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital
facility from which the credits were derived has been accepted by the city or
when adequate security for the completion of the eligible capital facility
has been provided in accordance with all terms of an executed Development
Agreement.



      (3)   Where credits have been issued pursuant to division
(F)(2) of this section, a development fee due at the time a building permit
is issued shall be reduced by the credit amount stated in or calculated from
the executed Credit Agreement. Where credits have not yet been issued, the
gross development fee shall be paid in full, and a refund of the credit
amount shall be due when the developer demonstrates compliance with division
(F)(2) of this section in a written request to the city.



      (4)   Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or
reallocated to another permit or parcel, except that credits may be released
for reuse on the same subject development if a building permit for which the
credits were issued has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for
a refund under Vol. II, § 7-1-19(A)(2)(a) of this Chapter.



      (5)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Vol. II, §
7-1-15, credits issued prior to January 1, 2012 may only be used for the
subject development for which they were issued. Such credits may be
transferred to a new owner of all or part of the subject development in
proportion to the percentage of ownership in the subject development to be
held by the new owner.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-16  DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.



   Development Agreements containing provisions regarding development
fees, development fee credits, and/or disbursement of revenues from
development fee accounts shall comply with the following:



   (A)   Development agreement required. A development agreement is
required to authorize any of the following:



      (1)   To issue credits prior to the city's acceptance of an
eligible capital facility.



      (2)   To allocate credits to a parcel that is not contiguous
with the subject development and that does not meet the requirements of Vol.
II, § 7-1-15(D)(7)of this Chapter.



      (3)   To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital
facility using funds from development fee accounts.



      (4)   To allocate different credit amounts per service unit to
different parcels within a subject development.



      (5)   For a single unit residential dwelling unit, to allow
development fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a building
permit as provided in this section.



      (6)   To waive development fees owed by the developer and
establish alternative revenues for applicable development fee accounts.



   (B)   General requirements. All Development Agreements shall be
prepared and executed in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and any
applicable requirements of the City Code. Except where specifically modified
by this section, all provisions of Vol. II, § 7-1-15 of this Chapter shall
apply to any Credit Agreement that is authorized as part of a Development
Agreement.



   (C)   Early credit issuance. A Development Agreement may authorize
the issuance of credits prior to acceptance of an eligible capital facility
by the city when the Development Agreement specifically states the form and
value of the security (i.e. bond, letter of credit, and the like) to be
provided to the city prior to issuance of any credits. The city shall
determine the



acceptable form and value of the security to be provided.



   (D)   Non-contiguous credit allocation. A Development Agreement may
authorize the allocation of credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of
the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as
that served by the eligible capital facility.



      (2)   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public
service from the eligible capital facility.



      (3)   The Development Agreement specifically states the value
of the credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or service unit, or
establishes a mechanism for future determination of the credit values.



   (E)   Uneven credit allocation. The Development Agreement must
specify how credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a
per-service unit basis, if the credits are not to be allocated evenly. If the
Development Agreement is silent on this topic, all credits will be allocated
evenly amongst all parcels on a per-service unit basis.



   (F)   Use of reimbursements. Funds reimbursed to developers from
development fee accounts for construction of an eligible capital facility
must be utilized in accordance with applicable law for the use of city funds
in construction or acquisition of capital facilities, including A.R.S. §§
34-201, et seq.



   (G)   Deferral of fees. A Development Agreement may provide for the
deferral of payment of development fees for a residential development beyond
the issuance of a building permit; provided that a development fee may not be
paid later than the 15 days after the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy for that dwelling unit. The Development Agreement shall provide for
the value of any deferred development fees to be supported by appropriate
security, including a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash bond.



   (H)   Waiver of fees. If the city agrees to waive any development
fees assessed on development in a Development Agreement, the city shall
reimburse the appropriate development fee account(s) for the amount that was
waived pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   (I)   No obligation. Nothing in this section obligates the city to
enter into any Development Agreement or to authorize any type of Credit
Agreement permitted by this section.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-17  RELIEF PROCEDURES AND HEARINGS.



   The developer who owes, has paid a development fee, or disagrees with
the offset amount determined by the Development Fee Administrator, may appeal
to the City Manager in accordance with the following procedures:



   (A)   Form of appeal. Such appeal must be filed with the Development
Fee Administrator in writing: either within 30 calendar days after the date
the city notified the developer of an assessment or offset determination; or
within 30 calendar days after the developer paid the development fee.



   (B)   Fees during pendency. Any building permit issued before the
appeal is filed shall be considered stayed until after the appeal process has
concluded. Any work in progress completed during the appeal process shall be
performed at the developer's own risk. Failure to pay the development fees as
determined on appeal shall result in the withholding by the city of the
certificate of occupancy for the subject development.



   (C)   The City Manager must render a decision within 30 calendar
days after the appeal is received by the Development Fee Administrator. The
City Manager's failure to render a decision within the 30 calendar days,
absent a continuance request by the developer, shall result in the
developer's position prevailing over the city's. The developer shall be
notified of the City Manager's decision in writing within 30 calendar days
after the appeal is received by the Development Fee Administrator.



   (D)   Final decision. The decision of the City Manager shall be
considered the final administrative decision of the city. Any further appeals
shall be pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-901 et seq.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-18  DEVELOPMENT FEE AS SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATION TO OTHER FINANCING
METHODS.



   (A)   Except as herein otherwise provided, development fees are in
addition to any other requirements, taxes, fees or assessments imposed by the
city on development or the issuance of building permits or certificates of
occupancy which are imposed on and due against property within the
jurisdiction of the city. Development fees are intended to be consistent with
the city's General Plan, Capital Improvements Program, Land Development Code,
and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks
to ensure the provision of capital facilities in conjunction with development.



   (B)   In addition to the use of development fees, the city may
finance qualifying capital facilities through the issuance of bonds, the
formation of assessment districts or any other authorized mechanism, in a
manner and subject to such limitations as provided by law.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-19  REFUNDS OF DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   Refunds. A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any
current owner of property within the city who submits a written request to
the city and demonstrates that:



      (1)   The permit(s) that triggered the collection of the
development fee have expired or been voided prior to the commencement of the
development for which the permits were issued and the development fees
collected have not been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the repayment of
financing or debt; or



      (2)   The owner of the subject development or its predecessor
in interest paid a development fee for the applicable capital facility on or
after August 4, 2014, and 1 of the following conditions exists:



         (a)   The capital facility designed to serve the subject
development has been constructed, has the capacity to serve the subject
development and any development for which there is reserved capacity, and the
service which was to be provided by that capital facility has not been
provided to the subject development from that capital facility or from any
other infrastructure.



         (b)   After collecting the fee to construct a capital
facility the city fails to complete construction of the capital facility
within the time period identified in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, as
it may be amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to
the subject development from that capital facility or any other
infrastructure.



         (c)   For a category of necessary public services, any
part of a development fee is not spent within 10 years of the city's receipt
of the development fee.



         (d)   The development fee was calculated and collected
for the construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific capital
facility serving the subject development and the actual construction costs
for the capital facility are less than the construction costs projected in
the Infrastructure Improvements Plan by a factor of 10% or more. In such
event, the current owner of the subject development shall, upon request as
set forth in this division (A), be entitled to a refund for the difference
between the amounts of the development fee charged for and attributable to
such construction cost and the amount the development fee would have been
calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been included in the
Development Fee Report. The refund contemplated by this section shall relate
only to the costs specific to the construction of the applicable capital
facility and shall not include any related design, administrative, or other
costs not directly incurred for construction of the capital facility that are
included in the development fee as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   (B)   Earned interest. A refund of a development fee shall include
any interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the development fee
by the city from the date of collection to the date of refund. All refunds
shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is
paid.



   (C)   Refund to government. If a development fee was paid by a
governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-20  OVERSIGHT OF DEVELOPMENT FEE PROGRAM.



   (A)   Annual report. The city shall file with the City Clerk an
unaudited annual report as required by all applicable laws.



   (B)   Biennial audit. The city shall conduct a biennial audit as
required by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-1-21  CALCULATION OF DEVELOPMENT FEES BASED ON FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Unless an applicant requests an individual assessment as set
forth in Vol. II, § 7-1-13(F), the development fees shall be calculated for
the proposed development based on any plan approval and/or permit allowing
the use, according to the applicable fee schedule.



   (B)   The following development fee schedules have been adopted by
City Council Ordinance No. 1399 and are incorporated herein by reference:



      (1)   Street facilities development fee schedule (see Vol. II,
Article 7-1 of this Chapter);



      (2)   Police facilities development fee schedule (see Vol. II,
Article 7-2 of this Chapter);



      (3)   Parks and recreational facilities development fee
schedule (see Vol. II, Article 7-3 of this Chapter); and



      (4)   Library Facilities development fee schedule (see Vol.
II, Article 7-4 of this Chapter).



   (C)   The units of development specified in the fee schedule shall
be interpreted as follows:



      (1)   A dwelling unit shall be interpreted as dwelling unit as
defined in Vol. II, § 7-1-4 of this Chapter, provided that it shall also be
interpreted as the creation of a new manufactured home or recreational
vehicle space in a manufactured home or recreational vehicle park; and



      (2)   Building square footage shall be measured in terms of
gross floor area, measured from the outside surfaces of the building walls.



   (D)   For categories of uses not specified in the applicable
development fee schedule, the Development Fee Administrator shall apply the
category of use set forth in the applicable fee schedule that the Development
Fee Administrator deems to be most similar to the proposed use.



   (E)   If any plan or permit approval for the proposed development
indicates a mix of uses in the development, the development fees shall be
calculated separately for each use and the results aggregated.



   (F)   For an addition, or to remodel or replace existing structures,
or for a change of use to an existing structure, the development fee to be
paid shall be the difference, if any, between:



      (1)   The fee, if any, that would be payable for existing
development on the site or, in the case of demolition or removal of a
structure, the previous development on the site; and



      (2)   The fee, if any, that would be payable for the total
development on the site after the new development.



   (G)   After receiving a written request of an applicant, the
Development Fee Administrator shall provide an estimate of the current
development fee based on the data provided by the applicant. However, this
estimate does not establish any vested rights to build or develop the
property.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



ARTICLE 7-2:  STREET FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES



Section



   7-2-1   Street facilities development fee schedule



   7-2-2   Individual assessments of street facilities development fees



   7-2-3   Use of street facilities development fees



§ 7-2-1  STREET FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE.



   Street facilities development fees shall be paid in accordance with
Vol. II, Appendix 7-A at the conclusion of Chapter 7.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-2-2  INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENTS OF STREET FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   The street facilities development fees may be calculated based
upon individual assessment. An individual assessment shall be at the cost of
the applicant and shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer firm or
other qualified professional as approved by the Development Fee Administrator.



   (B)   The individual assessment shall include, without limitation,
the following elements:



      (1)   A projection of the number of vehicular trips entering
and departing from the project during an average weekday;



      (2)   If the site is already developed, and some or all of the
existing development will be replaced by the completed project, a calculation
of the number of vehicular trips for that portion of the existing development
which will be replaced by the completed project;



      (3)   The percentage of trips which are "primary trips" (as
opposed to "pass-by trips" or "diverted-link trips" for which the project is
not the primary destination);



      (4)   The average length of those trips on the city's major
roadway system;



      (5)   The assumptions and conclusions from which any
projections are made; if the assumptions or conclusions are derived from the
current edition of the ITE manual or other standard reference materials, the
materials shall be identified and appropriate excerpts or specific references
provided; otherwise, the reasoning underlying the assumptions and conclusions
shall be clearly stated in writing; and



      (6)   Such information as the Development Fee Administrator
shall reasonably request.



   (C)   The streets facilities development fee per development unit
shall be calculated according to the following formula(s):



 

   Step 4: Cost per Development Unit


   Streets Level Of Service and Capital Costs
 
Per Vehicle Mile Traveled


      Minor Arterial Cost
 
$32.42


      GROSS CAPITAL COST
 
$32.42



 



 

Arterial Street Facilities - Residential Development Fee Schedule


 

[A]

 

[B]

 

[C]

 

[D]

 

VMT = [A] x [B] x [C] x [D]

 


 


 


 




 

Weekday Vehicle Trip Ends*

 

Trip Rate Adjustment Factors*

 

Avg Miles per Veh. Trip on System*

 

Trip Length Weighing Factors*

 

VMT

 


 

Cost per VMT

 


 

Arterial Component Proposed Development Fee




Unit Type

 

(Per Housing Unit)

 


 


 


 

(Per Housing Unit)



Single Unit
 

5.60

 

64%

 

7.92

 

121%

 

34.33

 

X

 

$32.42

 

=

 

$1,113




Single Unit - Manufactured

 

4.49

 

64%

 

7.92

 

121%

 

27.54

 

X

 

$32.42

 

=

 

$892




2+ Unit

 

4.40

 

64%

 

7.92

 

121%

 

26.97

 

X

 

$32.42

 

=

 

$874




 

Arterial Street Facilities - Nonresidential Development Fee Schedule


 

Weekday Vehicle Trip Ends*

 

Trip Rate Adjustment Factors*

 

Avg Miles per Veh. Trip on System*

 

Trip Length Weighing Factors*

 

VMT [E]

 


 

Cost per VMT [F]

 


 

Arterial Component Proposed Development Fee
[E] X [F]/1,000





 

(Per 1,000 sq. ft.)

 


 


 


 

(Per Square Foot of Floor Area)



Commercial
 

42.70

 

33%

 

7.92

 

66%

 

73.62

 

X

 

$32.42

 

=

 

$2.38



Office
 

11.03

 

50%

 

7.92

 

73%

 

31.87

 

X

 

$32.42

 

=

 

$1.03



Industrial
 

6.97

 

50%

 

7.92

 

73%

 

20.14

 

X

 

$32.42

 

=

 

$0.65




 



 

Streets Level Of Service and Capital Costs
 
Per Vehicle Mile Traveled


      Collector Cost
 
$98.40


      GROSS CAPITAL COST
 
$98.40



 



 

Collector Street Facilities - Residential Development Fee Schedule


 

[A]

 

[B]

 

[C]

 

[D]

 

VMT = [A] x [B] x [C] x [D]

 


 


 


 




 

Weekday Vehicle Trip Ends*

 

Trip Rate Adjustment Factors*

 

Avg Miles per Veh. Trip on System*

 

Trip Length Weighing Factors*

 

VMT

 


 

Cost per VMT

 


 

Collector Component Proposed Development Fee




Unit Type

 

(Per Housing Unit)

 


 


 


 

(Per Housing Unit)



Single Unit
 

5.60

 

64%

 

2.39

 

121%

 

10.37

 

X

 

$98.40

 

=

 

$1,020



   Single Unit - Manufactured
 

4.49

 

64%

 

2.39

 

121%

 

8.32

 

X

 

$98.40

 

=

 

$818



   2+ Unit
 

4.40

 

64%

 

2.39

 

121%

 

8.15

 

X

 

$98.40

 

=

 

$801




 



   [1]   Current fee established in 2012 was for single family and
manufactured home.  The average of both is entered here.



 

Collector Street Facilities - Nonresidential Development Fee Schedule


 

Weekday Vehicle Trip Ends*

 

Trip Rate Adjustment Factors*

 

Avg Miles per Veh. Trip on System*

 

Trip Length Weighing Factors*

 

VMT [E]

 


 

Cost per VMT [F]

 


 

Collector Component Proposed Development Fee
[E] X [F]/1,000





 

(Per 1,000 sq. ft.)

 


 


 


 

(Per Square Foot of Floor Area)



Commercial
 

42.70

 

33%

 

2.39

 

66%

 

22.23

 

X

 

$98.40

 

=

 

$2.18



Office
 

11.03

 

50%

 

2.39

 

73%

 

9.62

 

X

 

$98.40

 

=

 

$0.94



Industrial
 

6.97

 

50%

 

2.39

 

73%

 

6.08

 

X

 

$98.40

 

=

 

$0.59




 



 

Streets Level Of Service and Capital Costs
 
Per Vehicle Mile Traveled


   Signalized Intersection Costs
 
$4.89


   GROSS CAPITAL COST
 
$4.89



 



 

Signalized Intersection Street Facilities - Residential Development Fee
Schedule


 

[A]

 

[B]

 

[C]

 

[D]

 

VMT = [A] x [B] x [C] x [D]

 


 


 


 




 

Weekday Vehicle Trip Ends*

 

Trip Rate Adjustment Factors*

 

Avg Miles per Veh. Trip on System*

 

Trip Length Weighing Factors*

 

VMT

 


 

Cost per VMT

 


 

Arterial Component Proposed Development Fee




Unit Type

 

(Per Housing Unit)

 


 


 


 

(Per Housing Unit)



Single Unit
 

5.60

 

64%

 

10.32

 

121%

 

44.76

 

X

 

$4.89

 

=

 

$218



   Single Unit - Manufactured
 

4.49

 

64%

 

10.32

 

121%

 

33.91

 

X

 

$4.89

 

=

 

$175



   2+ Unit
 

4.40

 

64%

 

10.32

 

121%

 

35.17

 

X

 

$4.89

 

=

 

$171




 



   [1]   Current fee established in 2012 was for single family and
manufactured home.  The average of both is entered here.



 

Signalized Intersection Street Facilities - Nonresidential Development Fee
Schedule


 

Weekday Vehicle Trip Ends*

 

Trip Rate Adjustment Factors*

 

Avg Miles per Veh. Trip on System*

 

Trip Length Weighing Factors*

 

VMT [E]

 


 

Cost per VMT [F]

 


 

Arterial Component Proposed Development Fee
[E] X [F]/1,000





 

(Per 1,000 sq. ft.)

 


 


 


 

(Per Square Foot of Floor Area)



Commercial
 

42.70

 

33%

 

10.32

 

66%

 

95.98

 

X

 

$4.89

 

=

 

$0.46



Office
 

11.03

 

50%

 

10.32

 

73%

 

41.55

 

X

 

$4.89

 

=

 

$0.20



Industrial
 

6.97

 

50%

 

10.32

 

73%

 

26.26

 

X

 

$4.89

 

=

 

$0.12




 



Where:



 

FEE
 
= VMT x Net cost per VMT.


VMT
 
= Average Weekday Trip Ends x Adjustment Factor x Average Miles per System
Trip x Trip Length Weighting Factors.


Weekday Trip Ends per 1,000 Sq. Ft.
 
= vehicle trips per 1,000 sq. ft. of nonresidential development as defined in
the ITE Manual.


Trip Adjustment Factor
 
= percentage of all trip ends that represent destination trips as defined in
the ITE Manual.


Average Miles per System Trip
 
= 7.95 for Minor Arterials, 2.39 for Collectors, and 10.32 for the Street
Facilities system, unless the Applicant provides convincing evidence that
another factor is more appropriate for the proposed development.


Trip Length Weighting Factor
 
= average trip length ratio by land use type as defined in the National
Household Travel Survey.


Net Cost per VMT
 
= $32.42 for Minor Arterials, $98.40 for Collectors, and $4.89 for Signalized
Intersections, unless the Applicant provides convincing evidence that another
net cost factor is more appropriate for the proposed development.



 



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-2-3  USE OF STREET FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   The revenues from street facilities development fees collected
within the service area and accrued interest on such revenues shall be used
to finance project costs of qualifying major street facilities improvements,
as determined by the City Council, provided that the improvements are shown
in the approved Infrastructure Improvements Plan as described in Vol. II, §
7-1-10 of this Chapter, and are located within the same service area.



   (B)   Qualifying street facilities are limited to improvements to
the city's major roadway system. The city's major roadway system consists of
all city-maintained roadways or portions thereof that are classified as
collectors or arterials by the city's adopted Street Classification Plan on
file within the Public Works Department.



   (C)   Qualifying improvement costs include project engineering
costs; the construction cost of improvement, including but not limited to
street travel lanes, public pedestrian and bicycle pathways, turning lanes,
lighting, signalization, signage and landscaping improvements that are
required for the roadway improvement to function effectively; and the
principal, interest and other financing costs of bonds, notes or other
obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance qualified
improvements. Such revenues may also fund the cost of consultants used in
updating the street facilities portion of the Capital Improvements Program
and in updating the street facilities development fee computations.



   (D)   Monies collected as street facilities development fees shall
not be used to pay for any of the following:



      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public
facilities other than qualifying street facilities improvements;



      (2)   Retirement of debt incurred for street facilities
constructed prior to March 1, 1997;



      (3)   Street facilities improvements, such as acceleration or
deceleration lanes, that primarily serve, or are needed to mitigate the
impacts of an individual development;



      (4)   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing streets;



      (5)   City personnel and consultants hired for purposes other
than those expressly permitted under divisions (A) and (B) above;



      (6)   Streets and related transportation improvements that are
within or adjacent to, and intended to serve only, a specific development
such as a new residential subdivision; or



      (7)   Acquisition of land or rights-of-way. Land costs are not
included in the street facilities development fee calculations and no
development fee funds shall be expended on right-of-way acquisition, nor
shall offsets against street facilities development fees be provided for
dedication of rights-of-way.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



ARTICLE 7-3:  POLICE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES



Section



   7-3-1   Police facilities development fee schedule



   7-3-2   Individual assessments of police facilities development fees



   7-3-3   Use of police facilities development fees



§ 7-3-1  POLICE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE.



   Police facilities development fees shall be paid in accordance with
Vol. II, Appendix 7-A at the conclusion of Vol. II, Chapter 7.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-3-2  INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENTS OF POLICE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   The police facilities development fee may be calculated based
upon individual assessment. An individual assessment shall be at the cost of
the applicant and shall be performed by a qualified professional as approved
by the Development Fee Administrator.



   (B)   The individual assessment shall include, without limitation,
the data sources and calculations used to derive the ratio of service unit to
land use for the type of proposed development. The police facilities
development fee per development unit shall be calculated according to the
following formula:



 

Police Facilities Residential Level Of Service and Capital Costs
 
Per Person





   Vehicle Costs

 
$63.06



   Communications Equipment Costs

 
$23.86



   IIP and Development Fee Study Cost

 
$6.44



   GROSS CAPITAL COST

 
$93.36


 



   Revenue Credit   0%

 
$0.00



   NET CAPITAL COST

 
$93.36




 



 

Police Facilities Residential Development Fee Schedule



Unit Type

 

Persons per Housing Unit [1]

 


 

Cost per Person

 


 

Development Fee



Single Unit
 

1.73

 

X

 

$93.36

 

=

 

$161



   Single Unit - Manufactured
 

1.21

 

X

 

$93.36

 

=

 

$113



2+ Unit
 

1.39

 

X

 

$93.36

 

=

 

$129




 



 



Police Facilities Nonresidential Level Of Service and Capital Costs
 
Per Nonres Trip


   Vehicle Costs
 
$7.58


   Communications Equipment Costs
 
$2.87


   IIP and Development Fee Study Cost
 
$0.31


   GROSS CAPITAL COST
 
$10.76


 


   Revenue Credit   0%
 
$0.00


   NET CAPITAL COST
 
$10.76




 



 

Police Facilities Nonresidential Development Fee Schedule



Nonresidential Land Use

 

Vehicle Trips [1]
per 1,000 SF

 


 

Cost per Nonres Trip

 


 

Development Fee



Commercial
 
14.09
 
X
 
$10.76
 
=
 
$0.15


Office
 
5.52
 
X
 
$10.76
 
=
 
$0.05


Industrial
 
3.49
 
X
 
$10.76
 
=
 
$0.03



 



[1]   Development Fee Land Use Assumptions



[2]   Current Fee established in 2012



Where:



 

Persons per Housing Unit
 
= the average number of persons per total dwelling units of the proposed
housing type.


Vehicle Trips
 
= Weekday Trip Ends per 1,000 Sq. Ft. x Trip Adjustment Factor as defined in
the ITE Manual.


Weekday Trip Ends per 1,000 Sq. Ft.
 
= vehicle trips per 1,000 sq. ft. of nonresidential development as defined in
the ITE Manual.


Trip Adjustment Factor
 
= percentage of all trip ends that represent destination trips as defined in
the ITE Manual.


Net Cost per Person
 
= $93.36 unless the Applicant provides convincing evidence that another net
cost factor is more appropriate for the proposed development.


Net Cost per Non-Residential Vehicle Trip
 
= $10.76 unless the Applicant provides convincing evidence that another net
cost factor is more appropriate for the proposed development.



 



   (C)   The Development Fee Administrator shall determine the fee
based on the review of the individual assessment and the guidelines and
formula described in division (B) of this section.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-3-3  USE OF POLICE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   The revenues from police facilities development fees collected
within the service area and accrued interest on such revenues shall be used
to finance project costs of qualifying police facilities improvements, as
determined by the City Council, provided that the improvements are shown in
the approved Infrastructure Improvements Plan as described in Vol. II, §
7-1-10 of this Chapter, and are located within the same service area.



   (B)   Qualifying police facilities improvements are limited to
capital improvements to the city's public safety building, acquisition of
land for or construction of police facilities, acquisition of capital
equipment required for police operations, or other similar improvements,
including the principal, interest and other financing costs of bonds, notes
or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance qualified
improvements. Such revenues may also fund the cost of consultants used in
updating the police facilities portion of the Capital Improvements Program
and in updating the police facilities development fee computations.



   (C)   Monies collected as police facilities development fees shall
not be used to pay for any of the following:



      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public
facilities other than qualifying police facilities improvements;



      (2)   Retirement of debt incurred for police facilities
constructed prior to March 1, 1997;



      (3)   Repair, operation, maintenance or replacement of
existing police facilities or capital equipment; and



      (4)   City personnel and consultants hired for purposes other
than those expressly permitted under division (A) and (B) above.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



ARTICLE 7-4:  PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES



Section



   7-4-1   Parks and recreational facilities development fee schedule



   7-4-2   Individual assessments of parks and recreational facilities
development fees



   7-4-3   Use of park and recreational facilities development fees



§ 7-4-1  PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE.



   Parks and recreational facilities development fees shall be paid in
accordance with Vol. II, Appendix 7-A at the conclusion of Vol. II, Chapter 7.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-4-2  INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENTS OF PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   The parks and recreational facilities development fee may be
calculated based upon individual assessment. An individual assessment shall
be at the cost of the applicant and shall be performed by a qualified
professional as approved by the Development Fee Administrator.



   (B)   The individual assessment shall include, without limitation,
the data sources and calculations used to derive the ratio of service unit to
land use for the type of proposed development. The parks and recreational
facilities development fee per development unit shall be calculated according
to the following formula:



 

Parks and Recreational Facilities Level of Service and Infrastructure Costs
 
Per Person




   Parkland Cost            Developed Parks
 
$594.31


   Park Improvements Cost      Developed Parks
 
$204.32


   Recreation Facility Cost
 
$40.24


   Multi-Use Trails Cost
 
$1.98


   IIP and Development Fee Study Cost:
 
$7.28


   GROSS CAPITAL COST
 
$848.13


 


   Revenue Credit   0%
 
$0.00


   NET CAPITAL COST
 
$848.13




 



 

Parks and Recreational Facilities Development Fee Schedule



Unit Type

 

Persons per Housing Unit [1]

 


 

Cost per Person

 


 

Development Fee



Single Unit
 

1.73

 

X

 

$848.13

 

=

 
$1,466


   Single Unit - Manufactured
 

1.21

 

X

 

$848.13

 

=

 
$1,027


2+ Unit
 

1.39

 

X

 

$848.13

 

=

 
$1,174



 



[1]   Development Fee Land Use Assumptions



[2]   Current Fee established in 2012



 

Parks and Recreational Facilities Level of Service and Infrastructure Costs
 
Per Job




   Parkland Cost            Developed Parks
 
$364.28


   Park Improvements Cost      Developed Parks
 
$125.24


   Recreation Facility Cost
 
$24.67


   Multi-Use Trails Cost
 
$1.22


   IIP and Development Fee Study Cost:
 
$1.71


   GROSS CAPITAL COST
 
$517.12


 


   Revenue Credit   0%
 
$0.00


   NET CAPITAL COST
 
$517.12




 



 

Parks and Recreational Facilities Development Fee Schedule



Nonresidential Land Use

 

Jobs [3]

 


 

Cost per Job

 


 

Development Fee



 

per 1,000 SF

 


 


 


 


Commercial
 

2.00

 

X

 

$517.12

 

=

 
$1.03


Office
 

3.32

 

X

 

$517.12

 

=

 
$1.71


Industrial
 

2.31

 

X

 

$517.12

 

=

 
$1.19



 



[3]   Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers, 9th Edition
(2012).



[4]   City of Apache Junction does not currently assess Parks and
Recreational Facilities development fees on nonresidential development.



Where:



 

Persons per Housing Unit
 
= the average number of persons per total dwelling units of the proposed
housing type.


Jobs
 
= Employment per 1,000 Sq. Ft. as defined in the ITE Manual.


Net Cost per Person
 
= $848.13 unless the Applicant provides convincing evidence that another net
cost factor is more appropriate for the proposed development.


Net Cost per Job
 
= $517.12 unless the Applicant provides convincing evidence that another net
cost factor is more appropriate for the proposed development.



 



   (C)   The Development Fee Administrator shall determine the fee
based on the review of the individual assessment and the guidelines and
formula described in division (B) of this section.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-4-3  USE OF PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   The revenues from parks and recreational facilities
development fees collected within the service area and accrued interest on
the revenues shall be used to finance project costs of qualifying parks and
recreational facilities improvements, as determined by the City Council,
provided that the improvements are shown in the approved Infrastructure
Improvements Plan as described in Vol. II, § 7-1-10 of this Chapter, and are
located within the same service area.



   (B)   Qualifying parks and recreational facilities improvements are
limited to park site development costs, including grading, utilities,
landscaping, lighting, fencing, signage and construction of parking
facilities; acquisition, construction and installation of parks and
recreational facilities and equipment; or other similar improvements,
including the principal, interest and other financing costs of bonds, notes
or other obligations issued by, or on behalf of, the city to finance
qualified improvements. Such revenues may also fund the cost of consultants
used in updating the parks and recreational facilities portion of the Capital
Improvements Program and in updating the parks and recreational facilities
development fee computations.



   (C)   Monies collected as parks and recreational facilities
development fees shall not be used to pay for any of the following:



      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public
facilities other than qualifying parks and recreational facilities
improvements;



      (2)   Retirement of debt incurred for parks and recreational
facilities constructed prior to March 1, 1997;



      (3)   Repair, operation, maintenance or replacement of
existing parks and recreational facilities or capital equipment; and



      (4)   City personnel and consultants hired for purposes other
than those expressly permitted under divisions  (A) and (B) above.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



ARTICLE 7-5:  LIBRARY FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES



Section



   7-5-1   Library facilities development fee schedule



   7-5-2   Individual assessment of library facilities development fees



   7-5-3   Use of library facilities development fees



§ 7-5-1  LIBRARY FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE.



   Library facilities development fees shall be paid in accordance with
Vol. II, Appendix 7-A at the conclusion of Vol. II, Chapter 7.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-5-2  INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENTS OF LIBRARY FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   The library facilities development fee may be calculated based
upon individual assessment. An individual assessment shall be at the cost of
the applicant and shall be performed by a qualified professional as approved
by the Development Fee Administrator.



   (B)   The individual assessment shall include, without limitation,
the data sources and calculations used to derive the ratio of service unit to
land use for the type of proposed development. The development fee per
development unit shall be calculated according to the following formula:



 

Library Facilities Level of Service and Infrastructure Costs
 
Per Person


   Library Facilities
 
$534.90


   IIP and Development Fee Study Cost:
 
$5.29


   GROSS CAPITAL COST
 
$540.19


 


   Revenue Credit   0%
 
$0.00


   NET CAPITAL COST
 
$540.19



 



 

Library Facilities Development Fee Schedule



Unit Type

 

Persons per Housing Unit [1]

 


 

Cost per Person

 


 

Development Fee



Single Unit
 

1.73

 

X

 

$540.19

 

=

 
$934


   Single Unit - Manufactured
 

1.21

 

X

 

$540.19

 

=

 
$654


2+ Unit
 

1.39

 

X

 

$540.19

 

=

 
$748



 



[1]   Development Fee Land Use Assumptions



[2]   Current Fee established in 2012



 

Library Facilities Level of Service and Infrastructure Costs
 
Per Job


   Library Facilities
 
$151.93


   IIP and Development Fee Study Cost:
 
$1.24


   GROSS CAPITAL COST
 
$153.17


 


   Revenue Credit   0%
 
$0.00


   NET CAPITAL COST
 
$153.17



 



 

Libraries Facilities Nonresidential Development Fee Schedule



Nonresidential Land Use

 

Jobs [3]

 


 

Cost per Job

 


 

Development Fee



 

per 1,000 SF

 


 


 


 


Commercial
 

2.00

 

X

 

$153.17

 

=

 
$0.30


Office
 

3.32

 

X

 

$153.17

 

=

 
$0.50


Industrial
 

2.31

 

X

 

$153.17

 

=

 
$0.35



 



[3]   Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers, 9th Edition
(2012).



[4]   City of Apache Junction does not currently assess Parks and
Recreational Facilities development fees on nonresidential development.



Where:



 

Persons per Housing Unit
 
= the average number of persons per total dwelling units of the proposed
housing type.


Jobs
 
= Employment per 1,000 Sq. Ft. as defined in the ITE Manual.


Net Cost per Person
 
= $540.19 unless the Applicant provides convincing evidence that another net
cost factor is more appropriate for the proposed development.


Net Cost per Job
 
= $153.17 unless the Applicant provides convincing evidence that another net
cost factor is more appropriate for the proposed development.



 



   (C)   The Development Fee Administrator shall determine the fee
based on the review of the individual assessment and the guidelines and
formula described in divisions (A) and (B) of this section.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 7-5-3  USE OF LIBRARY FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   The revenues from library facilities development fees
collected within the service area and accrued interest on such revenues shall
be used to finance project costs of qualifying library facilities
improvements, as determined by the City Council, provided that the
improvements are shown in the approved Infrastructure Improvements Plan as
described in Vol. II, § 7-1-10 of this Chapter, and are located within the
same service area.



   (B)   Qualifying library facilities improvements are limited to
acquisition of library sites; library site development costs, including
grading, utilities, landscaping, lighting, fencing, signage and construction
of parking facilities; acquisition, construction and installation of library
facilities and equipment; or other similar improvements, including the
principal, interest and other financing costs of bonds, notes or other
obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance qualified
improvements. The revenues may also fund the cost of consultants used in
updating the library facilities portion of the Capital Improvements Program
and in updating the library facilities development fee computations.



   (C)   Monies collected as library facilities development fees shall
not be used to pay for any of the following:



      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public
facilities other than qualifying library facilities improvements;



      (2)   Retirement of debt incurred for library facilities
constructed prior to March 1, 1997;



      (3)   Repair, operation, maintenance or replacement of
existing library facilities or capital equipment; and



      (4)   City personnel and consultants hired for purposes other
than those expressly permitted under divisions (A) and (B) above.



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



APPENDIX 7-A:  DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE



 

 

Library

 

Parks & Recreation

 

Police

 

Streets

 

Total Development Fee



Residential
 

Per Housing Unit






   Single Unit

 

$934

 

$1,466

 

$161

 

$2,364

 

$4,925




      Single Unit - Manufactured Homes

 

$654

 

$1,027

 

$113

 

$1,895

 

$3,689




   2+ Unit

 

$748

 

$1,174

 

$129

 

$1,856

 

$3,907





Nonresidential
 

Per Square Foot of Floor Area




   Commercial

 

$0.30

 

$1.03

 

$0.15

 

$5.04

 

$6.52




   Office

 

$0.50

 

$1.71

 

$0.05

 

$2.18

 

$4.44




   Industrial

 

$0.35

 

$1.19

 

$0.03

 

$1.36

 

$2.93





 



(Ord. 1399, passed 5-20-2014)



CHAPTER 8:  COMMUNICATIONS



      Article




         8-1.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES




ARTICLE 8-1:  WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



Section



   8-1-1   Intent and purpose



   8-1-2   Applicability



   8-1-3   Definitions



   8-1-4   Site locations



   8-1-5   General site development regulations



   8-1-6   Specific site development regulations



   8-1-7   Design and siting review



   8-1-8   Application requirements



   8-1-9   Permitting



   8-1-10   Exceptions



§ 8-1-1  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Article is to establish a comprehensive set of
regulations pertaining to the location, siting, development, design and
permitting of wireless communications facilities for all zones existing in
this city in order to:



   (A)   Facilitate the development of a wireless communications
infrastructure in the city for commercial, public and emergency uses; and



   (B)   Protect the health, safety, welfare and aesthetic concerns of
the public.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-1)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



§ 8-1-2  APPLICABILITY.



   This Article shall apply to all types of aerials and associated
facilities used for wireless communications, that is, the transmitting and/or
receiving of voice, data, video images and other information through the air
via signals in the radio and microwave frequency band. This includes aerials
for amateur radio, television, wireless modems, cellular phones, enhanced
specialized mobile radio (ESMR), personal communications services (PCS),
paging systems, satellite communications and other wireless communication
technologies utilizing signals in the radio and microwave band. No wireless
communication facility (antennas, masts, towers and associated equipment)
shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged other than in
conformance with the provisions of this Article and other applicable
provisions of this Chapter.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-2)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



§ 8-1-3  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AERIAL.  A stationary transmitting and/or receiving wireless
communication device consisting of 1 or any combination of the elements
listed below:



      (1)   ANTENNA.  A horizontal or vertical element or array,
panel or dish that may be attached to a mast or tower for the purpose of
transmitting or receiving radio or microwave frequency signals;



      (2)   GUY WIRES.  Wires necessary to ensure the safety and
stability of an antenna, mast or both;



      (3)   MAST.  A vertical element consisting of a tube or rod
which supports an antenna; and/or



      (4)   TOWER.  A vertical framework of cross elements which
supports either an antenna, mast or both.



   COLLOCATION.  The placement of aerials and other facilities belonging
to 2 or more communications service providers on a single mast or building.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-3)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



§ 8-1-4  SITE LOCATIONS.



   (A)   Residential and home occupation aerials.  Aerials intended
for residential and home occupation use may be allowed on all residentially
zoned and used properties. HAM aerials are included in this designation.



   (B)   Commercial, industrial and public/ semi-public properties.



      (1)   Commercial, office, public. Aerials intended for
commercial, office, industrial and public/semi-public use are prohibited on
residentially zoned and used properties and/or historically designated
properties.



      (2)   Administrative review.  Aerials proposed on
public/semi-publicly owned properties shall be required to undergo an
administrative review process.



      (3)   Conditional use permit.  Aerials proposed on properties
zoned for commercial or industrial purposes shall be required to go through
the conditional use permit process and the associated public hearings before
the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-4)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



§ 8-1-5  GENERAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Aerials.



      (1)   Aerials located on public or semi-public property shall
have a maximum height allowance that is compatible to existing communication
structures on the subject property.  If no other wireless communication
facilities exist on the subject property, then the height shall be consistent
with other existing structures within the city, subject to approval by the
Director of Development Services.



      (2)   Overall height of the aerials on commercial and
industrial zoned property shall meet the maximum height requirement of the
zoning district plus 10 feet. Proposed aerials exceeding this height may
request an exception during the conditional use permit process for an aerial
exceeding the maximum height allowed. Except those wireless communication
facilities that meet the criteria as listed in division (B)(1) of this
section.



      (3)   All aerials, either based on the ground or based on an
existing structure, shall require a building permit. The building permit
requirements shall include adequate engineering analysis and details of the
location of support devices, including but not limited to footing, guy wires
and braces conforming to all applicable codes, as adopted by the city, to the
satisfaction of the Building Official.



      (4)   The section of masts and towers more than 30 feet above
ground shall have a cross-section that can be fitted within a square with a
side of 12 inches, unless an exception is granted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission through the conditional use permit process.



   (B)   Antenna.



      (1)   An antenna consisting of a single vertical element not
more than 4 inches in diameter in lieu of a horizontal arrangement shall have
a maximum height of 65 feet and be an original manufactured antenna.  HAM
antennas exceeding the 65-foot height limit are required to apply for an
exception as outlined in Vol. II, § 8-1-10.



      (2)   Antennas and/or guy wires shall not overlap adjoining
properties and shall not encroach upon an easement without the written
consent of the owner of the easement, which shall be attached to the
application for the building permit.



   (C)   Masts and towers.



      (1)   Concentration of towers and masts. The number of towers
and detached masts exceeding 8 inches in diameter at the base and 30 feet in
height above ground level allowed per lot shall be as follows:



 

Lot Size
 
Maximum Number of Towers and Detached Masts


Less than 30,000 square feet
 
1


30,000 square feet or more
 
2; additional towers, and detached masts, above 2, not meeting the criteria
stated in Vol. II, § 8-1-5(C)(1) require conditional use permit approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission



 



      (2)   Wood.  Wood towers shall not be erected.



      (3)   Location on parcel. Masts and towers must be located to
the rear of the property in accordance with placement of accessory structures
on a parcel and shall not be closer than 6 feet to any property boundary.



      (4)   Conditions.  All commercial, office and industrial
aerial mast and tower approvals shall be conditioned to allow the collocation
of aerials and related facilities of other commercial, office, and industrial
users where appropriate and feasible.



   (D)   Associated facilities. Back-up power generators shall comply
with the setbacks of the zoning districts and city's noise standards as
outlined in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, § 10-1-12.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-5)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



§ 8-1-6  SPECIFIC SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Residential and home occupation aerials. Aerials with panel or
dish antennas of more than 10 square feet shall comply with the setbacks and
height limits for accessory structures.



   (B)   Commercial, industrial and public, semi-public properties.



      (1)   Aerials mounted on buildings may extend 6 feet above the
building parapet wall. An additional 1 foot of height is allowed for every 10
feet that the aerial is set back from the parapet, to a maximum height of 10
feet above the building parapet, before a height exception is required.



      (2)   Detached masts and towers shall be located no closer to
a residentially zoned property than 50 feet or a distance equal to 1 foot for
every 1 foot of structure height, whichever is greater. Building mounted
aerials should be located a minimum of 50 feet horizontally from any
residentially zoned property.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-6)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



§ 8-1-7  DESIGN AND SITING REVIEW.



   (A)   For aerials requiring discretionary review, the Director of
Development Services or the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the
design and siting of the aerial. The primary objective is to blend the design
of the aerial into the surrounding environment, or site the aerial in such a
manner to minimize the visual intrusiveness of the structure.



   (B)   This review may include but not be limited to the following
criteria:



      (1)   The weighing of the design and site advantages and
disadvantages of a wall-mounted aerial versus a roof-mounted aerial versus a
freestanding aerial;



      (2)   The use of colors, materials and textures to integrate
the aerial into the surrounding environment or building;



      (3)   The use of landscaping to screen the aerial and its
associated structures;



      (4)   The proximity and visibility of the aerial to
residential properties and public rights-of-way;



      (5)   The dispersal of aerial locations to avoid visual
clutter;



      (6)   The concentration of aerial locations to avoid visual
clutter;



      (7)   Opportunities for collocation of aerials on existing
masts and towers where visual intrusiveness is reduced;



      (8)   The design of the building which houses the related
equipment and its compatibility with the adjoining building architecture; and



      (9)   The balancing of aesthetic concerns with the need to
provide a functional communications system.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-7)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



§ 8-1-8  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to the standard application requirements listed in Vol. II,
§ 8-1-7, the applicant may be required to provide the following materials:



   (A)   A master plan shall be prepared by the provider of all
facilities that can be reasonably foreseen, showing the proposed aerial
locations within a 1-mile radius of the proposed site(s). The purpose of this
requirement is to identify opportunities for clustering, dispersal and
collocation of aerials to reduce visual intrusiveness.



   (B)   Erection of a mock aerial (model aerial to scale), and a
computer simulation of sight-line elevations for all aerials, to help assess
the visual effects.



   (C)   Documentation that the technology and usage of that technology
meets Federal Communications Commission adopted safety standards.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-8)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



§ 8-1-9  PERMITTING.



   (A)   For all zoning districts, aerials that exceed maximum height
limits require a height exception except as otherwise provided in Vol. II, §
8-1-10.



   (B)   All city approvals for new aerials and modifications of
existing aerial approvals shall be conditioned to require the removal of the
aerial and its associated facilities if the aerial is not used for its
permitted purpose for a period of 180 days. The property owner or applicant
shall bear the entire cost of demolition and site restoration.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-9)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



§ 8-1-10  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Exceptions may be granted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission for tower and mast cross section widths and aerial heights
exceeding the maximum limits where practical difficulties, unnecessary
hardships or results inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Article
result from strict application of the Article provisions.



   (B)   A request for exception must be submitted on a form as
prescribed by the Director of Development Services. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee prescribed by City Council resolution. Upon receipt of
an exception application, a time and place for a public hearing before the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be set. A Notice of Public Hearing for
an exception under this Article shall be given in the same manner as provided
in Vol. II, § 1-16-7 of the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Apache
Junction. The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant the exception based
upon all the following findings:



      (1)   That the literal enforcement of the provisions of this
Article will result in restrictions inconsistent with the spirit and intent
of this Article;



      (2)   That granting of an exception will not result in a
condition that will be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements
in the vicinity and will not be materially detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare; and



      (3)   That the exception to be granted will not result in a
hazardous condition for pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (C)   After closing the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for
exception. The Commission’s decision on the exception request may be
appealed to the City Council as provided for in the Zoning Ordinance for the
city.



(Prior Document, § 8-1-10)  (Ord. 985, passed 3-18-1997)



CHAPTER 9: PLANTS [RESERVED]



Editor's note:
  Information regarding plants and native plant preservation is set forth in
Apache Junction City Code, Vol. II, Art. 1-8.



CHAPTER 10:  ENGINEERING STANDARDS



      Article




         10-1.   INTRODUCTION





         10-2.   CONSTRUCTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS





         10-3.   STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION





         10-4.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT





         10-5.   WATER





         10-6.   SEWER





         10-7.   SITE DEVELOPMENT





         10-8.   SUBDIVISION PLATS





         10-9.   AS-BUILT DRAWINGS




         APPENDIX 10-A:  DOWNTOWN CORE AREA AND B-3 ZONING DISTRICT



         APPENDIX 10-B:  RURAL AREA



         APPENDIX 10-C:  LOST DUTCHMAN HEIGHTS



         APPENDIX 10-D:  STANDARD DETAILS



ARTICLE 10-1:  INTRODUCTION



Section



   10-1-1   Purpose of Engineering Standards



   10-1-2   Sections



   10-1-3   Intent



   10-1-4   Policies related to development improvements



   10-1-5   General information



§ 10-1-1  PURPOSE OF ENGINEERING STANDARDS.



   The purpose of the Engineering Standards (“this Chapter” or
“these Standards”) is to provide both general information and specific
design standards to inform developers and their designers of the planning and
designing of public and private infrastructure within the City of Apache
Junction. Design concepts and specific technical data are outlined, but are
not intended to supersede sound engineering judgment. All plans are to be
prepared with these concepts in mind and will be reviewed accordingly. No
attempt has been made in these standards to establish a complete set of
design criteria; however, certain standards must be followed to provide
consistency for the sake of maintenance, repair or replacement.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-1-2  SECTIONS.



   (A)   Generally. This Chapter is divided into individual sections
and specially designated areas, which cover specific elements of the design
and development review process. It begins with general information followed
by specific technical details. Staff updates will be published and made
available periodically on an as needed basis. The city engineer may provide a
“Memorandum of Clarification” to portions of the standards on an
as-required basis. Clarifications will posted on the city website and at the
City Clerk’s Office.



   (B)   Specially designated areas. The specially designated areas are
included as individual separate elements of this Chapter and are as follows:



      (1)   Downtown Area (Apache Junction City Code Vol. II,
Appendix 10-A). The physical limits of the Downtown Area are shown on Apache
Junction Standard Detail AJ-12.1.



      (2)   Rural Area (Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Appendix
10-B). The physical limits of the Rural Area are shown on Apache Junction
Standard Detail AJ-12.1.



      (3)   Lost Dutchman Heights (Apache Junction City Code Vol.
II, Appendix 10-C).  The physical limits of Lost Dutchman Heights are shown
on Apache Junction Standard Detail AJ-12.1.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-1-3  INTENT.



   These Engineering Standards are intended to be used in conjunction with
the specifications of the land development, subdivision, zoning, floodplain,
grading, landscaping and other appropriate ordinances of the city, and such
other agencies as may have jurisdiction.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-1-4  GENERAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   All development within the city shall comply with all
requirements of the city codes, ordinances, procedures, rules, regulations,
guides and manuals. Copies of these documents, with revisions, are on file in
the Apache Junction City Clerk’s office. Preliminary and final design plans
shall be prepared in accordance with these standards.



   (B)   All construction of public infrastructure shall be in
accordance with the approved plans, the latest City of Apache Junction
Engineering Standards (this Chapter), the Apache Junction Standard Details
set forth in Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Appendix 10-D to this
Chapter, the current Uniform Standard Details and Uniform Standard
Specifications published by the Maricopa Association of Governments
(“MAG”), the Arizona Department of Transportation (“ADOT”), American
Water Works Association (“AWWA”), American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials (“AASHTO”), American Public Works
Association (“APWA”), Arizona Department of Environmental Quality
(“ADEQ”) and by the city as follows:



      (1)   Conceptual site/improvement plans.



         (a)   A developer may prepare and submit a conceptual
site/improvement plan for purposes of discussion with the development
services department and the public works department. The Preliminary Design
Review process will provide general directions, comments and requirements,
which may aid the developer in the production of his or her final plans. City
staff will reserve specific directions, comments and requirements at the time
of formal plans submission.



         (b)   In certain cases, such as projects with access off
major thoroughfares, or projects located in areas of major drainage
concerns/problems, a conceptual plan may be required in order for the
development services department and the public works department to assess
concerns and provide recommendations.



      (2)   Horizontal and vertical control.



         (a)   The developer’s engineer shall prepare plans in
conjunction with established and verified horizontal control available
adjacent to the site, and with vertical datum as provided by the city.



         (b)   Benchmarks shall be clearly indicated on the cover
sheet, and temporary benchmarks shall be clearly indicated on each
plan/profile sheet of the improvement plans. All plans shall reference a
minimum of 2 city benchmarks for horizontal control and a minimum of 1
benchmark for vertical control. Horizontal and vertical controls used for the
project shall be identified on the cover sheet and shall include the basis of
bearings, and the city benchmark numbers, description and latest elevation.
The benchmarks shall be verified by the construction contractor during
construction.



         (c)   All CAD drawings shall be referenced to a minimum
of 2 known Maricopa County Department of Transportation (“MCDOT”)
Geodetic Densification and Cadastral Survey (“GDACS”) control locations
(section corners and/or quarter-section corners) and projected to the
following national coordinate system:



            1.   Horizontal Coordinates:



               a.   North American Datum (“NAD”) 1983
High Accuracy Reference Network (“HARN”)



               b.   State Plane Arizona Central



               c.   Unit of Measure - International Feet



            2.   Vertical Coordinates (if applicable):



               a.   North American Vertical Datum of 1988
(“NAVD88")



      (3)   Right-of-way. The acquisition and dedication of new
street right-of-way and/or easements (utility, drainage and the like) shall
be determined and coordinated through the city. Deeds containing legal
descriptions and accompanying exhibits for these rights-of-way, easements,
tracts and/or parcels used to dedicate or cause to be dedicated to the city
shall be prepared and sealed in accordance with the requirements of the
Arizona State Board of Technical Registration and submitted to the city for
approval and recordation prior to final plan approval.



      (4)   Street lights. Street lights are required on all public
streets within or adjacent to the proposed development per city regulations.
Plans for these facilities must be included in the overall submittal. Street
lights are not required in the specially designated Rural Area.



      (5)   Utilities.



         (a)   All utility designs must be in accordance with
city standards, utility company standards, the latest State and County Health
Department requirements, and approved by each respective agency prior to the
issuance of city permits. The developer shall:



            1.   Coordinate the plans with all of the
appropriate utility companies; and



            2.   Place a “utility coordination block” on
the cover sheet showing the names of the utility companies, and the date
plans were submitted to each company or agency.



         (b)   Utilities for new development shall be placed
underground in accordance with landscaping requirements set forth in Apache
Junction City Code Vol. II, Article 1-8, Landscape Regulations.



         (c)   Existing and proposed locations must be shown on
plans to reduce the possibility of conflict and damage. Correcting conflicts
shall be the responsibility of the developer. All relocation costs must be
borne by the developer.



         (d)   In the case of large projects where the
improvements cannot be shown on 1 plan sheet, the plans must include a
general Master Utility Plan for the development. This Master Utility Plan
shall appear on 1 sheet and be included with the improvement plan set. The
Master Utility Plan shall include proposed street light locations.



      (6)   Soils report. The developer shall provide a soils
investigation report for each project. Areas of unsuitable soil and areas
that have large shrink and swell potential, as well as areas of subsidence or
fissures, will require special treatment during project construction. The
developer’s engineer shall note these areas and special treatment
requirements from the soils report on the plans. The report shall investigate
soil conditions for structural thickness for all streets, percolation rates
for dry wells or retention basins, building foundation allowable loads, and
retaining wall allowable loads.



      (7)   Plan review.



         (a)   Once the plans for the development have been
prepared, they shall be submitted to the development services department with
the appropriate development and review fees. Once submitted, they will be
distributed to the appropriate city departments and Fire District for their
review and comment. These comments will be compiled and consolidated by the
Apache Junction development services department and returned to the
developer. All such comments shall be incorporated into the plans and reports
by the developer for resubmittal.



         (b)   Water plans that are in the Arizona Water
Company’s jurisdiction will be submitted to Arizona Water Company for its
review and approval.



         (c)   Water plans that are in the Apache Junction Water
District’s jurisdiction will be submitted to Apache Junction Water District
for its review and approval.



         (d)   Sewer plans shall be submitted to Superstition
Mountains Community Facilities District No. 1 for its review and approval.



      (8)   Plan approval.



         (a)   Final plan approval is required prior to the start
of construction. Plans are considered approved when all appropriate sign-offs
have been obtained.



         (b)   Plan approval is valid for 1 year from date of
approval.



         (c)   If construction is not started within 1 year of
the issuance of permit, the plans must be resubmitted for review and
re-approval, and the appropriate fees must be re-paid. The updated plans will
be subject to review under the code in force at the time of the new review.



      (9)   Construction.



         (a)   Construction permits are required for each phase
of each type of construction activity within the city. Any contractor found
working on a project without an official set of approved plans and permits
shall discontinue work and if they do not is subject to a stop work order
issued by the city engineer or City Building Official. Prior to the issuance
of a permit, the developer shall provide the appropriate assurance of
construction for the off-site improvements per city regulations.



         (b)   The city’s review of all NPDES submittals
including NOI, NOT and SWPPP is intended as review only and does not
constitute approval of the methods or plans for cleaning the stormwater and
protecting the waters of the United States. The contractor is solely
responsible for insuring that all requirements of the Clean Water Act are
strictly enforced.



      (10)   Preliminary and final plat. Preliminary and final plat
requirements, see Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Article 10-8 of this
Chapter.



   (C)   Electronic submittal requirements.



      (1)   Approval submittal:



         (a)   Final plat, subdivision and site improvement
plans: CD/DVD containing complete final plat and improvement plan base
file(s) in AutoCad DWG format (all X-REF files to be inserted into each DWG
file) and PDF images of each plan sheet i.e. the signature set. The PDF files
will be named the same as the construction plan sheets (i.e. C1.pdf, 100.pdf,
and the like).



         (b)   Geospatial data: data can also be delivered in a
GIS format such as a shapefile (“SHP”) or geodatabase.



      (2)   Revised plan approval submittal:



         (a)   Final plat, subdivision and site improvement
plans: CD/DVD containing complete REVISED final plat and improvement plan
base file(s) in AutoCad DWG format and PDF images of REVISED plan package,
8-1/2x11 minor revision sheet, etc. with approval submittal. The PDF files
will be named the same as the construction plan sheets (i.e. C1.pdf, 100.pdf,
and the like).



         (b)    Geospatial data: Data can also be delivered in a
GIS format such as a shapefile (“SHP”) or geodatabase.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-1-5  POLICIES RELATED TO DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENTS.



   The following sections outline the city’s policies related to various
improvements associated with the development process. They are by nature
general in scope. Reference should be made to the appropriate sections within
the balance of these standards for specific details.



   (A)   Street improvement policy.



      (1)   All developments within the city shall provide an
interior street system adequate to ensure that all parcels and/or facilities
within the development shall have reasonable access to the balance of the
public street system. Further, they shall provide access into the development
for public service and/or emergency operations. Such facilities shall be of
such width and structural strength as to provide safe and unrestricted access.



      (2)   In single-family developments it is the intent of the
city that the street system be designed in conformance with current street
classifications. There shall be minimal direct access to the collectors,
secondary streets, and extremely limited access to the arterials.



      (3)   When the development occurs adjacent to a boundary
street, it is the city’s policy that it shall be the responsibility of the
developer to install improvements along their frontage to the ultimate grade
and alignment for that boundary street. This may include removal and
replacement of the existing street surface to the centerline if that
structure is inadequate to meet the current design standards. Concrete curb
and gutter, concrete sidewalk, street lighting, landscaping, irrigation and
burial of overhead utilities will be required, at the sole or substantial
expense of the developer.



   (B)   Storm drainage policy.



      (1)   It is the city’s policy that all developments within
the city shall provide sufficient retention/detention so as to minimize the
adverse impact of that development on its downstream neighbors. To that end,
all development shall provide sufficient on-site retention/detention to
contain, at the least, the runoff generated by storm event falling on that
property (see Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-4-2(A)(1) and (2)).
Such retention/detention facilities shall be separate and distinct tracts or
drainage easements within the development and shall be planned for
accordingly.



      (2)   Further, it is the city’s policy that all developments
shall provide adequate drainage facilities so as to convey runoff, generated
both on and off the project, around or through the project in such a manner
as to ensure that the structures will be free from flooding and that there is
reasonable access for emergency and public service vehicles. The developer
shall install storm sewers, channels and/or other physical improvements
necessary to achieve this result.



      (3)   The Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County; Volume
I, Hydrology, shall be used to determine peak discharge volumes for design
purposes, and Volume II, Hydraulics is to be utilized as a basis for design
guidance and criteria.



      (4)   When washes cross a property, an erosion hazard setback
from the edges of the wash(es) will be determined by the development services
department and no buildings will be constructed within the setback without
industry acceptable erosion hazard setback mitigation techniques and
structures.



   (C)   Water line extension policy. It is the city’s policy that
all development within the city shall have an adequate and secure source of
potable water. Therefore, unless specifically excepted in writing by the
Apache Junction Water Utilities Community Facilities District (“WUCFD”)
or the Apache Junction Water District (“AJWD”), all developments within
the city shall be serviced by AJWD or Arizona Water Company. Further, the
developer shall extend the system to and through the development as necessary
to ensure adequate supply to the development. If deemed necessary and
appropriate, the developer shall extend the water distribution system to the
extremities of the project so as to ensure that more distant potential users
shall have reasonable access to the potable water source.



   (D)   Sewer line extension policy. It is the city’s policy that,
unless specifically excepted in writing by the Superstition Mountains
Community Facilities District No. 1 (“SMCFD”), all developments within
the city shall provide for the discharge of domestic and other liquid waste
into the sewage system provided by SMCFD. All developers shall be required to
extend to and through their project a sewage collection system of a size
sufficient to dispose of these wastes to the SMCFD’s system. When deemed
appropriate and necessary, the developer shall extend the main trunk and/or
collector lines to the upstream extremities of the project so as to provide
reasonable access for potential upstream users to the SMCFD’s sewage
system. Owners of developments outside the city limits but within the CAG 208
Plan boundaries must annex into the city and enter into a development
agreement to do so which is binding to successors in interest.



   (E)   Site development policy. It is the city’s policy that all
development within the city shall be designed and constructed in such manner
as to provide a safe and pleasant environment for the current and future
citizens of Apache Junction. To that end, the appropriate standards have been
established for site development, to include: public and/or private access
for general and special uses; water and sewage systems; on-site and off-site
drainage; irrigation; landscaping; storm retention; street lighting, traffic
control and public utilities as may be required. The structures themselves
are to be constructed in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations (Apache
Junction City Code Vol. II, Chapter 2) and/or Zoning Ordinance (Apache
Junction City Code Vol. II, Chapter 1), the current adopted International
Building Code, Standard Specifications, and these standards, as appropriate.



   (F)   Order of precedence. It is not intended by these standards to
repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws or ordinances except those specifically repealed
with private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land
to which the city is a party. Where these standards impose a greater
restriction on land, buildings or structures than is imposed or required by
such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions
of these standards shall prevail.



   (G)   Definitions and abbreviations. The words, abbreviations or
phrases used in these standards may be found in the Maricopa Association of
Governments Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction
(Standard Specifications) and Uniform Standard Details for Public Works
Construction (Standard Details). All other words or phrases shall be per the
generally accepted meaning of the English language.



(Ord. passed  - - )



ARTICLE 10-2:  CONSTRUCTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS



Section



   10-2-1   General comments



   10-2-2   Plan submittal documents



   10-2-3   Redline comments



   10-2-4   Approval of plans



   10-2-5   Basic plan requirements



   10-2-6   Cover sheet



   10-2-7   Detail sheet



   10-2-8   Reports and other documents



   10-2-9   Special plan requirements



   10-2-10   Plan view only sheets



   10-2-11   Plan and profile sheets



   10-2-12   General construction notes



   10-2-13   Street construction notes



   10-2-14   Grading and drainage construction notes



   10-2-15   Water main construction notes



   10-2-16   Sewer construction notes



   10-2-17   Civil Engineering Plan review checklist



§ 10-2-1  GENERAL COMMENTS.



   (A)   This chapter contains information to assist the consultant in
the preparation of all construction plans and documents to be submitted to
the city for approval.



   (B)   All plans shall conform to the latest revised copy of the
city’s Engineering Standards (this Chapter) and Apache Junction Standard
Details set forth in Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Appendix 10-D to this
Chapter.



   (C)   Any deviation from this Chapter requires prior approval by the
city engineer.



   (D)   All construction plans for grading and drainage, streets,
water, sewer and storm drains shall be prepared per the standards set forth
in these standards and Standard Details.



   (E)   If any plan submitted is not in compliance with these
standards, or has in the plan reviewer’s opinion excessive corrections, the
review may not continue and will be returned to the owner. Any plan submitted
for review, even if discontinued, will be counted as a plan review submittal.



   (F)   All plans and reports shall be accompanied by a completed
Checklist for Engineering Plan Review as set forth in Apache Junction City
Code Vol. II, § 10-2-17 and city engineering Plan Review Fee Schedule, as
set forth in Apache Junction City Code Vol. I, Chapter 4, Fees.



   (G)   Two (2) sets of drainage reports, grading and drainage, paving
and storm drain plans, Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (“SWPPP”),
and 6 sets of commercial and all other development plans with off-site
improvements along perimeter streets are required for each submittal to the
city’s development services department. Plan construction documents shall
also be submitted in PDF electronics file format. The corresponding number of
sets of plans and city redlines are required for all subsequent submittals.



   (H)   When final plans are submitted for approval signatures, a CD
of the electronic CAD files of the construction plan sheets shall also be
submitted per § 10-1-5(C). Each sheet file shall not contain any X-reference
files which shall be “inserted” into the drawing file.



   (I)   Submittals of water and sewer plans shall be made directly to
the utility companies and there must be verification by the developer of
submittal requirements with each respective utility company.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-2  PLAN SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS.



   (A)   Site plan (site, drainage, water, sewer plans and others as
requested by city). An approved site plan shall be included in or submitted
with a drainage report and/or grading and drainage plan.



   (B)   The following may be submitted simultaneously:



      (1)   Drainage report;



      (2)   Grading and drainage plan;



      (3)   Paving plan (including striping plan and soils report);



      (4)   Storm drain plan;



      (5)   Sewer plan to the sewer district and city;



      (6)   Water plan to the water company/water district and city;



      (7)   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (“SWPPP”);



      (8)   Street lights plan;



      (9)   Traffic signal installation plan if applicable; and



      (10)   Dry utilities plan.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-3  REDLINE COMMENTS.



   All plan review and city redline comments must be corrected or
clarified. If there is a discrepancy concerning a redline comment, plan
review staff should be notified. The redline set of plans shall be returned
with the next plan submittal. Changes made to the plans or report, other than
corrections noted in the city’s redlines, shall be listed in detail with
the location in plans clearly stated. Failure to identify additional changes
shall result in return of plans and an additional review shall be required.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-4  APPROVAL OF PLANS.



   (A)   When the plans meet the requirements for approval, the
original Mylar cover sheet will be requested. The original (4 mil) Mylar
cover sheet and 7 full sets of plans on bond paper shall be submitted for
signature. Prior to city signature, all other reviewing agencies shall have
signed the cover sheet. If an agency does not sign the cover, a letter of its
approval shall accompany the cover sheet and the letter date and signing
party will be noted on the cover sheet.



   (B)   Any approvals or permits by the city shall not constitute
authorization, approval or acceptance that the developer has complied with
all federal, state, or county rules, regulations and requirements. The
developer is responsible for obtaining and shall comply with all federal,
state and county approvals, authorizations and permits, including but not
limited to the following:



      (1)   Clean Water Act (Section 404);



      (2)   Air quality permits: dust, industrial, and small
operations;



      (3)   National Historic Preservation Act & Archaeology; and



      (4)   Environmental compliance permits.



   (C)   A CD/DVD of the electronic files per § 10-1-5(C) for the
AutoCAD drawings shall also be submitted at this time. AutoCAD drawing files
shall not contain X-reference files within them. All X-referenced files shall
be “inserted” into each drawing, such that there are no X-referenced
files associated with an AutoCAD base file drawing. The plan files shall also
be submitted in PDF format on the same CD/DVD per § 10-1-5(C).



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-5  BASIC PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   General submittal standards:



   (A)   Plans shall be prepared on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet size,
with a minimum 2-inch left border and minimum 1/2-inch border on all other
sides. Plan sets of differing sizes need to be assembled according to size.



   (B)   Plans submitted for review shall have the appropriate
professional (State of Arizona) seal, signature, and date on each sheet in
accordance with the requirements of the Arizona State Board of Technical
Registration.



   (C)   All infrastructure improvements (e.g., water, sewer, grading)
shall be submitted on separate sheets. Exceptions to this are:



      (1)   Storm drain and paving may be on the same sheet
(separate fees apply for each utility); and



      (2)   Water and sewer may be on the same sheet (separate fees
apply for each utility).



   (D)   (1)   All improvement plans submitted for review shall be
to a scale that allows the information to be clearly read and easily
understood. The city may use 50% reduced copies of improvement plans; and
should be taken into account when selecting drawing scales, line weights and
lettering sizes.



      (2)   The following are standard drawing scales to be used for
construction documents submitted to the city. The development services
department may consider the use of other scales on a case-by-case basis.



 


Drawing Scales - General Standards




Type of Sheet

 

Scale





Plan and profile showing public street improvements (curb, gutter and
sidewalk)
 
1 in. = 20 ft. horizontal


1 in. = 2 ft. vertical


Single utility installation (water, natural gas or sanitary sewer)
 
1 in. = 20 ft., 30 ft. or 40 ft. horizontal


Double utility installation (water, natural gas or sanitary sewer)
 
1 in. = 20 ft., 30 ft. or 40 ft. horizontal


Combination of public street and utilities
 
1 in. = 20 ft. horizontal


1 in. = 2 ft. vertical


Grading and drainage plans
 
1 in. = 20 ft., 30 ft. or 40 ft. horizontal


Master Utility Plan
 
1 in. = 100 ft.


Landscape plans for publicly maintained areas
 
1 in. = 20 ft., 30 ft. or 40 ft. horizontal


Public street lighting or traffic signals
 
1 in. = 20 ft. horizontal




 



   (E)   The city requires that all “Preliminary - Not For Recording
or Construction” statements be removed from all plans, plats, maps or
dedication prior to plan approval or recording.



   (F)   Minimum lettering and numbering size shall be 3/16 inch for
manually drafted or 1/8 (0.125) inch for mechanically produced letters,
numbers and symbols. Lettering, numbering and line work must be uniform, with
clear definition and in black ink.



   (G)   Plans shall be of a quality to allow line weight and letter
size to be easily read when reduced by 50%. NOTE: Plans which in the opinion
of city staff cannot produce usable 50% reductions will not be accepted for
review.



   (H)   Plans shall be drawn with the drafting symbols presented in
Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard Details for Public Works
Construction.



   (I)   Plans submitted to the city for review shall be blueline or
blackline prints.



   (J)   Plans submitted to the city for approval shall be original
Mylar (4 mil) drawings or photo Mylar (4 mil) copies of original drawings.



   (K)   A Master Utility Plan at 1 inch = 100 feet shall be submitted
with the final construction plans if the development services department
requires one. This plan will also be updated with the as-built drawings.



   (L)   Incomplete submittal may result in rejection (e.g.,
nonconformance with this chapter). The rejection of plans may count as a
review. The next submittal may require payment of additional review fees.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-6  COVER SHEET.



   (A)   For improvement plans cover sheet format and information, the
engineering division of the public works department should be contacted.



   (B)   An individual cover sheet with the following information is
required for each type of single improvement plan. Only 1 cover sheet is
required for construction plan sets that have more than 1 type of
improvement. That can include paving, grading and drainage, water, sewer,
street lighting and traffic signals.



      (1)   Project name and description;



      (2)   City name: below the title include the words “Apache
Junction, Arizona”;



      (3)   Owner/developer’s name, address and telephone number;



      (4)   Consultant/architect’s name, address and telephone
number;



      (5)   Engineer’s seal, signature and date (this is to be
affixed on each sheet);



      (6)   Vicinity map showing the project’s location within the
city limits;



      (7)   Legal description: provide project property legal
description. When a legal description is not feasible, the township, range,
section and location shall be listed;



      (8)   Project benchmark: Approved city benchmarks shall be
listed indicating benchmark number, description, location and latest city
elevation datum per § 10-1-4(B)(2). Any project datum (temporary or
permanent) used for the project shall be tied vertically to a city vertical
control benchmark; and



      (9)   Additional information: the following additional
information shall be included on the cover sheet. Contact the engineering
division of the public works department for electronic CAD files of standard
cover sheet and notes sheets:



         (a)   Blocks for city approval signatures;



         (b)   City of Apache Junction, General Construction
Notes (Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-2-12) (may be put on a
separate note or detail sheet);



         (c)   A key-map shall be provided on multi-sheet plans
to relate plan sheets to project locations and type of improvements. A
standard scale of all maps must be sufficient to show all required
information clearly (e.g., valves, fire hydrant, manholes, street signs and
drainage arrows). This may be shown on a detail sheet instead of the cover
sheet;



         (d)   Sheet index;



         (e)   Estimate of quantities (for work in public
rights-of-way or public easements) with construction items shown in units as
required in the right-of-way permit fee schedule shall be required. If the
project is to be developed in phases, the estimate of quantities shall
indicate quantities for each phase. A detailed, certified cost estimate shall
be submitted for approval by the city;



         (f)   Utility system ownership approval area shall be
listed. If a letter of conditional approval is received, a copy shall be
submitted to the development services department with the reviewer’s name
and space for a date in the approval block;



         (g)   Other agency approvals shall be listed (e.g.,
State and/or County Health Departments, Fire District, Sewer District, Flood
Control District);



         (h)   The zoning description as it currently exists on
the property shall be listed;



         (i)   A legend for symbols, non-standard abbreviations
and the like may be shown on a separate note or detail sheet;



         (j)   A “Blue-Stake” note is required on all plans
which include excavation of any type as well as cover sheet;



         (k)   A list of all affected utility companies and all
dates any plans were submitted for their review shall be shown; and



         (l)   An “As-Built” certification block shall be
shown.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-7  DETAIL SHEET.



   (A)   A separate detail sheet may be provided at the discretion of
the consultant or when required by the city.



   (B)   The following information is required:



      (1)   Construction notes (Apache Junction City Code Vol. II,
§§ 10-2-12 through 10-2-16);



      (2)   A typical cross-section for each street in the street
construction plans. The information required on a typical section is:



         (a)   Dimensions;



         (b)   Street centerline and right-of-way line;



         (c)   MAG and Apache Junction Standard Details and
Specifications;



         (d)   Pavement structural design;



         (e)   Trim and match to existing street; and



         (f)   Existing and proposed utilities.



      (3)   Special construction details as required shall be
provided, to include:



         (a)   Modification or relocation detail for existing
structures;



         (b)   Special construction required where utility
locations conflict; and



         (c)   Others determined by the consultant and/or the
city to clarify construction design as well as construction information.



   (C)   General plan information:



      (1)   Plan layout, graphics and call-outs must be clearly
presented in an uncluttered manner acceptable to the development services
project engineer;



      (2)   Call-out shall be boxed numeric style call-outs. Each
number shall relate to the same topic for the entire set of plans. Narrative
call-outs shall be grouped and clearly shown on every page that the call-out
is used. Stationing and offset shall accompany every applicable call-out
number;



      (3)   Plans may show only 1 utility (e.g., water, sewer, storm
drain, grading and drainage, or paving) on the plans at a time, in bold, for
review. All other infrastructure, existing and future, shall be shown lighter
(smaller pen width or dashed). Exceptions to this are:



         (a)   Storm drain and paving may be on the same sheet
(separate fees apply for each utility).



         (b)   Water and sewer may be on the same sheet (separate
fees apply for each utility).



      (4)   Plans shall provide cross-referencing between all sheets
which have details, detail call-outs, notes, and the like; and



      (5)   Plans shall be oriented with north at the top or right
side of each sheet whenever possible. A north arrow and bar scale shall be
provided.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-8  REPORTS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS.



   Reports and other submitted documents shall include the following:



   (A)   All reports and documents shall have the appropriate (State of
Arizona) professional seal, signature and date; and



   (B)   All reports and documents shall be provided on 8-1/2-inch by
11-inch format. Only typed reports are allowed. Larger size exhibits may be
included, provided they are secured inside.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-9  SPECIAL PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   For traffic control plans, the city engineer shall stipulate, review
and approve all traffic control plans for construction. An approved traffic
control plan shall be required prior to any traffic control device
installation within the public right-of-way.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-10  PLAN VIEW ONLY SHEETS.



   (A)   Plan view only is allowed for construction plans for:



      (1)   Grading and drainage plans with supplemental
cross-sections as needed to explain drainage;



      (2)   Water line plans for new subdivisions with pipe size
under 12 inches in diameter;



      (3)   Street light plans; and



      (4)   Traffic signal plans.



   (B)   The following information is required:



      (1)   Orientation such that north is either to the top or the
right side of the sheet for each plan view;



      (2)   The drawing scale (see Apache Junction City Code Vol.
II, § 10-2-5(D)) indicating each plan view, and a graphic scale at least 2
inches long or 100 scale placed adjacent to each north arrow;



      (3)   All existing topography to include, but not be limited
to:



         (a)   Existing contours with adequate spot elevations
showing drainage;



         (b)   Existing utilities, aerial and underground,
including services, manholes, valves, vaults, risers and miscellaneous
utility items;



         (c)   Existing irrigation facilities;



         (d)   Adjacent land uses;



         (e)   City limits where applicable;



         (f)   One hundred-year floodplain limits where
applicable;



         (g)   One hundred-year floodway limits where applicable;



         (h)   Existing storm drains, manholes, catch basins,
retention/detention ponds and other miscellaneous drainage items;



         (i)   Direction of existing drainage flow with flow
arrows; and



         (j)   Miscellaneous items of construction.



      (4)   Existing and proposed right-of-way, easements, corner
triangles and property lines with accurate dimensions;



      (5)   Pinal County Tax Assessor’s parcel numbers for
surrounding properties;



      (6)   Existing topography in lighter imaging than new
construction;



      (7)   Drafting and lettering of new construction shall be
sufficiently heavier (darker) than existing topography so as to allow it to
be quickly and clearly identified;



      (8)   New construction notes shall be heavier (darker) than
the general information notes so that they contrast;



      (9)   New drainage slopes shown as a percentage of slope or in
foot per foot change of grade;



      (10)   Grade breaks;



      (11)   “Blue-Stake” (a.k.a. “Arizona 811) notes on each
sheet; and



      (12)   Engineer’s seal (State of Arizona), signature and
date shall be affixed on each sheet.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-11  PLAN AND PROFILE SHEETS.



   (A)   Plan and profile are required for the following construction
plans:



      (1)   All arterial and secondary collector streets plus other
streets when longitudinally matching existing streets;



      (2)   Water line plans within existing streets;



      (3)   Water line plans with pipe size 12 inches in diameter or
greater;



      (4)   All storm drain pipe plans;



      (5)   All sewer line plans; and



      (6)   All effluent line plans.



   (B)   The following information is required:



      (1)   Plan view prepared in accordance with Apache Junction
City Code Vol. II, § 10-2-10;



      (2)   Profile view to the scale noted in Apache Junction City
Code Vol. II, § 10-2-5(D) depicting the following:



         (a)   Elevation and stationing grid;



         (b)   Profile of existing surface over proposed
construction;



         (c)   Existing utility crossings; and



         (d)   Proposed construction (e.g., elevations, slopes
and grade breaks).



      (3)   New construction notes shall be heavier (darker) than
the general information notes so that they contrast; and



      (4)   Where the sanitary sewer is approved to be less than 5
feet deep, the proposed water line shall be indicated in profile by a
“ghost” line, and the building sewers shall be plotted at the locations
and inverts where they cross the water line. The MAG Standard Detail 404
shall be called out and shown, when needed, on both plan and profile.



   (C)   Double plan and profile shall only be permitted with written
approval for the development services project engineer.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-12  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION NOTES.



   All plans for construction within city right-of-way or easements shall
have the following notes shown on either the cover, note or detail sheet.




“CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION GENERAL CONSTRUCTION NOTES”




   (A)   “All work and materials within the public right-of-way shall
conform to the latest editions of the Maricopa Association of Governments
(“MAG”) Uniform Standard Specifications, Uniform Standard Details for
Public Works Construction, supplements as amended by the city or MAG, and by
the Apache Junction Engineering Standards and Standard Details. A 1-year
warranty period shall commence only after final acceptance by the city
engineer or his or her designee.”



   (B)   “All work and materials which do not conform to the approved
plans and specifications are subject to removal and replacement at the
contractor’s expense.”



   (C)   “All contractors and subcontractors shall obtain a city
business license and necessary encroachment permits prior to beginning
construction in the public right-of-way.”



   (D)   “Contractor must notify the city engineer, school districts
and emergency services providers 48 hours before restricting traffic on any
city street.”



   (E)   “The city engineer shall be notified 2 work days prior to
commencing work within public rights-of-way. The contractor shall comply with
the provisions for traffic controls and barricading as specified in the
city’s Traffic Barricade Manual and the latest version of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Developer/contractor shall be solely
responsible for erecting, placing and maintaining all temporary and permanent
signing and striping.”



   (F)   “All improvements within public right-of-way shall be
inspected by the city engineer or his or her designee who will be notified a
minimum of 24 hours before any inspection is needed.”



   (G)   “The city engineer may direct the placement or disposal of
soil materials taken from the public right-of-way during pregrading.”



   (H)   “It shall be the contractor’s responsibility to call for
Blue Stake, locate and protect all utilities and their appurtenances.”



   (I)   “At least 2 but not more than 5 working days prior to
excavating in the vicinity of any utility, the contractor shall contact the
utility’s locating service for field assistance.”



   (J)   “Dust generated by construction activities shall be
controlled by watering per Pinal County Air Quality Control District.
Contractor shall obtain necessary permits from the Pinal County Air Quality
Control District and shall provide a copy to the city engineer prior to
watering.”



   (K)   “All temporary utilities shall be obtained and handled by
the contractor at his or her own expense. The contractor shall arrange to
procure and transport water to the construction site. All temporary
facilities and debris shall be removed prior to final acceptance by the
city.”



   (L)   “Existing utilities shall be relocated as required by the
city. Overhead utility lines that must be relocated shall be placed
underground at their own cost.”



   (M)   “The developer shall arrange for the required utility
relocations and bear the costs of the relocations. The developer shall
provide affected utility companies and districts with advance notice of the
proposed construction giving sufficient time for utility review.”



   (N)   “City is not liable for delays or any damages to utilities
related to this construction nor will the city participate in the cost of
utility construction or relocation.”



   (O)   “Frames, covers, valve boxes and manholes within public
rights-of-way pavement shall be lowered to not higher than subgrade, plated
and the ABC and AC constructed. After the AC is placed, the AC shall be
sawcut and the lowered frames, covers and manholes shall be adjusted to grade
and concrete collared per MAG Standard Details 420-1, 420-2, 426, 520, 521
and 522 for manholes and MAG Standard Detail 391-1 for valves.”



   (P)   “Only water company employees are authorized to operate the
water valves and fire hydrants on their water system.”



   (Q)   “Traffic signal activity that includes relocation,
re-construction or any improvements that involve turning off the signal or
other related activity must be coordinated with the city engineer in
advance.”



   (R)   “The development services project engineer shall approve
final plans after all other reviewing agencies have signed the originals. A
developer shall submit the Mylar cover sheet for approval signature.”



   (S)   “Deviations from the approved plans must be approved by the
development services project engineer prior to construction. Any such changes
shall be documented on all as-built plans.”



   (T)   “City’s plan approval is for 1 year only. If construction
work is not started within 1 year and actively pursued to completion, the
plans shall be brought up to current standards and resubmitted for city
approval. The city’s review of all NPDES submittals including NOI, NOT and
SWPPP is intended as review only and does not constitute approval of the
methods or plans for cleaning the stormwater and protecting the waters of the
United States. The contractor is solely responsible for insuring that all
requirements of the Clean Water Act are strictly enforced.”



   (U)   “The acceptance of the completed rights-of-way improvements
within a new subdivision will not be given until all deficiencies are
corrected, test reports meeting MAG Specifications for compaction and
materials are submitted, the warranty bond is posted, and other data
including as-built drawings are provided to the city engineer.”



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-13  STREET CONSTRUCTION NOTES.




“CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION STREET CONSTRUCTION NOTES”




   (A)   “Exact point of matching termination and overlay of existing
street pavement shall be confirmed in the field by the city.”



   (B)   “Driveway locations shall be confirmed or approved by the
city prior to curb construction. The developer shall be responsible for
coordinating the locations for driveways to avoid conflict with utility
services.”



   (C)   “Curb, gutter, sidewalk and pavement shall be swept clean of
dirt and debris. New sidewalk shall be cleaned and kept clean during
construction if pedestrian traffic is allowed on the sidewalk.”



   (D)   “Gutters shall be water tested in the presence of the city
engineer or designee, to ensure proper drainage prior to acceptance.”



   (E)   “Contractor shall continuously reference location of all
valves and manholes during construction.”



   (F)   “All underground utilities located in the roadway shall be
completed before paving.”



   (G)   “Base course shall not be placed until subgrade has been
approved by the city engineer. Pavement course shall not be placed until base
course has been approved by the city engineer.”



   (H)   “As-built drawings, certified by the subdivider’s
engineer, shall be submitted to and accepted by the city engineer before
final acceptance of the work (see As-Built Requirements set forth in Apache
Junction City Code Vol. II, Article 10-9).”



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-14  GRADING AND DRAINAGE CONSTRUCTION NOTES.



   Plans for grading and drainage construction shall have the following
notes shown on either the cover, note or detail sheet.




CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION GRADING AND DRAINAGE CONSTRUCTION NOTES




   (A)   “An on-site excavation and grading permit is required.”



   (B)   “A separate encroachment permit is necessary for any
off-site construction.”



   (C)   “The city shall be notified 24 hours before any off-site
construction begins.”



   (D)   “Staking pad and/or finished floor elevations are the
responsibility of the developer or his or her engineer.”



   (E)   “In a Federal Emergency Management Agency (“FEMA”)
Special Flood Hazard Area (FEMA Zones A, AE, AO, AH) a FEMA Elevation
Certificate of the finished building floor shall be submitted at time of plan
review (pre-construction elevation certificate) and with the as-built plans
(post-construction elevation certificate). In non-critical drainage areas,
the developer’s engineer shall submit certifications of constructed
building pad elevations prior to the city’s acceptance of project.”



   (F)   “The grading contractor shall designate the location for
wasting spoil materials and a letter from the owner giving permission for
that disposal prior to starting on-site construction with a city grading
permit.”



   (G)   “Grading and drainage plan approval includes: construction
of drainage plan, including but not limited to retention and detention areas
and/or other drainage facilities, surface grading, walls, curbs, asphalt
pavement, and building floor elevations.”



   (H)   “The contractor shall provide all retention and detention
basins at elevations and locations as shown on the plans.”



   (I)   “The contractor is responsible for locating and confirming
depth of all the existing utility lines within proposed retention basin
areas. If the basin cannot be constructed per plan as a result of conflict
with underground utilities, the contractor shall contact the development
services project engineer and designer and request modification of the basin
design.”



   (J)   “The set of plans has been reviewed for compliance with city
requirements prior to issuance of construction permits and shall be kept at
the construction site. Such review shall not prevent the city from requiring
correction of errors in plans which are found to be in violation of any law
or ordinance.”



   (K)   “It is hereby advised that no person shall use any
mechanical equipment for land leveling or clearing, road construction,
trenching, excavating, demolition or engage in any earthmoving activity
without first obtaining a permit from the Pinal County Air Quality Control
District. (This notice is issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-431, Notice of
Building Agencies).”



   (L)   “As-built drawings, certified by the developer’s engineer
or surveyor, shall be submitted and approved per § 10-1-5(C) prior to
issuance of a building certificate of occupancy (see As-Built Requirements,
Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Article 10-9).”



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-15  WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION NOTES.



   Plans for water main construction within the city right-of-way or
easements and within the service area of the Apache Junction Water Utilities
Community District (“WUCFD”), the Apache Junction Water District
(“AJWD”) or the Arizona Water Company (“AWC”) shall have the
following shown on either the cover, note or detail sheet and/or will depict
the water construction notes per the WUCFD/AJWD when the water main
construction is within its service area:




“CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION NOTES”




   (A)   “Contractor will expose any lines being tied into to verify
location.”



   (B)   “Backfilling shall not be done until lines are inspected and
approved by the city engineer.”



   (C)   “Valves shall be furnished and installed by the contractor
according to MAG, city supplements, WUCFD/AJWD and/or AWC.”



   (D)   “Backflow prevention assemblies shall be furnished and
installed by the contractor according to MAG, city supplements, WUCFD/AJWD
and/or AWC. Assemblies 2 inches and smaller shall be placed in a protective
cage painted a neutral or earthtone color. Larger assemblies (3 inches and
above) shall be painted a neutral or earthtone color.”



   (E)   “Fire hydrants shall be furnished and installed by the
contractor, and shall be painted chrome yellow after installation. Approved
fire hydrant list is available at the WUCFD/AJWD and/or AWC.”



   (F)   “All service lines shall be Type K copper tubing. The
minimum size service line shall be 1-inch. Service lines shall be continuous
under pavement without a connection or extension (see Apache Junction
Standard Detail AJW-101).”



   (G)   “All taps shall use all bronze double strap service
saddle.”



   (H)   “WUCFD/AJWD and/or AWC will install all meters 2 inches and
smaller after all appropriate fees have been paid and paperwork completed.
Services up to 2 inches shall be installed per Apache Junction Standard
Detail AJW-101. Larger meters and services shall be in accordance with Apache
Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-5-3(E) and (F) of this Chapter.”



   (I)   “Pavement replacements shall be made to Apache Junction
Standard Detail AJ-200M.”



   (J)   “As-built drawings, certified by the subdivider’s
engineer, shall be submitted to and accepted by the city engineer before
final acceptance of the work (see Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Article
10-9, As-Built Requirements, of this Chapter).”



   (K)   “Plans submitted for projects within the AWC service area
shall show notes per AWC requirements as approved by the city.”



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-16  SEWER CONSTRUCTION NOTES.



   Plans for sewer construction within the city right-of-way or easements
shall have general notes and construction notes shown on either the cover,
note or detail sheet. The Superstition Mountains Community Facilities
District No. 1 (“SMCFD”) shall be contacted by the developer for the
required list of notes.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-2-17  CIVIL ENGINEERING PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST.



   The following checklist will be used as a guide to review all civil
engineering improvement plans submitted to the city:



CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION



DEVELOPMENT SERVICES



CIVIL ENGINEERING PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST



PRODUCT:                                           
                                                   
                 



LOCATION:                                           
                                                   
                 



LOG NO:                                           
                                                   
                 



LEGEND                        REVIEW   REVIEWED BY
         DATE



/-Requirement satisfied                  1         
                                                   
         



O-Requirement not
satisfied                  2                 
                                                   
 



?-Unable to determine status, more information is
required      3                                   
                                   



 

ITEM
 
REQUIREMENT
 
COMMENTS




IMPROVEMENT PLAN FORMAT


1.
 
The civil plans must be submitted on 24-inch x 36-inch sheets.
 
 


2.
 
The scale must be shown on the plans. An engineering scale must be used.
 
 


3.
 
North arrow must be shown on each sheet.
 
 


4.
 
A vicinity or site map is needed on the cover sheet.
 
 


5.
 
The name of the proposed development must be shown on the cover sheet.
 
 


6.
 
The city’s standard general notes must be shown on the cover sheet.
 
 


7.
 
The developer’s name, address and phone number must be shown on the cover
sheet.
 
 


8.
 
The engineer’s name, address and phone number must be shown on the cover
sheet.
 
 


9.
 
Each sheet of the civil package must be signed and sealed by the civil
engineer preparing the plans.
 
 


10.
 
All elevations must be referenced to an approved city benchmark. The city’s
benchmark number, description and elevation must be shown.
 
 


11.
 
The quantity tabulation must be shown on the cover sheet, including grading
cut and fill quantities. On-site improvements shall be separated from the
off-site improvements.
 
 


12.
 
A list of all affected utility companies shall be identified (including but
not limited to Apache Junction Water Utilities Community District, Arizona
Water Company, CenturyLink, Southwest Gas, SRP, MediaCom) and the dates plans
were submitted to them.
 
 


13.
 
Approval signature lines and dates for the following shall be clearly
delineated:
 
 


 
 
a.   development services department Engineer, City of Apache Junction
 
 


 
 
b.     public works department Engineer, City of Apache Junction
 
 


 
 
c.   Superstition Fire and Medical District
 
 


 
 
d.   Superstition Mountains Community Facilities District No. 1
 
 


 
 
e.   Apache Junction Water Utilities Community District
 
 


 
 
f.   Arizona Water Company
 
 


 
 
g.   Pinal County Health Department or date and copy of the approval
letter with a note of the date on the plan
 
 


 
 
h.   ADEQ or date and copy of the approval to construct water and sewer
with a note the date on the plan
 
 


14.
 
Perimeter traverse data shall be delineated for the project boundaries.
 
 


15.
 
The minimum height of all text and lettering shall be 0.1 inch.
 
 


16.
 
A legend identifying the symbols used on the plan sheets shall be delineated.
 
 


17.
 
An index map shall be shown with street names, lot, tract and parcel numbers,
sheet numbers and phase limits and numbers if applicable.
 
 


GRADING AND DRAINAGE


18.
 
All existing buildings and significant structures or items must be shown, and
also drainage structures, washes, ditches, easements and other like items. If
any of the items so noted are to be removed, they must be noted as such.
 
 


19.
 
The grading and drainage plans must encompass the entire development with all
lots, tracts and parcels being shown in their entirety.
 
 


20.
 
The existing topography must be shown by contours. Spot elevations are
required when the subdivision’s topography cannot be clearly defined by
contours. Spot elevations are required immediately off-site adjacent to the
subdivision boundary sufficient to permit analysis of grade differentials and
drainage.
 
 


21.
 
Existing storm drainage facilities such as retention basins, catch basins,
scuppers and storm drain pipes must be shown.
 
 


22.
 
Existing washes, ditches, lakes and other water features must be shown with
any modifications being noted. Existing washes entering the property must
continue through the property and exit at the current natural locations. All
natural runoff entering the site must be delineated.
 
 


23.
 
All portions of the development within the FEMA flood zones must be
identified as well as flood mitigation measures being shown. (FEMA elevation
certificate for pre and post developments must be attached.)
 
 


24.
 
Existing spot elevations must be shown for all existing curb and gutter
adjacent to the development. Elevations must be shown adjacent to each
property corner, at all grade breaks and at all scuppers/catch basins.
 
 


25.
 
Cross-sections must be shown across the development’s property lines with
the maximum allowable elevation difference between adjacent properties to be
1 foot and with natural off-site overland drainage flows being unobstructed.
 
 


26.
 
Cross-sections must be shown for all retention basins showing bottom
elevation, high water elevation and the basin edge elevation. The maximum
allowable side slope is 4:1 and the maximum water depth is 3 feet.
 
 


27.
 
The following NOTE shall appear on the cover sheet:

   “The proposed retention basins are to drain within 36 hours. If the
basins do not drain within the required 36 hours, the owner will be required
to install drywells or other means to be approved by the development services
project engineer to meet the requirement.”
 
 


 
 
Any proposed drywells must be registered with the ADEQ that meet the
following requirements:
 
 


 
 
a.   All drywells serving 1 acre or more of paved areas are to be the dual
chamber type such as the MaxWell Plus or equal.
 
 


 
 
b.   The Envibro System is to be used for areas where chemical or
petroleum spills or hazards may be possible.
 
 


28.
 
Construction details, plan and profile views must be shown for all proposed
drainage facilities such as:
 
 


 
 
a.   Scuppers and catch basins
 
 


 
 
b.   Storm drains
 
 


 
 
c.   Hydraulic profile must be shown
 
 


 
 
d.   Scupper inlet and chute elevations are required
 
 


 
 
e.   Trash Rack is required at all open ends of pipe 18 inches or more in
diameter. MAG Standard Detail 502-2 shall control.
 
 


 
 
f.   Scupper inlet and chute elevations are required
 
 


29.
 
The following information must be shown for each lot:
 
 


 
 
a.   Proposed elevations at front lot corners, typically top of curb
elevations
 
 


 
 
b.   Proposed elevations at rear lot corners
 
 


 
 
c.   Proposed finished pad elevations
 
 


 
 
d.   Proposed finished floor elevations
 
 


 
 
e.   Top and bottom elevations on retaining walls
 
 


 
 
f.   All existing block walls on and adjacent to subdivision boundaries
and retention basin perimeters must be shown with top of wall elevations
 
 


 
 
g.   All proposed block walls on subdivision boundaries and retention
basin perimeters
 
 


30.
 
All drainage pipes and equalizer pipes are to be 12 inches minimum in
diameter with headwalls.
 
 


31.
 
A drainage report is required and shall include the following:
 
 


 
 
a.   An exhibit delineating each drainage area with the corresponding
retention basins and drainage structures. Arrows must be provided indicating
drainage flows, patterns and overflows
 
 


 
 
b.   An explanation of off-site flows and overland contributions including
FEMA flow zones
 
 


 
 
c.   Calculations determining the volume of retention for each drainage
area
 
 


 
 
d.   Calculations showing the amount of retention for each drainage area
 
 


 
 
e.   Calculations determining the depth of ponding within the retention
basins
 
 


 
 
f.   An explanation of the low outfall elevation for each drainage area
including the effects of an overflow situation with the elevation being
stated in the report
 
 


 
 
g.   Retention basin drain time calculations. If drywells are necessary to
meet the 36-hour drain time requirement, the number of drywells must be
determined
 
 


 
 
h.   Street hydraulic calculations showing that the 10-year storm runoff
is retained within the curbs and the 100-year runoff is contained at least 6
inches below the finished floor elevations
 
 


 
 
i.    Storm drainage inlet and pipe sizing and capacity calculations
 
 


 
 
j.   An explanation of the minimum finished floor elevation within the
development with the elevation being above the low outfall elevation of the
site
 
 


 
 
k.   All calculations, formulas, charts with summarized tabulations
 
 


32.
 
Structural design calculations are required for the following:
 
 


 
 
a.   Storm drains subject to wheel loads
 
 


 
 
b.   Retaining walls
 
 


33.
 
A building permit is required for all retaining walls.
 
 


PAVING PLAN


34.
 
The pavement cross-section design shown on the plans must comply with the
city engineering standards.
 
 


35.
 
All existing driveways, street lights and fire hydrants within 200 feet of
the property boundaries on both sides of the streets.
 
 


36.
 
Actual street cross-sections to scale at 50- to 100-foot intervals for all
perimeter streets. Include pavement centerline elevation, station, pavement
join elevation and top of curb elevation.
 
 


37.
 
Typical sections for each street to be improved on detail sheet with the
following items:
 
 


 
 
a.   Right-of-way width
 
 


 
 
b.   Width of sidewalk
 
 


 
 
c.   Width of improved surface. (24 feet minimum is required for
half-street for 2-way traffic)
 
 


 
 
d.   Type of curb and gutter
 
 


 
 
e.   Pavement cross-section
 
 


 
 
f.   Pavement cross-slope
 
 


 
 
g.   Pavement structural sections
 
 


38.
 
A portion of the improvements and what jurisdiction governs. The permit
number shall be shown on the cover sheet.
 
 


39.
 
Deceleration lanes (with right/left turn arrows) for the proposed driveways
are required based on a traffic impact analysis, and additional right-of-way
for the deceleration lanes.
 
 


40.
 
Street lights every 180-200 feet on all streets within and adjacent to the
development with the following details noted:
 
 


 
 
a.   Luminaire size (lumens). (Local-9,500), (Collector-16,000),
(Major/Minor Arterial - 30,000), (Principal Arterial/Parkway - 50,000)
 
 


 
 
b.   Luminaire mounting height. (Local-32 feet), (Collector-32 feet),
(Section Line-35 feet),
 
 


 
 
c.   Dimension from the street centerline to the proposed pole (1 foot
behind sidewalk or 2.5 feet behind curb with no sidewalk)
 
 


 
 
d.   Dimension from property corners to the proposed street light
 
 


 
 
e.   Stationing for each proposed and existing light
 
 


 
 
f.   Dimension to the nearest existing light within 200 feet of the
property on both sides of the street
 
 


41.
 
The following layout items must be shown on each sheet:
 
 


 
 
a.   North arrows
 
 


 
 
b.   Plan and profile scale
 
 


 
 
c.   Phase limits and numbers
 
 


42.
 
The following utility reference items must be shown on each sheet:
 
 


 
 
a.   All existing utilities
 
 


 
 
b.   All proposed utilities
 
 


 
 
c.   Utility crossings must be shown in profile view when the crossings
are not detailed on utility plan sheets
 
 


 
 
d.   All power pole locations
 
 


43.
 
A Master Utility Plan including water, sewer, storm drain and street light
information.
 
 


44.
 
The following design items must be shown on each sheet in plan view:
 
 


 
 
a.   Existing right-of-way with width dimensioned
 
 


 
 
b.   Existing pavement with width dimensioned
 
 


 
 
c.   Existing curbs with width dimensioned
 
 


 
 
d.   Existing sidewalk with width dimensioned
 
 


 
 
e.   Existing sidewalk ramps
 
 


 
 
f.   Proposed right-of-way with width dimensioned
 
 


 
 
g.   Proposed pavement with width dimensioned
 
 


 
 
h.   Proposed curbs with width dimensioned and MAG Standard Detail number
call-out
 
 


 
 
i.   Proposed sidewalk with width dimensioned and MAG Standard Detail
number call-out
 
 


 
 
j.   Provide a 5-foot temporary sidewalk turndown at the ends of the
sidewalk improvements
 
 


 
 
k.   Proposed sidewalk ramps (MAG Standard Detail 231-A)
 
 


 
 
l.   Proposed sidewalk ramps at “T” intersections (MAG Standard Detail
233-C)
 
 


 
 
m.   Existing items to be protected in place
 
 


45.
 
The following design items must be shown on each sheet in profile view:
 
 


 
 
a.   Existing grade at right curb line
 
 


 
 
b.   Existing grade at left curb line
 
 


 
 
c.   Existing grade at centerline
 
 


 
 
d.   Proposed grade at right curb line
 
 


 
 
e.   Proposed grade at left curb line
 
 


 
 
f.   Proposed grade at centerline
 
 


 
 
g.   Proposed centerline elevation at curb return station on crown run-outs
 
 


 
 
h.   The proposed longitudinal grades must be labeled with longitudinal
grades on curves to be computed based on their true lengths that comply with
the city standards
 
 


 
 
i.   Storm drain crossings
 
 


 
 
j.   Utility and other crossings whenever minimal cover, 1 foot or less
below subgrade
 
 


46.
 
The following traffic engineering items must be shown in plan view:
 
 


 
 
a.   Street signs
 
 


 
 
b.   Traffic control devices:
 
 


 
 
   1)   Stop sign MUTCD R1-1, 30 inches by 30 inches per Apache
Junction Standard Detail AJ-28.1
 
 


 
 
   2)   Speed limit sign MUTCD 22-1, 24 inches by 30 inches
 
 


 
 
   3)   Dead end sign as required per Apache Junction Standard Detail
AJ-28.1
 
 


 
 
c.   Temporary turnaround at dead-end streets and phase lines
 
 


 
 
d.   Barricade with 9 red prismatic reflectors on red sheeting MUTCD M1-9R
for each 10 to 12 feet of barricade
 
 


 
 
e.   Signing and striping plans for section line streets and/or special
conditions
 
 


47.
 
The following survey design items must be shown on each sheet:
 
 


 
 
a.   Station numbers with sheet reference at all match lines in plan or
profile
 
 


 
 
b.   Centerline survey data
 
 


 
 
c.   Station numbers at all changes in street alignment, intersections,
curb returns and grade breaks in profile
 
 


 
 
d.   Gutter and centerline spot elevations at all grade breaks
 
 


 
 
e.   Gutter spot elevations at all intersections
 
 


 
 
f.   Centerline spot elevations at all intersections
 
 


 
 
g.   Grade breaks in plan
 
 


48.
 
Street geometrics must meet city standards or general engineering practices
for the following items:
 
 


 
 
a.   Centerline radii
 
 


 
 
b.   Tangent lengths between curves
 
 


 
 
c.   Tangent lengths at intersections
 
 


 
 
d.   Pavement tapers
 
 


 
 
e.   Intersection angles
 
 


 
 
f.   Vertical curve lengths
 
 


 
 
g.   Maximum longitudinal slope changes
 
 


 
 
h.   Barrier median construction
 
 


 
 
i.   Driveway installations
 
 


49.
 
Sufficient existing off-site elevations needed to determine grade and
direction of slope.
 
 


50.
 
Structural design calculations for storm drains subject to wheel loading.
 
 


51.
 
An easement or right-of-way dedication shall be by separate instrument. The
following exhibits and/or information are needed for staff review:
 
 


 
 
a.   Type of easement or right-of-way
 
 


 
 
b.   Legal description signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor,
labeled Exhibit “A” to city provided deed form
 
 


 
 
c.   Detail map based on the description signed and sealed by a registered
land surveyor, labeled Exhibit “B” to city provided deed form
 
 


 
 
d.   A current title report
 
 


 
 
e.   If there is a lien on the property such as a trust deed, a partial
release and partial reconveyance deed shall be included
 
 


52.
 
Please add the following statement on the cover sheet:
 
 


 
 
“The City of Apache Junction approved these plans for conformance with the
city codes, standards, and policies. The City of Apache Junction is not
responsible for design, assumptions, conclusions or accuracy of the
information contained herein or in the supporting documents.”
 
 


53.
 
An engineering cost estimate for all work within the public right-of-way
shall be submitted
 
 


54.
 
An improvement assurance bond shall be submitted based on the above
engineering cost estimate. The improvement assurance must be provided prior
to issuance of any permits.
 
 


55.
 
A drainage and retention agreement on the enclosed original city form shall
be provided, along with the legal description (Exhibit “A”) and map
(Exhibit “B”) with original RLS seal and signature.
 
 


56.
 
The following statement on the cover sheet shall be conspicuously legible:

“Approval of these plans shall not prevent the city from requiring
correction of errors in the plans where such errors are subsequently found to
be in violation of any law, ordinance or other health/safety issue.”
 
 


57.
 
The following note on the cover sheet shall be conspicuously legible:

“The improvements shown on this set of plans will not be fully approved by
the city and the certificate of occupancy will not be issued until the
overhead utility lines are undergrounded and/or the power poles are
relocated.”
 
 


58.
 
The following statements on the improvement plans shall be conspicuously
legible if they are applicable:

“The contractor shall establish the grade line for the new curb and gutter
according to the approved plans. If the cross slope between the existing edge
of pavement and the proposed lip of gutter is greater than 3% or less than
1%, the new curb and gutter line shall be modified or an additional asphalt
sawcut will be required to bring the cross slope to 2% (+/- 1%).”
 
 


 
 
“Provide 3,000 psi concrete cap over a pipe for any area where the minimum
cover requirements is not achievable.”
 
 


 
 
“MAG Standard Detail 250 is to be utilized as driveway entrance location
where vertical curb provided.”
 
 


 
 
“Safety rails must be provided at any area behind the sidewalk or sidewalk
ramp that is deeper than 18 inches from finish ground.”
 
 


 
 
“There shall be an 18-inch sedimentation basin at the bottom of catch
basin, and bubbler box.”
 
 


59.
 
A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and a copy of the Notice of Intent
form approved by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality for the
Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System General Permit shall be
provided.
 
 


60.
 
A copy of Drywell registration issued by the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality shall be provided.
 
 


61.
 
A copy of Drywell percolation test result after installation shall be
provided.
 
 


62.
 
Final approved plans per § 10-1-5(C) Electronic Submittal Requirements shall
be provided.
 
 




 



Note: The redlines are considered to be a part of these comments and may
contain comments not listed herein.



PLEASE RETURN THIS CHECKLIST AND THE CHECKPRINTS WITH THE NEXT PLAN REVIEW
SUBMITTAL.



If there are any questions, please call (480) 474-5077.



(Ord. passed  - - )



ARTICLE 10-3:  STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION



Section



   10-3-1   General comments



   10-3-2   Street geometrics



   10-3-3   General technical information



   10-3-4   Design standards



   10-3-5   Street structural section (aggregate base, asphalt base
course and asphalt surface course)



   10-3-6   Street improvements



   10-3-7   Construction



   10-3-8   Engineering reports



§ 10-3-1  GENERAL COMMENTS.



   (A)   This section describes the minimum geometric requirements to
be used in the preparation of construction plans that involve public street
improvements. The requirements described herein are primarily based on safety
considerations; therefore, standards that provide a greater degree of safety
may be used within reasonable economic limits, but standards that provide a
lesser degree of safety may not be used without approval from the city
engineer.



   (B)   While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and
completeness of these standards, the city shall not be held responsible for
any errors or omissions. It shall be the sole responsibility of the design
engineer to ensure a proper design and the accuracy and completeness of
construction documents containing his or her signature.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-3-2  STREET GEOMETRICS.



   (A)   Use of national standards.



      (1)   Geometric design standards. The American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials (“AASHTO”) policies on highway
design are approved references and are to be used together with this chapter.



      (2)   Traffic control standards. All traffic control devices
shall be in accordance with the latest Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (“MUTCD”) prepared by the U.S. Department of Transportation and
the City of Phoenix Traffic Barricade Manual.



      (3)   Special areas. For those areas that are located in the
special designated areas (see Apache Junction Standard Detail AJ-12.1), see
Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Appendix 10-A, 10-B or 10-C for additional
requirements in addition to this Article.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALLEY.  A public thoroughfare that affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting property.



         (a)   MAJOR ALLEY.  Serves multi-family residential,
commercial, and industrial areas.



         (b)   MINOR ALLEY.  Serves single-family residential
areas.



      DEVELOPER.  The individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, syndicate, trust, or other legal entity that files the
application and initiates proceedings for the development and/or subdivision
of land in accordance with the Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I.



      EASEMENT.  A grant by the owner for the use of specified land by
the public, a corporation or persons, for specific uses and purposes and so
designated and recorded in the county recorder’s office.



      MEDIAN.  A raised or flush area designed to separate and control
vehicular movement typically located near or in the center of the
right-of-way.



      PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public walk dedicated entirely through a
block from street to street and/or providing access to a school, park,
recreation area or shopping center.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any land which by deed, conveyance, agreement,
easement, dedication, usage, zoning condition, process of law or other means
is reserved for or dedicated to the general public for street, highway,
alley, public utility, pedestrian walkway and other public purpose.



      STREET.  Any existing or proposed avenue, boulevard, road,
bridge, viaduct or easement for public vehicular access or area shown in a
plat duly filed and recorded in the county recorder’s office, and includes
all land within the right-of-way whether improved or unimproved and also such
improvements as pavement, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking
spaces, bridges, viaducts and traffic control devices.



         (a)   ARTERIAL STREET. One of exceptional continuity
that is intended to carry the greater portion of through traffic from 1 area
of the city to another and is generally positioned at one-mile intervals.



         (b)   COLLECTOR STREET.  One designed with the primary
purpose of collecting and distributing traffic to and from arterial streets.



            1.   INDUSTRIAL COLLECTOR.  A street serving
commercial, industrial or other land uses expected to generate high traffic
volumes or substantial heavy truck traffic.



            2.   RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR.  A street serving
predominantly residential land uses.



         (c)   CUL-DE-SAC.  A short local street having but one
end open for vehicular traffic, the opposite end being terminated with a
permanent turnaround.



         (d)   DRIVEWAYS.



            1.   COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY.  Access for retail,
office, high density residential or government/community service building.



            2.   INDUSTRIAL DRIVEWAY.  Access for large
industrial, office park, mixed use or warehouse developments which may also
accommodate heavy truck movements.



            3.   PARKING LOT ACCESS WAY.  Passage to and
circulation among parking areas within an integral apartment or townhouse
complex.



            4.   RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY.  Access to
single-family residence from local or collector street only.



         (e)   LOCAL STREET.  Typically, one of limited
continuity with the primary purpose of service to only those lots which are
adjacent.



         (f)   PRIVATE STREET.  One not owned or maintained by
the city.



         (g)   PUBLIC STREET.  One owned and maintained by the
city.



         (h)   RURAL STREET.  One located within a low density
area.



   (C)   Street types. The city has the following four street types:



      (1)   Parkways. Parkways provide for efficient movement of
large volumes of through traffic with direct access being limited.



      (2)   Arterial streets. Arterial streets with or without
raised medians provide regional continuity and carry large volumes of traffic
between areas of the city and through the city. Full access to abutting
commercial and multi-family land uses is limited to median openings where
there is a raised median. Single-family residential developments shall not
have direct access to an arterial street, unless approved by the city
engineer.



      (3)   Collector streets. Collector streets provide direct
access to abutting land uses, handle local traffic, and provide access to the
arterial street system and are normally connected with local streets.



      (4)   Local streets. Local streets provide direct access to
abutting land uses, handle local traffic and provide access to the collector
street system.



   (D)   Street classification. Following is a listing of each street
classification followed by the number of the detail that depicts the standard
street cross-section for that classification.



 

Street Type
 
Detail


Local
 
AJ-20.1


Collector
 
AJ-20.2


Minor and Major Arterials
 
AJ-20.3


Principal Arterials
 
AJ-20.4


Parkway
 
AJ-20.5



 



      (1)   Street classifications are determined by location and/or
intended use.



      (2)   All developments shall provide for public arterial and
collector streets at their normal alignments except in the Lost Dutchman
Heights, or as approved by the city engineer.



   (E)   Street names. Street names shall be consistent with the
natural alignment and extension of existing streets. New street names shall
not duplicate in whole or in part or be confusing with existing street names.
The city council reserves the right to modify street names to conform to city
standards.



   (F)   Intersections to arterial streets. Interior streets shall not
intersect arterial streets other than at the 1/4- and 1/2-mile points of the
arterial or as approved by the city engineer.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-3-3  GENERAL TECHNICAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Street name signs.



      (1)   All new developments shall provide for street name signs
and posts at all intersections. The developer shall install these signs and
posts at public street intersections per Apache Junction Standard Detail
AJ-28.1.



      (2)   Private streets shall be signed by the developer as
approved by the city’s development services department.



   (B)   Survey monuments.



      (1)   All developments shall provide survey monuments at
section corners, street centerline intersections, street centerline alignment
changes (Point of Curvature [“PC”], Point of Tangency [“PT”], or
Point of Intersection [“PI”] if it is within street pavement). For new
building construction replacement of monuments for areas outside the
right-of-way shall be per Arizona State Board of Technical Registration rules
and requirements.



      (2)   All section corners, 1/4-corners, and center of section
shall be a brass cap in a hand hole per MAG Standard Detail 120-1, Type
“A.” All other required survey monuments shall be a brass cap on the
surface per MAG Standard Detail 120-1, Type “B.”



      (3)   All existing monumentation shall be preserved both
horizontally and vertically.



   (C)   Barricades and delineators.



      (1)   All new developments shall provide for barricades at all
dead ends, temporary dead ends and incomplete streets per MAG Standard Detail
130, Type “B.”



      (2)   New barricades shall be constructed per MAG Standard
Detail 130, Type “B” modified with red and white reflectorized stripes
using engineer grade reflective sheeting.



      (3)   Barricades installed with phased construction may be
relocated within the same development.



      (4)   Delineators are required to guide traffic at all
necessary locations (such as pavement tapers). Minimum spacing (in feet)
between delineators is the same as the speed limit (in miles per hour) for
the roadway.



   (D)   Conduits, sleeves or carrier pipes. Projects that have parkway
landscaping with irrigation lines under public streets shall install conduit
sleeves for the irrigation line(s) prior to the paving improvements. All
parkway landscaping shall be as directed and approved by the Apache Junction
parks and recreation department.



   (E)   Signage and striping. All signage shall be per the latest
MUTCD and striping shall be per the latest edition of AASHTO’s Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets. Signing and striping shall be approved by the
city engineer.



   (F)   Pavement marking plans.



      (1)   General notes:



         (a)   “All pavement markings shall conform to the ADOT
Standard Drawings and Specifications unless otherwise specified in the latest
edition of the MUTCD handbook, or as noted on the plans.”



         (b)   “All lane dimensions are from center of lane
line, center of double lane line, face of curb, or edge of pavement unless
otherwise noted.”



         (c)   “The pavement marking drawings are schematic
only. The contractor shall follow all dimensions, details, and standards when
installing pavement striping, markings and markers.”



         (d)   “All signing and pavement markings shall be
installed within 5 days of completion of the final lift of asphalt or as
required by the Engineer.”



         (e)   “The contractor shall clean the roadway surface
to the satisfaction of the city engineer by sweeping and air-jet blowing
immediately prior to the placement of all pavement markings.”



      (2)   Plan requirements:



         (a)   North arrow and scale shall be included on each
plan sheet, excluding notes and detail sheets.



         (b)   ROW, edge of pavement, and curbs are to be clearly
delineated, excluding drainage facilities, utilities, topographic lines, but
including all driveways and intersecting streets.



         (c)   Limits of the project, beginning and ending
stations, are to be provided. The limits of pavement surface treatments that
are being applied to allow for pavement marking changes should also be
defined.



         (d)   Centerlines and stationing are to be provided and
shown within the roadway limits, not external to the curb or edgelines.



         (e)   Taper lengths (bay tapers, storage lengths,
approach and departure tapers) relative to the roadway design speed or posted
speed limit, per the latest edition of AASHTO’s Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets.



         (f)   The proposed new striping patterns and type are to
be compatible with existing striping on both ends of the project.



         (g)   All striped lines are to be labeled correctly.



         (h)   Edgeline striping should end at the beginning of
the radius, PC; centerline striping ends at mid radius.



         (i)   Striping plans should extend 500 feet on either
side of the project, and transitions from existing striping patterns to new
patterns should be defined.



         (j)   The roadway cross section is to be properly
dimensioned at locations where the cross section changes. This includes
beginning and ending of median and edgeline/curbline tapers, beginning and
ending of lane shift tapers of tapers to add a lane, both legs of major
intersections and locations where the pavement widens or narrows. The
dimensioning shall include widths of all lanes (thru, turn, multi-use, bike),
median widths, and paved shoulders. Cross section change locations shall be
denoted by station. Striping taper lengths shall be noted.



         (k)   Crosswalks and stop lines are to be properly
placed relative to sidewalk ramps and median walk throughs. The approach
crosswalk line shall be spaced 4 feet from the stop line and the crosswalk
lines shall be spaced 10 feet apart.



         (l)   Pavement arrows and “ONLY” designations for
mandatory turn lanes are typically applied only at signalized intersections.
Arrows and ONLYs can be applied at unsignalized intersection at the
discretion of the city engineer. The location of the approach edge of all
legends should be either dimensioned, typically from the stop line, or
stationed.



         (m)   All roadway names should be identified, include
side streets.



         (n)   An appropriate title block designating submittal
status, date, designer, and engineer shall be provided on each plan sheet.



         (o)   A separate sheet containing general notes, symbol
legend, pavement marking quantities, and details shall be provided.



   (G)   Traffic signing plans.



      (1)   General notes:



         (a)   “All signs shall conform to the latest edition
of the MUTCD.”



         (b)   “Signs may be modified and locations adjust to
fit conditions as directed by the city engineer.”



         (c)   “All sign station locations are approximate. The
contractor shall verify actual sign locations with city engineer prior to the
installation of all signs.”



         (d)   “The contractor shall be responsible for
coordinating all work with Blue Stake and for installing all traffic signs in
the field.”



         (e)   “The design speed for the road is          
. The posted speed limit for the road is           . Sign placement
shall be based on the posted speed limit.”



      (2)   Plan requirements:



         (a)   All signing shall conform to the latest edition of
the MUTCD.



         (b)   North arrow and scale shall be included on each
plan sheet, excluding notes and detail sheets.



         (c)   Design speed and posted speed limits of the
project are to be noted on the Traffic Signing General Notes.



         (d)   ROW, edge of pavement, and curbs are to be clearly
delineated, excluding drainage facilities, utilities, topographic lines, but
including all driveways and intersecting streets.



         (e)   The existing roadway and proposed signing for 500
feet beyond the project limits or to the nearest intersection, whichever is
less shall be shown.



         (f)   The base sheets for the Signing Plans shall be the
pavement marking plan sheets. These sheets shall show match lines and include
the traffic signal, street lighting and pavement marking in the background.
All major and minor streets shall be identified and labeled correctly. The
plan symbol legend may be included depending on available space. All signs
will be oriented in the direction seen by the motoring public with the
correct FHWA sign illustration and identified by the MUTCD letter/number or
appropriate designation and station.



         (g)   All new and existing signs within the right-of-way
shall be identified. The existing signs shall be labeled “EXISTING SIGN”
and shall indicate whether it is to remain, be relocated or be removed. If
the sign is shown on the sheet, they shall be grayed out or shown with dashed
lines.



         (h)   Signs shall be placed per Town of Gilbert Standard
Detail 201 and 201A. The “No Parking” symbol shall be no smaller than
18"x18" and the “No Parking” Symbols shall be installed below all speed
limit signs.



         (i)   Signing quantities and installation location are
subject to change at the time of installation.



         (j)   Any sign that is to be installed within 25 feet of
an existing street light pole shall be installed on that pole and not on a
separate support. Signs that need to be removed during construction shall be
done so by the Contractor at their expense.



         (k)   The Contractor shall allow the concrete in the
postholes to cure for at least 24-hours prior to standing the poles.



         (l)   All signing shall be installed within 5 days after
the installation of the first lift of asphalt.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-3-4  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   Street design will be in accordance with the following criteria,
subject to the approval of the city engineer. Geometric design standards not
specifically included in this standard will conform to the latest A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, published by the AASHTO.



   (A)   Street right-of-way requirements.



      (1)   The right-of-way requirements shall be as shown in
Apache Junction Standard Details AJ-20.1 through AJ-20.8.



      (2)   Right-of-way widths in excess of the standard widths may
be required in special circumstances such as when:



         (a)   Cut or fill slopes cannot be confined within the
standard width;



         (b)   Minimum sight distance lines on horizontal curves
are not within standards;



         (c)   Minimum sight distances at intersections are not
within the standards; and



         (d)   Auxiliary lanes are to be provided.



   (B)   Intersections. Although all intersections share certain common
elements, they are not subject to generalized treatment.



      (1)   Minimize conflict. To minimize conflicts and provide for
anticipated traffic movements, each intersection must be evaluated with
regard to its individual characteristics, and designed based on the following
factors:



         (a)   Traffic factors such as capacities, turning
movements, vehicle size and operating characteristics, vehicle speed,
pedestrian movements, transit operations and accident history;



         (b)   Physical factors such as topography, existing
conditions, channelization requirements; and



         (c)   Human factors such as driving habits, reaction to
surprises, decision and reaction time, and natural paths of movement.



      (2)   Angle of intersection. A right-angle intersection
provides the shortest crossing distance for intersecting traffic streams. It
also provides the most favorable condition for drivers to view and judge the
relative position and speed of intersecting vehicles. Where special
conditions exist, intersection angles may diverge from a right angle with
approval of the city engineer.



      (3)   Alignment and profile. Intersections occurring on
horizontal or crest vertical curves are undesirable. When there is latitude
in the selection of intersection locations, vertical or horizontal curvature
should be avoided. A line or grade change is frequently warranted when major
intersections are involved. If a curve is unavoidable, it should be as flat
as site conditions permit. Where the grade of the through roadway is steep,
flattening through the intersections is mandatory.



      (4)   Intersection sight visibility.



         (a)   Sight visibility triangles. Clear lines of sight
will be maintained along all streets, alleys and driveways to assure the
safety of motorists and pedestrians.



         (b)   Lines of sight. Lines of sight will not be
obscured between 24 inches and 6 feet through a triangular area adjacent to a
driveway, an alley or a street, where such access ways intersect with another
street in a T-configuration. The sight visibility triangle, or sight
triangle, consists of 3 sides that are formed by two intersecting access ways
and a line connecting the two.



   (C)   Sight distance.



      (1)   Adequate sight distance shall be provided at all
intersections, alleys and driveways.



      (2)   The determination of whether an object constitutes a
sight obstruction shall consider both the horizontal and vertical alignment
of both intersecting roadways, as well as the height and position of the
object.



      (3)   The sight distance required varies according to traffic
speeds on the through road. A designer shall provide the sight distance based
on the latest AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets and
submit it with the plans.



   (D)   Street slopes.



      (1)   Typical street cross-slope. Undivided streets should
have a normal crown that is a 2-way cross-slope with the cross-section high
point on the street centerline. Divided streets should have cross-slope on
each pavement section. The high point of each slope on each pavement section
shall occur on the edge of the pavement nearest to the median. Existing
conditions may cause cross-slope requirements to vary. The nominal
cross-slope is 2%, with a maximum cross-slope of 3% and a minimum cross-slope
of 1%. Any deviation from the nominal cross-slope shall be approved by the
city engineer.



      (2)   Cross-slopes in street dip sections. While dip sections
are discouraged, where storm drainage runoff flows must cross the street, dip
sections are needed and must be approved by the city engineer. The pavements
through the dip section should have a 1-way slope (no crown), curbing and
medians must not be raised, and cut-off walls shall be installed in
accordance with MAG Standard Detail 552. Transitions back to normal street
cross-slopes will be needed at both ends of the dip section.



      (3)   Existing cross-slope. See Apache Junction City Code Vol.
II, § 10-3-6(D) for street widening standards.



      (4)   Longitudinal slope.



         (a)   The minimum street and gutter slope for public
streets is 0.0032 feet/feet (0.32%). Special approval by the city engineer is
required for slopes less than the minimum.



         (b)   Projects that have any area with less than the
approved minimum gutter slope shall provide construction staking on the
actual gutter alignment (not offset) at a spacing not to exceed 25 feet and
have the grades checked by a city engineering inspector immediately preceding
the concrete pour.



         (c)   Grade breaks and grade changes shall be clearly
noted and stationed on the grading and drainage plan and the profile views.



         (d)   Projects with longitudinal slopes less than 0.32%
shall have the gutter lines water-tested in the presence of and to the
satisfaction of the city’s inspector.



      (5)   Vertical curves. Roadways with a longitudinal grade
break or grade change of greater than 1.5% shall be required to design and
construct a vertical curve along that section of roadway. Vertical curves
shall be designed, at a minimum, per the most current AASHTO standards.



      (6)   Superelevation. Although the superelevation of roadways
is discouraged, unusual circumstances may require the use of superelevation.
The city engineer must approve the use and design of superelevated roadways.
Roadway drainage must be considered in superelevated conditions.



      (7)   Undulating roadways. Roadways shall be designed to
eliminate undulations. In the case where an existing paved roadway undulates,
it shall be removed full width and reconstructed to a new grade acceptable to
the city engineer and the entire cost paid for by the developer.



      (8)   Side slopes. Side slopes should be designed for
functional effectiveness and ease of maintenance.



         (a)   For areas more than 10 feet from back of curb,
slopes of 4:1 or flatter shall be provided.



         (b)   Steeper slopes may be approved in areas more than
30 feet from back of curb when soils are not highly susceptible to erosion,
or when a cut is not more than 4 feet vertical. Cuts or fills greater than 4
feet vertically shall be approved by the city engineer.



   (E)   Pavement tapers.



      (1)   Projects are required to provide sufficient pavement
tapers at all necessary locations (such as the beginning or end of a project)
to properly transition traffic flow between varying widths of existing and
new pavement.



      (2)   The pavement section for tapers shall be per these
standards. See Table 10-3.1 under Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, §
10-3-5 below.



      (3)   Pavement tapers shall be constructed with a thickened
edge per MAG Standard Detail 201, Type “B.”



      (4)   Taper length formulas: Taper length for merging traffic
situations are calculated by the following formulas:



         (a)   When the design speed is 40 mph or less:



         TL   =   WxS2
                 60



         (b)   When the design speed is 45 mph or greater:



         TL   =   WxS



         where:



            TL   =   Taper length in feet



            S   =   Design speed in miles per hour. The
design speed is 5 mph over the posted speed limit.



            W   =   Width of the offset between the edge of
the travel lane and the edge of the lane after the taper.



      (5)   Taper length for non-merging traffic situation (such as
where pavement widens with traffic) is normally 50 feet minimum. However,
there may be some instances when more than 50 feet of taper may be required.
The requirement for a longer taper will be determined on a case-by-case basis
by the city engineer.



      (6)   The city engineer shall investigate the existing
conditions and if determined to be substandard, the project shall sawcut and
remove any existing pavement tapers when extending or installing new pavement
improvements.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-3-5  STREET STRUCTURAL SECTION (AGGREGATE BASE, ASPHALT BASE COURSE
AND ASPHALT SURFACE COURSE).



   (A)   Flexible pavement. The flexible pavement street structural
section for public streets shall be the minimum depths shown below.







 



   Table 10-3.1  Street Structural Section (Minimum Depths)



 



Street Classifications
 
Asphalt Surface Course (A)
 
Asphalt Base Course (B)
 
ABC Fill (C)


Parkway
 
2.5 in. - A-19**
 
3 in. - A-19
 
12 in.*


Arterial
 
2.5 in. - A-19**
 
3 in. - A-19
 
12 in.*


Collector
 
2 in. - A-12.5**
 
2.5 in. - A-19
 
8 in.


Local Street-Residential
 
2.5 in. - A-12.5**
 
0 in.
 
6 in.


Local Street-Commercial and Industrial
 
2 in. - A-12.5**
 
2.5 in. - A-19
 
8 in.


*    See Note 1


**  See Note 4




 



      (1)   Install in two equal layers.



      (2)   ABC fill to conform to MAG Standard Specification 702.2
(aggregate base).



      (3)   Asphalt concrete shall conform to the latest version of
the East Valley Asphalt Criteria and be approved by the EVA Committee.



      (4)   Surface treatment for new roadways shall be placed at
the end of the 1-year warranty period. Surface treatment shall be Grade SS-1h
fog seal in accordance with MAG Standard Specification 333 applied at a rate
of 0.1 gallon per square yard or as otherwise directed by the city engineer.



      (5)   Utility adjustments and concrete collars shall be
completed prior to application of surface treatment.



      (6)   A soil test and a street structural section
recommendation by a qualified geotechnical firm shall be required unless the
city engineer allows an exemption.



   (B)   Rigid pavement. Rigid pavements, such as portland cement
concrete, are generally not used for city streets. If rigid pavements are
used, each design must be approved by the city engineer.



   (C)   Decorative pavement.



      (1)   The use of decorative concrete must be approved by the
city engineer. Decorative concrete will not be placed in arterial through
lanes. When approved, it shall be constructed in accordance with MAG Standard
Specifications Sections 340 and 725 (Class A concrete) with a minimum
thickness of 8 inches.



      (2)   The use of interlocking paving blocks must be approved
by the city engineer. When approved, they shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s guidelines. In addition, a minimum of 25 paving
blocks of the type installed must be deposited free of charge at the city’s
maintenance yard for future city maintenance operations.



   (D)   Miscellaneous pavement standards.



      (1)   For cases where the full depth of base course cannot be
constructed due to insufficient cover over existing facilities, the city
engineer reserves the authority to approve equivalent alternate designs if
justified.



      (2)   The minimum pavement cross-sectional requirement for
temporary turnarounds, which are constructed at project phase lines, is 6
inches of aggregate base course over 6 inches of subgrade; see MAG Standard
Specifications Sections 301, 310 and 702. If the temporary turnaround is
constructed at a project boundary, a surface course of 2 inches of asphaltic
concrete is required in addition to the base and subgrade noted above; see
MAG Standard Specifications Sections 321 and 710, without lime.



      (3)   Temporary pavement cross-sections shall consist of 2
inches of asphaltic concrete over 6 inches of aggregate base course over 6
inches of subgrade, see the same MAG Standard Specifications sections noted
above.



      (4)   The edge of the temporary pavement and the perimeter of
a paved temporary turnaround shall be constructed with a thickened edge per
MAG Standard Detail 201, Type “B.”



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-3-6  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Medians.



      (1)   Median widths. Median widths (raised and not raised) are
as shown on Apache Junction Standard Details AJ-20.4 and AJ-20.5.



      (2)   Median curbs. Median curbs shall be installed per Apache
Junction Standard Details AJ-20.4 and AJ-20.5.



      (3)   Median curb termination.



         (a)   Medians shall terminate in a bullet nose per MAG
Standard Detail 223. Concrete pavers may be used in lieu of concrete when
approved by the city engineer.



         (b)   At intersections, medians shall terminate at a
point perpendicular to the curb return adjacent to the median’s bullet nose
per MAG Standard Detail 223 or as directed by the city engineer.



      (4)   Median openings.



         (a)   Raised medians on arterial streets are provided to
reduce conflicts and improve traffic flow. Requests for median cuts shall be
approved by the city engineer to ensure that the purpose of the median is not
defeated by a proliferation of median cuts.



         (b)   There are two types of median cuts used in Apache
Junction.



            1.   Full access. The full access cut allows left
turns from the street into a site as well as left turns from a site onto the
street.



            2.   Partial access. The partial access opening
allows left turns from the street into a site, but it prohibits left turns
from a site on to the street.



         (c)   Median openings shall be designed per the
following criteria:



            1.   Median opening spacing is measured from the
center of the median opening to the center of the adjacent median opening or
intersection.



            2.   In general, full access median cuts may be
provided at 1/6-mile or 880-foot points along an arterial street. Additional
median openings are allowed but should be the partial access type.



            3.   A median cut closer than 880 feet to an
arterial-to-arterial intersection shall be the partial access type.



            4.   Median cuts less than 660 feet from an
arterial-to-arterial intersection are not allowed.



            5.   Median cuts less than 660 feet from any
signalized intersection or an intersection likely to be signalized are not
allowed.



            6.   Median cuts less than 880 feet from a freeway
interchange generally are not permitted, although each case will be evaluated
based on the configuration of the particular interchange.



            7.   Adjacent median cuts should not be so closely
spaced as to eliminate all of the area available for landscaping in the
median.



            8.   Left turn storage shall be provided for both
directions on the major street.



            9.   There may be unique geometric conditions at
some locations that would affect the ability to provide a median cut.
Variations from these standards may be appropriate depending on the
particular design features of the street under consideration, and may be
approved only by the city engineer.



         (d)   The design and construction of median openings for
private businesses shall be the responsibility of those establishments,
subject to approval by the city engineer.



      (5)   Median landscaping.



         (a)   Landscaping within a median shall be approved by
the city’s parks and recreation department.



         (b)   Landscaping within a median along a public street
shall be maintained by the city.



   (B)   Curbs and gutters.



      (1)   Vertical curbs.



         (a)   Vertical curbs are required for all streets except
local residential and in designated rural areas.



         (b)   The vertical height of the curb shall be 6 inches
on arterial or collector streets unless otherwise approved to match existing
conditions.



         (c)   Installation shall be per MAG Standard Detail 220,
Type “A” or MAG Standard  Detail 222, Type “A.”



         (d)   Vertical curbs shall be 6 inches at all medians
and edge of roads with landscaping, equipment or vertical structures.



         (e)   Six-inch vertical curb will be used at all curb
returns on public local residential street intersections.



         (f)   Six-inch vertical curb will be used at all curb
returns on public local residential street intersections with collector or
arterial streets.



      (2)   Roll curbs. Roll curbing is required for public local
residential streets except where vertical curb is required (curb returns and
the like) and is to be constructed in accordance with MAG Standard Detail
220, Type “C” or “D.”



      (3)   Ribbon curbs. Where ribbon curb is needed and approved
by the city engineer for public streets, the installation of the ribbon curb
is to be per MAG Standard Detail 220, Type “B.” Transition from vertical
curb and gutter or roll curbing to ribbon curb shall be with a curb
termination. Installation of the curb and gutter transition is to be per MAG
Standard Detail 221.



      (4)   Curb returns. All curb returns shall be constructed with
vertical curb. Curb returns shall have a minimum drop of 0.20 of a foot
around the return. Maximum drops shall not exceed 5% along the face of the
curb at the sidewalk ramp. See Table 10-3.2 for minimum back of curb radii
for curb returns at intersections.



Table 10-3.2



Minimum Curb Return Radii at Intersections



 

 

Parkway

 

Arterial

 

Collector

 

Local



Parkway
 

35*

 

35

 

30

 

**



Arterial
 

35

 

35

 

30

 

**



Collector
 

30

 

30

 

30

 

25



Local
 

**

 

**

 

25

 

20



* feet (back of curb)


**Not allowed without written approval from the city engineer



 



      (5)   Height transitions. Transitions in curb height shall
occur within the curbing at an intersection between curb returns or between
the wings of a driveway (from 6 inches to 4 inches for example).



      (6)   Curb removal and replacement. If existing curb and
gutter must be removed and replaced, the existing asphalt pavement must be
sawcut and removed to a minimum width of 2 feet from the lip of the new
gutter. Replacement of asphalt pavement shall match existing asphalt and base
thickness at a minimum.



      (7)   Valley gutters. Valley gutter and aprons, where
required, are to be installed per MAG Standard Detail 240. Valley gutters are
to have a minimum drop across the intersection of 0.25 foot. Valley gutters
and aprons shall be constructed with Class “A” concrete.



         (a)   Transverse valley gutters are prohibited from
being used within the city. If a transverse valley gutter is proposed, it
must be approved by the city engineer.



         (b)   Asphalt valley gutters are not allowed on public
streets.



         (c)   Locations of valley gutters. Valley gutters may
only be used across collector streets, and local residential streets.
Exceptions must be approved by the city engineer.



   (C)   Turning lanes. A separate turning lane permits separation of
conflicting traffic movements and removes turning vehicles from the
intersection area. Right-turn lanes shall be provided on arterial streets at
all street intersections and at driveways where warranted. For left-turn
lanes at signalized intersections, dual turn lanes should be considered when
the turn volume exceeds 200 vehicles per hour, the opposing through volume
exceeds 1,000 vehicles per hour, or the delay to left turning vehicles
exceeds 45 seconds. Abrupt reduction of alignment and sight distance
standards should be avoided. The minimum length of these lanes must be
approved by the city engineer and are:



Table 10-3.3



Minimum Length of Turn Lanes



 

Turn Direction
 

Street Classification




Parkway and Arterial

 

Collector





Left


   Storage
 

200*

 

150



   Taper
 

150

 

100



Right


   Storage
 

150

 

100



   Taper
 

100

 

100



* Length in feet




 



   (D)   Street widening.



      (1)   Projects widening existing pavement are required to
sawcut and remove a 2-foot minimum section of the existing pavement
continuous along the edge of the existing pavement.



      (2)   Projects that are required to widen existing pavement
shall provide on the plan and profile sheets, as a minimum, existing
elevation, grades at the centerline, sawcut line and gutter line at 50-foot
intervals, unless a smaller interval is required by the city engineer.



      (3)   Also the plan sheets shall show the existing cross-slope
from the existing centerline of the street to the sawcut line and from the
sawcut line to the lip of proposed gutter at the same 50-foot intervals. The
existing and proposed cross-slopes are to be within 1% to 3% with a desired
2%. The existing pavement must be sawcut to a line that achieves the 1% to 3%
or rebuilt from the street centerline.



      (4)   When existing paving has been installed without surface
course, the developing project shall install surface course to the
centerline. The surface course shall be tapered beyond the centerline to
provide a smooth transition. The city engineer shall assess the amount of
tapering required to make a smooth transition to the existing pavement.



      (5)   The developer’s engineer will be required to
investigate existing pavement for composition, structural capacity and
stability. If after the developer’s engineer’s investigation, the city
engineer determines the existing pavement section is below current standards,
the developer’s engineer shall call out a sawcut at the construction
centerline and replacement of the existing pavement with new pavement per
city standards.



   (E)   Partial street and half-street improvements.



      (1)   Generally, a developer is required to construct the full
street cross-section for the streets internal to the development and a
portion of the streets surrounding the development. For partial or
half-street designs, a 24-foot minimum width from lip of gutter to the edge
of the asphaltic pavement and a striping plan is required.



      (2)   For all streets, pavement tapers shall be constructed to
provide transitions between newly constructed and existing roadway sections
as deemed necessary by the city engineer.



   (F)   Public alleys.



      (1)   New residential alleys are not allowed in Apache
Junction.



      (2)   Commercial alleys are to be 24 feet wide. Surfacing is
to be per MAG Standard Detail 202.



      (3)   Projects that have an alley system within or contiguous
to the project which will be used as a primary means of access shall have an
alley that is a minimum of 24 feet wide and paved. Paving shall be per MAG
Standard Detail 202.



      (4)   Projects that have an alley system within, or contiguous
to the project, which will not be used as a primary means of access, are
required to surface the alley with a minimum of 6 inches of compacted
aggregate base course (“ABC”).



   (G)   Sidewalks.



      (1)   Construction standard. Parkway, arterial, collector and
local street classifications that have sidewalks shall comply with Apache
Junction Standard Details AJ-20.1 through AJ-20.5 in addition to MAG Standard
Detail 230, except as otherwise approved by the city engineer.



      (2)   Sidewalk widths.



         (a)   Local street classification requires a 4-foot wide
sidewalk except in special designated area rural areas where no sidewalks are
required. See Apache Junction Standard Detail AJ-20.1 and AJ-20.6.



         (b)   Collector street classification requires a 5-foot
sidewalk except in special designated rural areas where no sidewalks are
required. See Apache Junction Standard Detail AJ-20.2 and AJ-20.7.



         (c)   Minor and major arterial street classifications
require 6-foot wide meandering sidewalks except in special designated rural
areas where no sidewalks are required. See Apache Junction Standard Detail
AJ-20.3 and AJ-20.8.



         (d)   Principal arterial and parkway street
classifications require 10-foot wide meandering sidewalks. See Apache
Junction Standard Details AJ-20.4 and AJ-20.5.



         (e)   Sidewalks on bridges are required to be a minimum
of 8 feet in width.



      (3)   Width transitions. Sidewalk width transitions shall
occur either in the curb return area or across a driveway.



      (4)   Location.



         (a)   Sidewalks along collector, arterial and parkway
streets shall be detached and linear at a distance as noted per Apache
Junction Standard Details AJ-20.2 through AJ-20.5 or as specified by a
technical review comment.



         (b)   Sidewalks along local streets shall adjoin the
back of the curbing.



      (5)   Sidewalk ramps. In accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (“ADA”), sidewalk ramps are required at all public
street intersections per MAG Standard Detail 231, Type “A.”



         (a)   Existing curb installation. The installation of a
sidewalk ramp in an existing curb shall be made by completely removing the
existing curb and gutter. The existing asphalt pavement shall be removed and
replaced as noted in the section on curb and gutter (division (B)(6) above).
The sidewalk ramp will be constructed per MAG Standard Detail 231, Type
“A.”



         (b)   Tee intersections. Sidewalk ramps per MAG Standard
Detail 233 shall be installed on the perpendicular side of the street at the
tee intersections and shall be aligned with one of the curb returns on the
opposite side of the street. Where roll curb is constructed, the sidewalk
ramp shall be per MAG Standard Detail 220, Type “C”.



         (c)   Existing intersections. Projects that adjoin or
include an existing public street intersection in which sidewalk ramp(s) are
not existing are required to install the necessary ramp(s) in order to comply
with ADA requirements.



   (H)   Driveways. All driveways within public rights-of-way shall be
designed and installed per the following:



      (1)   Residential lots. Residential lots where the sidewalk is
adjoining the roll curb, both the sidewalk and the driveway in the
right-of-way shall be Class “A” concrete, 6 inches thick.



      (2)   Commercial and industrial properties. Commercial and
industrial driveways shall be installed per MAG Standard Detail 250.



      (3)   Existing curb installations. The installation of a
driveway in an existing vertical curb shall be made by the complete removal
of the curb and gutter. The existing asphalt pavement shall be removed and
replaced as noted in the section on curb and gutter (division (B)(6) above).
The driveway shall be constructed per MAG Standard Detail 250.



      (4)   Driveway location limitations.



         (a)   New access. A new access driveway will not be
allowed (measured to the driveway centerline):



            1.   Within 30 feet of any commercial property
line, except when it is a joint-use driveway serving two abutting commercial
properties and access agreements have been exchanged between, and recorded
by, the two abutting property owners;



            2.   When the total width of all driveways serving
a property exceeds 50% of the curb line frontage;



            3.   Within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of an
intersecting non-arterial street;



            4.   Within 100 feet of the right-of-way line of
an intersecting arterial street; or



            5.    Within 100 feet of an approved median
opening location on an arterial street.



         (b)   On residential access.



            1.   Residential properties that have frontage on
a local street as well as on an arterial or collector street shall only
access the local street.



            2.   In some instances, residential parcels
fronting only on an arterial or collector street may be given access if
alternate public access is not available and is approved by the city
engineer. When such access is allowed, the driveway shall be circular or it
shall have a turn-around area to ensure that there is no need for backing
onto the street.



      (5)   Locations delineated.



         (a)   Commercial and industrial. Commercial and
industrial driveway locations shall be delineated on the improvement plans
and installed as part of the original curb and sidewalk construction per MAG
Standard Detail 250.



         (b)   Residential. Residential driveway locations not
delineated on the construction plans shall be identified before the curb,
gutter and sidewalk is constructed and approved by the city’s inspector.
The driveways shall be constructed per 10-3-6(H)(1).



   (I)   Deceleration lanes. Deceleration lanes may be required on
streets in conjunction with driveways and may require additional
right-of-way. The location and lane length shall be determined on a
case-by-case basis and shall be approved by the development services project
engineer.



   (J)   Bikeways, lanes and paths.



      (1)   Bikeways and bike paths separate from the paved roadway
require a minimum of 5 feet for one-way travel and a minimum of 10 feet for
two-way travel.



      (2)   Each bike lane within the paved roadway requires a
minimum of 4 feet of additional pavement. See Apache Junction Standard
Details AJ-20.2, AJ-20.3, AJ-20.7 and AJ-20.8.



      (3)   Bikeways, bike lanes and bike paths will be designed in
accordance with the ADOT publication, Arizona Bicycle Facilities Planning and
Design Guidelines and city policy.



   (K)   Traffic signals.



      (1)   Signal poles, bases and conduits with pull boxes shall
be provided at all arterial and secondary street intersections.



      (2)   Separate conduits shall be installed for traffic signal
conductor wires and traffic signal fiber optics as directed by the city
engineer.



      (3)   An approved traffic preemption device shall be installed
on all new traffic signals.



      (4)   All traffic control plans shall be approved by the city
engineer.



   (L)   Streetlights.



      (1)   Position. Streetlights shall be positioned a minimum of
1 foot back of the sidewalk or a minimum of 2-1/2 feet from the back of curb
to the face of pole. Streetlight poles may be placed in the median where the
median width is sufficient to maintain a minimum distance of 3 feet or more
from the back of curb to the face of pole.



      (2)   Locations. Streetlights shall conform to the following
table:



Table 10-3.4



Minimum Streetlight Standard



 


Street Type

 

Luminaire

 

Height (Feet)

 

Spacing Min/Max (Feet)





Local
 


 


 




   Residential
 

9,500

 

32

 

180/200



   Indust/comm
 

9,500

 

32

 

180/200



Collector
 

16,000

 

32

 

180/200



Minor and major arterial
 

3,000

 

35

 

180/200



Principal arterial and parkway
 

50,000*

 

35

 

180/200



* Double mast arm lights in median




 



      (3)   New commercial, industrial and residential streetlight.



         (a)   Streetlights are required on all streets adjacent
to development. Streetlights shall be located at all intersections.



         (b)   The developer’s engineer will locate perimeter
lights for the project. All phasing shall be shown on the plans. The city
engineer shall review the locations for approval.



         (c)   Proposed streetlight installations shall note the
following items:



            1.   Luminaire size;



            2.   Luminaire mounting height;



            3.   City of Apache Junction Standard Detail
number for the streetlight poles;



            4.   Dimensional ties from street centerline to
the proposed streetlight; and



            5.   Dimensional ties from property corners to the
proposed streetlight.



         (d)   The developer’s engineer will provide a legend
on the plans identifying the following items:



            1.   Luminaire size;



               a.   Local streets - 9,500 Lumen;



               b.    Mid-section line and collectors -
16,000 Lumen;



               c.    Section line (arterial) - 30,000
Lumen; and



               d.    Principal arterial and parkway -
50,000 Lumen.



            2.   Luminaire mounting height; and



            3.   City of Apache Junction Standard Detail
number.



         (e)   SRP will inform the developer of contribution
costs which developer shall pay. Upon receipt of notice from SRP that the
developer has paid the cost of the streetlights and construction to SRP, the
city engineer will authorize construction and accept future energy and
maintenance costs.



         (f)   SRP and the developer shall notify the city
engineer when they are ready to install the streetlights as development
construction proceeds. The city engineer will inspect the streetlights and
accept the installations along with other required off-site improvement.



         (g)   The city engineer will accept the future energy
billing.



      (4)   Commercial project and subdivisions with private streets
or no interior public streets.



         (a)   From development site plan, the developer’s
engineer shall locate streetlights along adjacent public streets.



         (b)   The developer shall provide the drawings showing
the approved lights to the city and SRP.



         (c)   Upon receipt from SRP, if underground conduit is
required, it will be provided at the developer’s expense.



         (d)   The developer will provide payment for the
streetlight costs to SRP, or they will hire a private contractor to install
the lights, with the approval of installation from SRP.



         (e)   The city will transmit a letter to SRP authorizing
work to begin and stating the city will accept future energy and maintenance
costs.



         (f)   The city will inspect the streetlights and accept
the installations along with other required off-site improvements at the time
of certificate of occupancy.



      (5)   Subdivision with public streets. See Subdivision
Regulations, Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Chapter 2.



         (a)   The intent of this requirement is to create a
street light improvement district with boundaries similar to a development
containing interior and perimeter public streets.



         (b)   The process will be initiated by a receipt of a
unanimous petition for street lighting from the owner of the land to be
developed.



      (6)   Process to create a streetlight improvement district in
developed areas.



         (a)   To obtain streetlights in a developed
neighborhood, a Street Lighting Improvement District (“SLID”) should be
formed. The following list provides options available to initiate action.



            1.    Representative(s) of the property owners
make the request;



            2.   A majority petition signed by property
owners, is submitted and verified; and/or



            3.   A unanimous petition signed by all the
property owners is submitted and verified.



         (b)   The steps required in the procedure are listed
below and each action listed is handled by the city engineer after receipt of
a properly executed request or petition:



            1.   Prepare streetlight district boundaries;



            2.   Determine the location of lights to be
installed;



            3.   Obtain cost estimates from SRP;



            4.   Council acts on resolution of intention;



            5.   Public notice is given (i.e., advertised and
posted on the property as per A.R.S. Title 48);



            6.   A 30-day protest period is provided;



            7.   Protest hearing and ruling by council (if
applicable);



            8.   Council considers resolution ordering work;



            9.   Letter to SRP authorizing construction and
providing funds;



            10.   Utility schedules work and coordinates
installation of underground conduit;



            11.   City accepts improvements;



            12.   City informs county assessor of district
charges; and



            13.   County collects charges each year with
annual tax assessments.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-3-7  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   All construction shall conform to the latest MAG Standard
Details and MAG Standard Specifications together with the Apache Junction
Supplement to MAG and to the Apache Junction Standard Details.



   (B)   A right-of-way encroachment permit is required for all work
within the city right-of-way.



   (C)   A 100% performance bond or equivalent, acceptable to the city,
is required for all work within the city right-of-way.



   (D)   All contractors working within the city right-of-way shall
have a current Apache Junction business license, proof of current insurance,
and be subject to applicable tax laws. The certificate of insurance shall
also list the city as an additional insured party.



   (E)   All work within the city right-of-way shall be inspected and
approved by the city engineer.



   (F)   All newly constructed public ways shall be kept barricaded and
access denied to the public until such public way is accepted by the city and
all permanent traffic control devices are installed to the approval of the
city.



   (G)   A dust control permit is required from Pinal County.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-3-8  ENGINEER REPORTS.



   (A)   Preliminary design report for development. A preliminary
design report shall be submitted prior to or at the time of preliminary plat
submittal. At a minimum, the preliminary report must address the following
subjects:



      (1)   Vehicle trip generation;



      (2)   Roadway classification;



      (3)   Design speeds;



      (4)   Auxiliary and additional lane requirements;



      (5)   Parking requirements;



      (6)   Pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian requirements; and



      (7)   Special features and their influence.



   (B)   Traffic impact. Developers are responsible for submitting a
“Traffic Impact Analysis for Proposed Development,” as outlined in ADOT
Publication 35-209, and a traffic circulation study.



   (C)   Design study report.



      (1)   Developers are responsible for submitting a design study
report to validate the design shown on the construction plans. The report
shall briefly describe the basis of the design and the assumptions made and
explain special solutions to problems encountered.



      (2)   The following sections shall be contained in the report.



         (a)   Soils report. A soils report shall be submitted
with new street construction plans indicating “R” value, sieve analysis,
plastic index of the sub-grade, and street structural cross-section design.



         (b)   Drainage report. A drainage report shall be
submitted with new street construction plans and/or the grading plans. This
report shall be prepared per Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Article 10-4
of this chapter.



         (c)   Pavement evaluation report.



            1.   A pavement evaluation report shall be
submitted with new street construction plans when it is proposed to match
existing pavement. The design engineer is responsible for investigating and
evaluating the existing pavement structure.



            2.   If the existing pavement does meet
requirements, it may be matched by trimming a minimum of 2 feet for a
longitudinal match, or a perpendicular match. Exact point of matching and
method of trimming (saw cut or wheel cut) shall be determined in the field by
the city engineer.



         (d)   Other details. Supplemental sketches, details,
calculations and design rationale to support and justify engineering design
shall be provided as needed and as requested by the city engineer.



(Ord. passed  - - )



ARTICLE 10-4:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



Section



   10-4-1   Introduction



   10-4-2   Stormwater standards



   10-4-3   Stormwater Master Plan



   10-4-4   Stormwater Plan and drainage reports



   10-4-5   Hydrology



   10-4-6   Street drainage; flow



   10-4-7   Storm drains



   10-4-8   Open channels



   10-4-9   Culverts and bridges



   10-4-10   Detention or retention facilities



   10-4-11   Drainage easements and covenants



   10-4-12   Construction and inspection



   10-4-13   Floodplain management



   10-4-14   Other permits and requirements



   Exhibit 10-4.1, Drainage and Retention Agreement (Sample)



   Exhibit 10-4.2, Drainage and Retention Certification Letter (Sample)



§ 10-4-1  INTRODUCTION.



   This article has been prepared as a guide for preparation of plans for
stormwater drainage systems to be installed within the City of Apache
Junction. This Article along with the city’s Standard Details, the Maricopa
Association of Governments (“MAG”) Standard Specifications and Details,
and the publications Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County, Arizona,
Volume I, Hydrology and Volume II, Hydraulics by the Flood Control District
of Maricopa County (“FCDMC”) should provide all of the information needed
for plan preparation. The Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County,
Arizona, Volume I, Hydrology and Volume II, Hydraulics have been adopted by
the city as a basis for design guidance and criteria, except as amended
herein.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-2  STORMWATER STANDARDS.



   The city requires that stormwater runoff for new commercial,
industrial, multi-family and residential developments be managed as follows:



   (A)   Retention. The required retention to be contained is the
stormwater runoff per divisions (A)(1) and (2) below. Half pavements of the
adjoining streets may be considered part of the development.



      (1)   For the areas north of Baseline Avenue, the following
retention requirement shall apply: 110% of the stormwater which falls within
the development from a 10-year storm of 24-hour duration (approximately 2.4
inches) of which the difference between the natural runoff and the developed
runoff must be retained within the boundaries of that development (including
street areas if within a subdivision) (see Apache Junction City Code Vol. II,
§ 10-4-10(B)(1) and (2)).



      (2)   For the areas south of Baseline Avenue, the following
retention requirement shall apply: stormwater which falls within the
development from a 100-year storm of 2-hour duration (approximately 3.0
inches) must be retained within the boundaries of that development (including
street areas if within a subdivision) (see Apache Junction City Code Vol. II,
§ 10-4-10(B)(1) and (2)).



      (3)   Surface retention is allowed in all newly developed
areas.



      (4)   Underground retention is only allowed in commercial and
industrial areas.



   (B)   Streets.



      (1)   Ten-year stormwater runoff. Streets must be constructed
to carry the stormwater runoff from a 10-year storm event as follows:



         (a)   For local streets, there shall be no curb
overtopping with no requirements for dry lane conditions.



         (b)   For collector, arterial and parkway streets, there
shall be at least 1 dry 12-foot driving lane in each direction.



      (2)   One hundred-year stormwater runoff.



         (a)  Calculated peak flow shall be considered to be
contained within the right-of-way with:



            1.   Six-inch maximum depth over the curb;



            2.   One hundred cfs maximum flow; and



            3.   Ten fps maximum velocity.



         (b)   See Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-4-6
for the street drainage design guide.



      (3)   Runoff in excess of street capacity. When the stormwater
runoff in the streets exceeds the 10-year or 100-year conditions stated in
divisions (B)(1) and (2) above, the excess flows shall be contained in an
approved storm drain and/or channel system. No open channels are allowed in
the city’s right-of-way.



      (4)   Inverted crown streets. No new inverted crown streets
are allowed within the city limits.



      (5)   Street cross drainage. Cross drainage shall be
underground with culverts and bridges. Low water crossings shall not be used
without the city engineer’s approval.



   (C)   Off-site flows.



      (1)   Off-site flows are flows that originate upstream of the
proposed land development site and have historically traversed either through
the site or have been channelized in some form adjacent to the project.



         (a)   Land development projects are required to convey
the 100-year, time of concentration (Tc) peak flows around or through the
project site. These off-site flows shall be interpolated from Apache
Junction’s Stormwater Master Plan report.



         (b)   Off-site flows shall not be mixed with any
stormwater flows originating from within the project’s contributing
drainage area unless specifically approved by the city engineer.



         (c)   Off-site flows shall be carried through the
development and discharged at a location and in a manner consistent with
historical flow patterns without adverse impact to adjacent, upstream or
downstream properties.



         (d)   Storm drains or box culverts shall be required
when off-site flows are discharged from a development site into public
right-of-way. See Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-4-7 for additional
information.



      (2)   Note that “off-site flows” does not include the
stormwater runoff from adjacent public right-of-way that the project must
retain in accordance with division (A) above.



   (D)   Special Flood Hazard Area (FEMA designated area). Any
development or construction within a special flood hazard area shall conform
to FEMA flood plain development requirements and to the requirements of the
latest city floodplain management ordinance. See Apache Junction City Code
Vol. II, § 10-4-13 and Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Chapter 5.



   (E)   Conditions for developing property in flood areas.



      (1)   (a)   Existing washes are not to be filled or altered
without a city-approved engineering study. Existing washes can be relocated
on-site based on a city-approved engineering study showing adequate capacity
and slope for the relocated washes. The washes must enter and leave the
subject property in the historic locations. This shall apply to the following
lands within the corporate limits of the City of Apache Junction, including
but not limited to:



            1.   All special flood hazard areas as defined by
FEMA;



            2.   FEMA zone X-500, also known as Shaded Zone X,
as it pertains to alluvial fan or sheet flooding;



            3.   Local floodplains associated with washes
and/or sheet flow having a 100-year peak discharge of 50 cfs or more;



            4.   Areas within the erosion hazard setback of a
watercourse;



            5.   All floodplains/flood-prone areas and erosion
hazard setbacks identified on previously and subsequently recorded
subdivision plats; and



            6.   All floodplains/flood-prone areas and erosion
hazard setbacks identified on previously and subsequently drainage studies
commissioned by the city engineer.



            7.   Any ephemeral natural watercourses that
convey runoff during rain events.



         (b)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



            FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD- PRONE AREA. Any land area
susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. For regulatory
purposes this involves either a FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area, areas platted
on accepted city plans as being flood-prone or areas near washes which in the
opinion of the Floodplain Administrator may be impacted by water during a
base flood.



      (2)   It is unlawful to divert, obstruct or retard a
watercourse. Affected agencies or persons may seek legal action.



      (3)   Construction in designated flood zones.



         (a)   Construction in an AH designated flood zone, as
shown on the FIRM, requires an existing site topography be prepared by a
State of Arizona registered land surveyor and a city-approved engineered
grading plan. The lowest floor, garage and equipment is to be designed to be
at least 1 foot (State of Arizona regulatory flood elevation (“RFE”)
above the base flood elevation (“BFE”)). Certification by a State of
Arizona registered civil engineer stating that the development will not raise
the base flood elevation more than 1 foot is required.



         (b)   A subdivision of 5 or more acres or 50 or more
lots located all or partially in an A designated flood zone shall have the
base flood elevations determined for the A Zone. The base flood elevations
may extend outside the A Zone and the limits of the base flood elevations
shall be shown on the grading and drainage plan of the subdivision. The
lowest floor, garage and equipment is to be designed to the RFE.



         (c)   When constructing in an A designated flood zone,
without designated floodway and base flood elevations determined, the lowest
floor of a structure shall be a minimum of 2 feet above the highest adjacent
grade (“HAG”) at the pad location of the structure.



         (d)   Construction in an AE designated flood zone where
the floodway and base flood elevation is determined, the lowest floor of a
structure to be constructed outside the floodway shall be a minimum of 1 foot
RFE above the base flood elevation shown on the FIRM.



         (e)   Construction in Flood Zones A and AE will allow
fill dirt to be imported to the site with a city-approved engineered grading
plan. A city excavation and grading permit shall be required.



         (f)   After construction of the building and after all
machinery and/or equipment such as water heaters, air conditioners and other
associated equipment have been installed and the grading around the building
is completed, a State of Arizona registered land surveyor or a registered
engineer shall file a finished construction FEMA elevation certificate for
city files.



      (4)   Any grading resulting in alteration of floodwater
capacity or re-alignment of a flood area in an A Zone area may require an
Army Corps of Engineer’s 404 Permit and/or FEMA approval.



      (5)   Manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the bottom
of the structural frame or the lowest point of any attached appliances (e.g.,
ground-mounted AC unit), whichever is lower, is at or above the regulatory
flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.



      (6)   Nonresidential buildings constructed in any A Flood Zone
are to be elevated or floodproofed to 1 foot above the base flood elevation
or higher. A certification by a State of Arizona registered civil engineer is
required stating that the development grading and building will not raise the
base flood elevation more than 1 foot. An as-built FEMA elevation certificate
prepared by a State of Arizona registered land surveyor or registered
engineer is also required.



      (7)   Constructing buildings on posts or pilings does not
remove the building from the Special Flood Hazard Area for flood insurance
purposes. The posts or pilings are to be designed to resist lateral movement
due to forces of the floodwaters.



      (8)   Construction is prohibited in floodways unless it has
been determined by a State of Arizona registered civil engineer that
construction will not increase flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge by any amount. Construction in the FEMA floodways as
indicated on the area FIRM map requires that there be no rise in the 100-year
flood elevation and certification letter by a State of Arizona registered
civil engineer to this. The work may require an Army Corps of Engineers 404
Permit and/or approval of FEMA.



      (9)   Waste disposal systems cannot be installed wholly or
partially in a floodway.



      (10)   Removing a property from a FEMA flood zone requires a
State of Arizona registered civil engineer to process a request in accordance
with FEMA procedures.



      (11)   The city’s floodplain management ordinance set forth
in Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Chapter 5 should be consulted for
further information.



   (F)   Stormwater collection and retention plan. A conceptual
stormwater collection and retention plan and a preliminary drainage report
shall be submitted to the city with a preliminary plat or site development
plan, and shall be approved prior to the approval of the plat or plan.
Drawings, plats, plans and the like shall comply with the city standards, set
forth in Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-4-4(A).



   (G)   Drainage report. A drainage report shall be submitted to the
city wherever development and/or grading is proposed within the city limits.
DEVELOPMENT shall mean any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling. See Apache
Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-4-4(B).



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-3  STORMWATER MASTER PLAN.



   The city’s “City of Apache Junction Stormwater Master Plan,”
dated January 2002, shall be used as the basis for any off-site drainage
flows. This Master Plan can be viewed at the city engineer’s office and is
available in electronic format on the city’s website.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-4 STORMWATER PLAN AND DRAINAGE REPORTS.



   (A)   Stormwater Collection and Retention Plan. The Stormwater
Collection and Retention Plan shall include but not be limited to the
following:



      (1)   The watershed boundaries, both on-site and off-site,
shall be delineated with any existing drainage or irrigation structures such
as waste or delivery ditches, natural drainage channels and the like, and the
proposed development’s impact on existing features;



      (2)   A topographic map which shows the location of the
project area; a 1- or 2-foot contour interval shall be used as the base map
for both existing and proposed. The map shall also show the location of the
property with respect to the street system and other features such as
existing and proposed stormwater retention basins and the like;



      (3)   Method of collection (surface and/or subsurface);



      (4)   Depth, side slopes and volume of retention basins;



      (5)   Calculations showing retention required and provided;



      (6)   Method of disposal of water within 36 hours;



      (7)   Areas tributary to each retention basin;



      (8)   The development’s low outfall elevation and location
relative to city datum shall be explained and the location on all watershed
and topographic maps shall be identified;



      (9)   The drainage pattern of all streets within and adjacent
to the proposed development on the drainage maps shall be indicated;



      (10)   A preliminary retention basin plan including size,
depth and possible methods of draining the retention basin shall be proposed;



      (11)   Areas within any 100-year floodplain including any FEMA
designated floodplain shall be indicated; and



      (12)   All stormwater plans and preliminary drainage reports
shall be prepared and signed by a professional civil engineer who is
registered by the State of Arizona.



   (B)   Drainage reports. Drainage reports shall be submitted for
approval by the city with the site improvement plans. The report shall be
typewritten on letter-size sheets with necessary maps folded and inserted
into the report in the proper order. All drainage reports shall be prepared
and sealed by a qualified professional civil engineer registered in the State
of Arizona. All elevations shown on the plans shall be referenced to a
benchmark on the city datum unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.



      (1)   Preliminary drainage report. A preliminary drainage
report shall be required for all commercial, industrial, multi-family and
residential subdivision developments. The report must be presented with
preliminary development plans. Complete engineering reviews shall not occur
without this report, which shall be on separate, letter-size, typewritten
sheets with necessary maps and attachments. Handwritten comments on a plan
sheet are not acceptable and shall be returned unapproved. The preliminary
drainage report shall include, but not be limited to:



         (a)   Adequate maps that delineate the boundaries of
on-site and off-site drainage areas;



         (b)   Maps or drawings that indicate the drainage
pattern of all existing drainage, irrigation, structures, streets and the
like, and proposed streets and building sites. The different critical points
and where inlets/outlets are to be located shall be labeled. The
inlets/outlets are to have the same numbers as the drainage areas draining to
them;



         (c)   Each sub-area is to be analyzed for the peak flow
generated by a 10-year and 100-year storm. Use of the rational method is
preferred for drainage areas less than 160 acres. Hydrology and hydraulics
design methods shall be consistent with the Maricopa County Drainage Design
Manual, Volumes I, II and III;



         (d)   Storm drain design computations;



         (e)   Inlets shall be analyzed separately and catch
basin computations shall be submitted;



         (f)   The off-site storm runoff flows shall be described
in detail. Drainage area, calculated peak flows, and other pertinent runoff
data must be clearly set forth. If the flow is in a defined channel, the
channel can be improved. An 8-foot bottom to accommodate maintenance vehicles
may be required. Special consideration of the use of open channels is to be
given on each individual project by the city. Channels for the runoff from
areas outside the development may be realigned through the new development.
Special precautions at the point of discharge for flow rate, velocity,
erosion and sedimentation shall be evaluated to prevent adverse effects on
downstream properties;



         (g)   The retention volumes required by the formula:



            Drainage area (square feet) x drainage area
coefficient (C) x 0.2 x 1.1 (freeboard) = retention volume in cubic feet; and



         (h)   Proposed retention basin location(s), size(s) and
means of stormwater conveyance and disposal shall be shown on the drainage
map(s). Narrative discussion and supporting calculations shall be provided in
the body of the report.



      (2)   Final drainage report. A final drainage report shall be
required and accompanied with the drainage and retention agreement (Exhibit
10-4.1, following the text of this Article) to be recorded. The final
drainage report shall include but not be limited to:



         (a)   Cover sheet.



            1.   With submittal number, name and address of
project, parcel or development for which the report is submitted;



            2.   Name, address and phone number of engineer
and property owner; and



            3.   Seal, signature and date of State of Arizona
professional civil engineer.



         (b)   A narrative with topographic maps that describe
the location and condition of the property the project is located on (on-site
conditions); and the upstream (off-site) watersheds as well as any downstream
constraints which affect the property;



         (c)   Calculations demonstrating required retention
volume, tributary areas to each basin and volume provided and basin grades,
depth, high water elevation, pipe invert elevations, basin outfall elevation
and side slopes;



         (d)   Retention basin percolation test results;



         (e)   Elevation and location of low outfall elevation
for the development, sub-area or site improvement;



         (f)   Explanation of the effect of a basin overflow due
to back-to-back storms or a storm greater than the design storm;



         (g)   Street capacity calculations for the 10-year and
100-year storm;



         (h)   Time of concentration calculations;



         (i)   Storm drain piping and catch basin hydraulic
calculations, including the hydraulic grade line (“HGL”);



         (j)   The routing of off-site flows through or around
the proposed development;



         (k)   The city datum benchmark to which all site and
facility elevations are referenced;



         (l)   Tailwater and backwater elevations at all culverts;



         (m)   Finished floor elevations of all structures;



         (n)   Method of disposing of retained stormwater within
36 hours, and provide shallow pit percolation test results and calculations;



         (o)   Inflow and outflow points at retention/detention
basins and culverts;



         (p)   Points of concentration and intake point for catch
basins, scuppers, channels and street intersections;



         (q)   Calculations of the retention basin(s) drain time,
the number of drywells per city criteria and percolation test results;



         (r)   Drainage report based upon computerized hydraulic
models with all values and variables identified in the report. Software
manuals and documentation shall be made available upon request by the city;



         (s)   Long-term maintenance responsibility shall specify
the name, address, and phone number(s) of the person(s), firm(s) or agency
responsible for ownership, operation, liability and maintenance of drainage
improvements. Other documents where these responsibilities are documented
(i.e., CCRs, final plats and the like);



         (t)   Catch basin V-depth calculations; and



         (u)   All hydrology and hydraulic calculations as
required by the city that includes a summary of the following of each
drainage area:



            1.   Retention required and provided;



            2.   Street capacity and depths; and



            3.   Catch basin and storm drain pipe capacity,
HGL and velocities.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-5  HYDROLOGY.



   (A)   General comments. This section describes the city’s policies
concerning hydrologic analysis procedures to be used in the city for the
planning and design of drainage and flood control facilities and the
preparation of accompanying drainage reports. This section contains
recommended procedures, equations, data and basic assumptions which the
planner or designer is generally required to use. If a situation is
encountered in which the use of other methods or data in addition to or
instead of these are believed to be more appropriate, then the city engineer
should be consulted and advance approval must be received before using them.
When methods or data not described in this Chapter are used, the drainage
report must include enough information to enable the city engineer to fully
evaluate the applicability of the methods and data.



   (B)   Basis of design.



      (1)   The Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County, Volume
I, Hydrology, Section 3, Rational Method, shall be used to determine peak
discharges and volumes for design purposes for small, uniform, regularly
shaped watersheds less than 160 acres.



      (2)   The Corps of Engineers’ HEC-1 or HEC-HMS computer
modeling is required for small watersheds that are non-uniform, irregular in
shape, when routing of flows are necessary, or for areas larger than 160
acres.



   (C)   Study requirements. A hydrology study shall be performed for
each development within the city. The study shall define the overall and
sub-drainage areas. It shall also determine appropriate hydrologic data for
the following:



      (1)   Off-project areas. The drainage flows for each
off-project drainage area tributary to the project shall be computed and
submitted in summary form. These off-site flows will be based on the City of
Apache Junction Stormwater Master Plan dated January 2002 (adopted in Apache
Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-4-3) or from consultant’s computations
where the Master Plan does not cover.



      (2)   Project sub-basins. The project shall be divided into
sub-basins tributary to appropriate design points. The pertinent hydrologic
data shall be computed for each and submitted in summary form.



      (3)   Appropriate design points. APPROPRIATE DESIGN POINTS are
those points wherein the peak flow rates, or other pertinent data, are needed
to determine flow capacity requirements, inflow-outflow relationships and the
like. These points would include but not necessarily be limited to the
following: inflow-outflow points of retention/detention basins, up and/or
downstream ends of culverts; intake points for storm drains (e.g., inlets,
catch basins, scuppers and the like); points immediately upstream and
downstream of channel junctions and/or street intersections; others as may be
necessary to give a complete hydrologic picture and allow a thorough
hydraulic evaluation and/or design of the drainage system.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-6  STREET DRAINAGE; FLOW.



   (A)   For street flow, the street drainage criteria of Section 3 of
the Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County, Volume II, Hydraulics shall
apply except as amended herein. The Rational Method shall be used to
calculate street runoff as stated in Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, §
10-4-5(B) of these standards.



   (B)   Calculations shall be submitted which indicate compliance with
the criteria as stated in Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-4-2(B) of
these standards.



   (C)   A 7-inch curb may be allowed to increase the street capacity
and eliminate the need for storm drains and may only be used for short
sections of streets near drain inlets with the approval of the city engineer.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-7  STORM DRAINS.



   Where the peak flows exceed the capacity of the public street to convey
the peak flows, storm drains shall be installed and sized to carry the excess
flows (e.g., when the 10-year peak exceeds the spread criteria or exceeds the
curb capacity of the public street or when the right-of-way cannot convey the
100-year peak storm within the constraints of Apache Junction City Code Vol.
II, § 10-4-2 of these standards). All storm drains within a development will
outlet into on-site retention/detention basins, on-site channels or off-site
channels, washes or storm drains.



   (A)   Storm drain hydraulics.



      (1)   Hydraulic calculations shall be prepared as indicated in
the FCDMC Hydraulic Manual, Section 4, with the following modifications:



         (a)   Storm drain piping shall be sized to carry the
excess runoff to meet the street flow criteria described in Apache Junction
City Code Vol. II, § 10-4-2 of these standards.



         (b)   Where a storm drain is the sole flow path to a
retention basin from a development or site, the storm drain shall be sized to
carry the 100-year storm peak flow rate.



         (c)   The hydraulic grade line (“HGL”) may be above
the pipe, provided that it remains at least 1 foot below the ground elevation
at all manholes, catch basins, inlets and the like.



      (2)   Calculations for establishing the HGL for storm drainage
catch basins, pipes, and structures are to be submitted with the engineering
improvement plans. The HGL shall be shown on storm drain piping profile
drawings, including catch basin runs.



   (B)   Storm drain main.



      (1)   Location.



         (a)   The alignment of a storm drain is normally within
the pavement area of a public street other than principal arterials and
parkways unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.



         (b)   The storm drain should not normally cross the
centerline of the public street, nor cross under curb lines, sidewalks,
driveways and the like.



         (c)   Public storm drains located outside of public
right-of-way shall be centered within a 20-foot drainage easement.



      (2)   Pipe size.



         (a)   The minimum pipe size of the lateral collector
shall be 15-inch ID, and the minimum pipe size of the main is 18-inch ID.



         (b)   At changes in pipe size, the crowns of the pipes
shall match.



      (3)   Depth. Storm drains located within public rights-of-way
shall comply with the following:



         (a)   Consideration shall be given regarding the depth
of any manhole to be installed on a public storm drain in establishing the
depth of the storm drain pipe. Shallow manholes shall be avoided and require
approval by the city.



         (b)   The crown of storm drain pipes whether public or
private shall not encroach or protrude into the pavement section of the
public street (ABC base and surface courses of asphalt).



         (c)   The crown of storm drain culverts shall not
normally encroach or protrude into the pavement section of public streets.
With city engineer approval, the asphalt courses may be placed directly onto
the concrete slabs of box culverts.



      (4)   Direction changes. When the pipe changes direction more
than 30 degrees, there shall be a drop between match points of at least 0.1
feet. In no case shall the deflection angle be greater than 90 degrees.
Manholes shall be required at all storm drain pipe direction changes.



      (5)   Separation of storm drain pipe from water and sewer
lines.



         (a)   Horizontal separation of storm drains and water or
sewer lines shall be a minimum of 6 feet, outside of pipe to outside of pipe.



         (b)   Vertical separation of storm drains and sewers
should be 2 feet (sewer below) unless the sewer line is manufactured from
ductile iron with mechanical joints or equal.



         (c)   Vertical separation of storm drain and water line
(water line below) shall be 2 feet clear.



         (d)   Separation is measured from the outside of the two
pipes.



      (6)   Velocity. The velocity of stormwater flowing within
public storm drains shall be in the range of 2 feet per second (2 fps) to 10
feet per second (10 fps).



      (7)   Pipe classification.



         (a)   The minimum D-load class specification shall be
Class 3 or the actual installation requirement, whichever is greater.



         (b)   Trench loading calculations shall be provided upon
request during the plan review process.



         (c)   The civil engineering improvement plans shall
clearly identify the class of the pipe for all storm drains, whether public
or private within city right-of-way.



      (8)   Pipe materials. The following materials are acceptable
for constructing conveyance components of publicly maintained storm drains
within the city:



         (a)   RGRCP. Rubber gasket reinforced concrete pipe
(“RGRCP”) conforming to Section 618 of the Uniform Standard
Specifications as published by MAG.



         (b)   RCP.  Reinforced concrete pipe (“RCP”) is
approved for storm drains 36 inches or larger. RCP shall conform to Section
618 of the MAG Uniform Standard Specifications.



         (c)   CIPP. Cast-in-place pipe (“CIPP”) conforming
to Section 620 of the MAG Uniform Standard Specifications is subject to the
following.



            1.   CIPP generally should not be placed under a
road bed. The city engineer must grant specific approval for the installation
of CIPP. Letters of request shall include a justification statement and shall
be submitted to the public works department - engineering division for
processing.



            2.   Minimum size shall be 36 inches.



            3.   A soils report shall be provided that
confirms that soil conditions are adequate for the installation of CIPP.



            4.   The hydraulic gradient for the design events
shall be kept within the pipe.



            5.   Details of the CIPP shall be prepared for and
approved by the city engineer.



         (d)   Other pipe. Where a lateral conveyance is not
subject to pavement loading from public streets (e.g., laterals directly from
inlets into a retention basin), the following pipe materials may be used with
prior approval from the city engineer.



            1.   Polyvinyl chloride (“PVC”) SDR 35 or
greater conforming to Section 745 of the MAG Uniform Standard Specifications.



            2.   High density polyethylene (“HDPE”)
conforming to Section 738 of the MAG Uniform Standard Specifications.



         (e)   Restricted material usage. The following materials
are not approved for use in constructing storm drains located within City of
Apache Junction right-of-way, but are approved for culvert crossings with the
approval of the city engineer:



            1.   Corrugated metal pipe (“CMP”); and



            2.   Corrugated metal pipe arch (“CMPA”).



         (f)   Alternative materials. Other materials for public
stormwater conveyance may be considered on a case-by-case basis subject to
the following:



            1.   A written request to the city engineer
detailing the justification for the use of alternative materials; and



            2.   The request shall be made through the public
works department - engineering division.



      (9)   Pipe compaction methods.  Mechanical compaction methods
are required. No jetting or flooding shall be allowed within the city
right-of-way without mechanical compaction.



   (C)   Storm drain inlets. Inlets are those drainage structures that
are placed and sized to intercept stormwater flows and direct those flows
into a conveyance.



      (1)   Inlets that have been approved for use within public
right-of-way or publicly maintained areas are:



         (a)   Inlets constructed in accordance with MAG Standard
Details 533 (Type “D”), 534 (Type “E”), 535 (Type “F”), all
modified with an 18-inch sump area below the invert of the pipe as shown in
Apache Junction Standard Detail AJ-533-1M.



         (b)   Scuppers constructed in accordance with MAG
Standard Detail 206-1. No metal tops are allowed.



         (c)   Projects that are being developed adjacent to
existing public streets in which a scupper type inlet exists to direct street
runoff onto the project site are required to remove and replace the existing
scupper with an approved inlet unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.



         (d)   Inlets that provide an “access” opening into
the box are prohibited. All access openings shall be through the grate.



         (e)   Slotted drains are not allowed within the city
right-of-way unless prior approval is given by the city engineer.



         (f)   Other inlet types with the appropriate
justification may be approved on a project-by-project basis.



         (g)   MAG Standard Detail 535 (Type “F”) cannot be
constructed fully or partially in sidewalk areas.



      (2)   Inlet capacities on public streets shall be calculated
in accordance with:



         (a)   The Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County,
Volume II, Hydraulics; or



         (b)   The Federal Highway Administration’s
(“FHWA”) Hydraulic Engineering Circular Number Twelve (“HEC” 12),
“Drainage of Highway Pavements.”



         (c)   The engineer shall make allowances for clogging of
the inlet structure.



      (3)   Inlets within public right-of-way shall not be placed or
connected in series unless approved by the city engineer.



      (4)   The minimum horizontal distance between inlets within
public right-of-way is 30 feet.



   (D)   Storm drain laterals. The portion of the conveyance that
connects the inlet structure to the storm drain mains or to an outlet
structure is considered a lateral pipe. Laterals within the public
right-of-way shall conform to the following:



      (1)   Minimum diameter is 15 inches when the lateral is
subject to traffic loading forces or may be 12 inches when not subject to
traffic loading forces and approved by the city engineer (e.g., equalization
pipes and the like).



      (2)   The crown of the lateral pipe shall not encroach or
protrude into the public street pavement section (ABC, base or surface
asphalt courses).



      (3)   See division (B)(8) above regarding acceptable materials
for lateral pipes that are located within public right-of-way.



      (4)   The connection of the lateral pipe to the main pipe(s)
of the storm drain shall be per MAG Standard Detail 524 or via a
prefabricated tee component.



      (5)   The minimum D-load classification for lateral pipes
shall be Class 3 or the actual installation requirements, whichever is
greater.



   (E)   Manholes and structures. Manholes or junction structures shall
be provided on public storm drains to facilitate maintenance in accordance
with the following:



      (1)   Locations. Manholes and/or junction boxes are required
at all of the following:



         (a)   Junctions of 2 or more pipes;



         (b)   Changes in grade;



         (c)   Changes in alignment; and



         (d)   Changes in pipe sizes (pipe crowns to match).



      (2)   Spacing. The maximum spacing for manholes shall be:



         (a)   Four hundred feet on lines 18 inches to 36 inches
inside diameter; and



         (b)   Six hundred sixty feet on lines greater than 36
inches inside diameter.



      (3)   Manhole construction standards on public storm drains
shall comply with the following table:



Table 10-4.1



Manhole Construction Standards



 


Manhole

 

Pipe Size




≤ 48 in.

 

≥ 51 in.




MAG Standard Detail



Base
 

520

 

521



Shaft
 

522

 

522



Frame and cover
 

424 (30 in.)

 

424 (30 in.)




 



   (F)   Storm drain outlets. Structures that are located at the
downstream terminus of storm drain laterals or mains are classified as
outlets. Storm drain outlets that are located within public right-of-way or
areas that are subject to maintenance by the city shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   Concrete headwalls shall be installed on 12-inch and
larger pipes per MAG Standard Detail 501-4 or an equivalent.



      (2)   Access barriers shall be installed on the outlets of
12-inch or larger pipes.



      (3)   Erosion protection shall be provided as necessary.



      (4)   Safety railing shall be installed on headwalls that,
from the top of the headwall to the floor, are 18 inches and greater in
height and are 24 inches horizontally, or less, to a public sidewalk per MAG
Standard Detail 145.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-8  OPEN CHANNELS.



   (A)   Natural channels. Whenever possible and appropriate existing
natural drainage channels must be preserved in their natural state. When this
is the case, a drainage easement or right-of-way shall be dedicated over the
100-year floodplain of the natural drainage way.



   (B)   Man-made channels. When man-made channels are required, the
emphasis would be placed on a “natural” appearance. Side slopes 6:1 or
flatter is preferred with “natural” vegetation planted per the city’s
parks and recreation department requirements and approval.



      (1)   Design criteria.



         (a)   Open channels. Open channels are not allowed in
the city right-of-way. Open channels shall be designed to convey at least the
100-year peak discharge within the main channel.



         (b)   Channel details. Channel lining, freeboard, toe
protection, under drains, design velocity, drop structures and the like shall
be as shown in the FCDMC Drainage Design Manual, Volume II, Hydraulics.



         (c)   Hydraulic capacity. The capacity of the drainage
channel shall not be impeded or diminished by the lining or landscaping
materials. The conveyance of the historical flows (“Q” values) shall be
substantially maintained.



         (d)   Maximum velocities/erosion protection. In general,
the maximum velocity shall not exceed the scouring velocity of the soil (with
natural cover). When the scour velocity is exceeded, additional erosion
protection shall be provided. The protection may consist of one or more of
the following:



            1.    Concrete/shotcrete lining reinforced with 12
gauge, 4-inch by 4-inch welded wire fabric reinforcement;



            2.   Natural stone grouted rip-rap 4-inch to
12-inch diameter stones - leave a minimum 1/4 diameter exposed, maximum ½
diameter exposed;



            3.   Check dams at 3-foot elevation intervals; or



            4.   Dumped rip-rap of sufficient size and depth
with calculations showing size and depth.



         (e)   Side slopes. Channels shall have side slopes that
are approved by the city engineer.



         (f)   Channel safety. Channels adjacent to pedestrian
walkways (which is not limited to concrete sidewalks), whether located within
public right-of-way or on private property shall have safety hand railings
per MAG Standard Detail 145 or an equivalent design.



      (2)   Channel types. The following types of channels are
acceptable for use, and can be applied individually or in combinations.



         (a)   Concrete lined. Where used, these types of
channels shall have a 4-inch shotcrete or concrete lining reinforced with 12
gauge, 4-inch by 4-inch welded wire fabric reinforcement.



            1.   A natural coloring or additive may be allowed
or required in some areas.



            2.   Landscaping adjacent to the channel on both
sides is required.



         (b)   Desert landscaped. Where desired or applicable,
landscaped channels can be constructed subject to the following:



            1.   Maintenance of the channel is considered
(e.g., 8-foot bottom provided where necessary).



            2.   Side slopes can be landscaped with
appropriate trees, shrubs and rock features which do not impede with the
function of or the maintenance of the channel.



            3.   Appropriate roughness coefficients (“n”
values) shall be used in sizing the channel.



            4.   Appropriate materials as approved by the city
shall be used as a channel liner. The engineer shall take into consideration
the potential for erosion and maintenance.



         (c)   Soil cement lining. The use of soil cement
requires special approval by the city, and where approved, this type of
channel shall utilize native soils to achieve an integral character with the
surrounding area.



      (3)   Dip sections.



         (a)   The design of public streets to create a dip
section in which to channelize the stormwater flows of the design storm
across public streets is prohibited except where specifically approved by the
city engineer and in the specially designated Rural Area (see Apache Junction
City Code Vol. II, Appendix 10-B).



         (b)   Existing dip sections on public streets that are
subject to widening requirements associated with the development of adjacent
properties are to be removed or modified.



            1.   Where the contributing stormwater flows to
the existing dip section have been eliminated or reduced to discharges
associated with Apache Junction’s design storms and topography permits, the
dip section shall be completely removed and the public street reconstructed.



            2.   Where topography or existing conditions do
not permit the removal, the dip section shall be modified so that flows
associated with Apache Junction’s design storms and lesser events are
conveyed via storm drain facilities and discharges associated with larger
storm events would be allowed to flow across the modified dip section in the
historic fashion.



      (4)   Valley gutters.



         (a)   Valley gutters shall be used to transport runoff
across local streets when a storm drain system is not required. However,
valley gutters are generally not acceptable for collector or arterial streets
and may do so only with the approval of the city engineer.



         (b)   In unusual cases, valley gutters may be required
to cross collector streets in which case a wider 8-foot design width shall be
used and must be approved by the city engineer. Mid-block valley gutters
should be avoided.



      (5)   Maintenance.



         (a)   Access. Open channels to be properly maintained
should provide reasonable access for maintenance. Minimum width of access
should be 8 feet. Spacing between vehicular access points should be a maximum
of ½ mile. A minimum of 1 access point per subdivision is required.
Non-vehicular access points shall be provided every 660 feet maximum. If the
facility is to be city-maintained, the above minimum requirements are
mandatory.



         (b)   Responsible party. Maintenance of drainage
facilities within the city is usually the responsibility of the property
owner or the subdivision’s homeowners’ association. Specific maintenance
responsibilities should be called out on the recorded plat and the grading
and drainage plan.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-9  CULVERTS AND BRIDGES.



   Cross street culverts and bridges shall be designed to the criteria in
the following table:



   Table 10-4.2



   Culvert and Bridge Design Criteria



 


Street Classification

 

Peak Frequencies




10-Year

 

50-year

 

100-year



Local and minor collector
 
Runnoff to be conveyed by culvert or bridge under road with no flow
overtoppng the road
 
Runnoff to be conveyed by culvert or bridge and by flow over the road wit a
maximum 6-inch flow depth over the road.
 
Runnoff to be conveyed by culvert or bridge and by flow over the road with a
maximum 12-inch flow dept over the road.


Collector, arterial and parkway
 
 
Runnoff to be conveyed by culvert or bridge under road with no flow
overtopping the road.
 
Runnoff to be conveyed by culvert and by flow over the road with maximum
6-inch flow depth over the road Minimum freeboard for bridges is 2 feet.



 



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-10  DETENTION OR RETENTION FACILITIES.



   (A)   Retention methods. Allowable methods of providing stormwater
retention are:



      (1)   Surface storage. Where surface storage (i.e., the
traditional retention basin) of the required retention is planned or
provided, the basin(s) shall comply with the following:



         (a)   Irregular areas. Retention is to be accommodated
within a limited number of well-defined irregular shaped areas. Pursuant to
the Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, multiple small retention basins are
not acceptable for either public or private developments unless approved by
the city engineer for public developments and by the development services
project engineer for private developments and are in conformance with city
standards.



            1.   To count separate retention areas as one,
they must have the same high water elevation and be connected by equalizer
pipes.



            2.   On-lot retention is prohibited in all
residential subdivisions.



            3.   Maximum depth of the required retention that
shall be retained within a surface retention basin is 3 feet (see division
(D)(1) below).



            4.   The high water elevation shall be lower than
the adjacent grades of adjoining property unless an engineered berm is
approved by the city.



         (b)   Within city right-of-way or PUE.



            1.   Retention facilities (surface basins,
underground pipes, tanks and the like) are to be located within the private
property or “on-lot” of the proposed land development. Right-of-way areas
shall not be excavated, depressed or encroached upon without prior approval
of the City of Engineer. When allowed, the retention facility shall conform
to division (D)(1).



            2.   Retention area(s) including the high water
elevation limits for the design storm can encroach into public utility
easements (“PUE”) subject to:



               a.    Adequate protection and cover is
maintained for any existing public utilities.



               b.    Buoyancy calculations for the public
utilities, whether existing or proposed, are required when the pipe diameter
is larger than 16 inches.



               c.   Where wastewater manholes exist or are
planned within the high water limits, the manholes shall have a watertight
frame and cover per MAG Standard Detail 423, and the rim shall be higher than
the high water elevation of the design storm.



      (2)   Paved surface storage. In commercial and industrial
areas retention may be accomplished upon paved areas (e.g., impervious
surfaces such as asphalt, concrete and the like). See division (E) of this
section.



      (3)   Underground storage. Underground storage utilizes
storage tanks, vaults, pipes and the like to place the required stormwater
retention volume underground on the development site. Underground storage is
allowed for commercial retail and industrial type projects only.



         (a)   The design engineer shall consider the following
during the design process for any project involving underground storage:



            1.   Venting of the structure;



            2.   Access to the underground structure for
routine maintenance;



            3.   Structural loads including any surface loads;



            4.   Buoyancy of the structure; and



            5.   Drainage of the structure within the required
36 hours.



         (b)   The engineer shall include in the drainage report
for the project the justifications, design criteria, operational and
maintenance information for the underground structure and any associated
equipment such as pumps.



         (c)   See division (L) below for underground storage
guidelines.



   (B)   Sizing.



      (1)   Basis of design.



         (a)   All retention/detention facilities shall be sized
to retain the storm event falling over the entire project (gross area
including streets) (see division (B)(2)(a) and (b) below). For the purpose of
determining the volume required, the project shall be considered to extend to
the centerline of all existing and/or future streets on the exterior
boundaries and to include all interior streets and other rights-of-way within
the project.



         (b)   There shall be a minimum of 1 foot freeboard from
the water surface elevation to the lowest building elevation and/or the
gutter of the upstream streets.



      (2)   Volume required. The volume required for each
retention/detention basin shall be calculated as follows:



         (a)   North of Baseline Avenue:



            V R =1.1 x 0.2 (Cpost - Cpre) x A



         where:



            V R= Retention volume required (cubic feet)



            1.1 = An additional 10% of retained volume to account
for losses due to sedimentation, weed growth and the like



            0.2 = 10-year, 24-hour depth of rainfall (2.4
inches/12)



            Cpost = a coefficient relating the runoff to rainfall
for the proposed construction (per FCDMC Drainage Design Manual, Volume 1,
Table 3.2).



            Cpre = a coefficient relating the runoff to rainfall
for the existing condition (per FCDMC Drainage Design Manual, Volume 1, Table
3.2).



            A = drainage area, including ½ of all abutting
streets (square feet)



         (b)   South of Baseline Avenue:



            V R = 0.25C x A



         where:



            V R = Retention volume required (cubic feet)



            0.25 =  100-year, 2-hour depth of rainfall (3.0
inches/12)



            C = a coefficient relating the runoff to rainfall 
(per FCDMC Drainage Design Manual, Volume 1, Table 3.2).



            A = drainage area, including ½ of all abutting
streets (square feet)



         Drywell volumes shall not be included in the proposed
storage capacities.



      (3)   Location.



         (a)   Retention/detention basins shall be located such
that they can intercept the flows from the entire site.



         (b)   If the basin is located other than at the lowest
point of the project, the developer’s engineer shall denote on the master
drainage map the actual or effective drainage area. If portions of the
project cannot drain to the primary basin, additional basins shall be added
to retain runoff from these areas. Credit will not be given for providing
volume in excess of that needed to retain the required storm event from a
basin’s effective drainage area.



   (C)   Volume certification. The developer will provide the city with
certified as-built dimensions of the basins and the actual volume of storage
provided. This must be based on as-built topographic surveys made by either a
civil engineer or land surveyor who is registered to practice in the State of
Arizona. These as-built volumes must reflect permanent finished landscaping
in place. The volumes shall be certified by the design engineer that the
volumes provided meet or exceed the required design volumes per city
ordinance and the approved drainage plan. The volume of storage provided must
equal or exceed the approved design volumes before the city engineer will
issue letters of acceptance for maintenance of any public facilities.



   (D)   Grading.



      (1)   Depths.



         (a)   Retention basins are not permitted within the city
ROW. Where unusual circumstances are encountered, retention basins may
encroach in city ROW with prior written approval from the city engineer. When
retention basins are allowed to encroach, the basins shall not extend more
than 10 feet into the city ROW and shall not exceed 1.5 feet of water depth
within the city ROW unless there is a fence or other similar protection to
restrict access to the area.



         (b)   The overall average depth shall not exceed 3 feet
without authorization of the city engineer. If granted, the basin must be
fenced to prohibit access or a side slope of 8:1 shall be provided for a
minimum distance of 25 feet measured from the 100-year high water level.



         (c)   While it is the city’s intent that the
“average” depth not exceed 3 feet, it is also the city’s intent that
the basins be contoured to present an aesthetically pleasing appearance as
determined by the city engineer. Therefore, up to 25% of the bottom area may
be up to 4 feet deep.



         (d)   In no case shall the depth exceed 1 foot without a
positive means of disposing of accumulated runoff.



      (2)   Slopes, side and bottom.



         (a)   Bottom. The bottom of all basins shall be sloped
towards the discharge points. The minimum bottom slope shall be 0.5%.



         (b)   Side slopes.



            1.   Side slopes adjacent to public rights-of-way,
or when there is pedestrian type access to that portion of the basin, shall
have a side slope of 6:1 or flatter.



            2.   Side slopes adjacent to walls, fences, hedges
and the like (e.g., no or limited pedestrian type access in that area) may
have side slopes up to 4:1.



            3.   Retaining walls (e.g., vertical slopes) may
be used in areas adjacent to permanent walls, fences and the like.



      (3)   Grading/landscaping/joint use as parks.



         (a)   1.   It is the intent of the city that
retention/detention basins present an aesthetically pleasing appearance. The
developer’s engineer shall contour the sides and bottoms of the basins to
enhance appearance through varied slopes.



            2. The developer and designer shall work with
representatives of the city’s development services department and parks and
recreation department to determine the need/desirability and feasibility of
joint usage of the basin as a park site. If appropriate, the design shall
provide for appropriate open areas for the recreational facilities. All
design shall be approved by the city parks and recreation department.



         (b)   It is not the intent of these standards to dictate
the specific details of the configuration to the designers; however, the
following concepts will be used as the basis of reviewing the plans:



            1.   Curvilinear sides should be used in lieu of
long stretches of straight lines.



            2.   Side slopes should be varied (e.g., start
with 6:1 then change to 7-8:1 or more). With appropriate use of landscaping,
side slopes can even be reduced to 4:1.



            3.   bottom areas should contour to varying depths
in lieu of uniform depth/slope.



         (c)   The tops and bottoms of side slopes shall be
rounded off, generally over a distance of 5 feet each way of the curve point
of intersection (“PI”).



         (d)   All landscaping within city ROW, easements or
dedicated tracts shall be approved by the city parks and recreation
department.



   (E)   Retention/detention in parking lots.



      (1)   Retention/detention in parking lots of multi-family
developments is not allowed. All retention/detention of such developments
shall be in landscaped areas.



      (2)   Retention/detention of runoff in parking lots of
industrial/commercial developments is allowed subject to the following
guidelines:



         (a)   No more than 50% of the required storage volume
may be retained/detained in parking areas. The balance shall be provided in
landscaped areas. The tributary areas to each basin shall be noted on the
master drainage map.



         (b)   No more than 50% of the required parking spaces
shall be covered by stormwater retention/detention.



         (c)   Storage system shall be designed to store the
first 30% of the required runoff volume off paved areas (to avoid nuisance
water constantly ponding on the pavement).



         (d)   Depth of water shall not exceed 6 inches within
the parking area, nor shall it exceed 0.15 feet at the midpoint of any
parking space.



         (e)   Interference with pedestrian traffic will be
minimized in the design of the storage facility.



         (f)   A continuous fire access lane shall be provided
throughout the development, and it shall be free of ponded water from the
retention areas.



         (g)   All parking spaces shall be accessible during
periods when the basins are filled to capacity, without pedestrians having to
cross ponded water deeper than 0.15 feet.



      (3)   Before final plan approval, an approved drainage report
must show the calculated stormwater storage volume based on runoff from the
100-year, 2-hour storm, or the pre-approved 10-year, 24-hour storm for the
Downtown Area and in-fill projects north of Baseline Avenue.



   (F)   Overflow/outfall.



      (1)   Each project shall be designed such that the
“ultimate” outfall for all drainage in excess of the 100-year, 2-hour
storm is routed to a public street, storm drain, drainage channel or natural
watercourse. The outfall shall be accessible without draining over private
property.



      (2)   If such an outfall does not exist, the project must
provide an outfall.



   (G)   Overflow/conveyance.



      (1)   Off-project flows which historically flowed through the
project may be routed through the project. Off-site runoff volumes shall not
be allowed across private lots, streets or public/private access ways.



      (2)   Runoff volumes in excess of those required to be
retained/detained may be routed directly through the outfall, although they
shall be routed via the retention/detention facilities.



   (H)   Location/conflicts with existing utilities.



      (1)   Retention/detention facilities shall not encroach into
existing easements for private utilities without written approval of the
encroachment from all utilities using the easement.



      (2)   Retention/detention facilities shall not encroach into
public ROW nor into public easements. If necessary, the developer shall
relocate conflicting utilities into a new dedicated easement.



      (3)   The top of the retention/detention facilities (e.g.,
freeboard elevation) shall be at least 4 horizontal feet from any building or
public roadway.



      (4)   Retention/detention facilities shall not be located
within 20 feet of an active septic system nor within 100 feet of an active
water well.



      (5)   A minimum 3 feet of cover (from the bottom of the basin
to the top of the pipe) shall be maintained over water and sewer service
lines.



   (I)   Disposal/discharge.



      (1)   All retention/detention facilities shall have a positive
method of disposing of retained/detained runoff waters. All water so
retained/detained shall be disposed of within 36 hours. Public streets are
not considered an acceptable outlet for disposal of retained/detained runoff,
however are considered an acceptable outlet for overflow. Only under special
circumstances with prior city engineer approval should pump disposal methods
be used.



      (2)   The minimum allowable pipe size for primary outlet
structures is 12 inches. A headwall (MAG Standard Detail 501-4) and an access
barrier shall be constructed at the outlet.



      (3)   Acceptable methods of disposal of accumulated stormwater
runoff are:



         (a)   Positive gravity outlet.



            1.   Surface infiltration. A percolation test is
required in each retention basin location to determine natural percolation.
Test results shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval of the
retention basin(s).



            2.   Drywells.



               a.    Drywells are permitted when no other
means of disposal are available. Infiltration into the drywell cannot be
considered to reduce the size of the retention area.



               b.   The property owner of record shall be
responsible for the design, performance, operation or maintenance of drywells
used with on-site retention.



               c.    Drywells must penetrate at least 10
feet into a permeable stratum and a percolation test must be carried out on
the drywell before acceptance. The percolation test results are to be filed
with the development services project engineer.



               d.    Drywells shall comply with the ADEQ
publication Guidance for Design, Installation, Operation, Maintenance, and
Inspection of Drywells and the additional requirements described herein. A
copy of the application for registration by ADEQ of the proposed drywell(s)
shall be submitted prior to approval of grading plans.



               e.    Multiple drywell installations shall
be located a minimum of 100 feet apart, unless waived by the city engineer,
and a minimum of 20 feet away from a basin inlet.



               f.   All drywells draining runoff from more
than 1 acre of pavement are to be a dual chamber type similar to the MaxWell
dual chamber drywell (Torrent Resources) or approved alternate.



               g.   For any project involving hazardous
materials, including fuels, the drywell must include the “Envibro”
Drainage System (Torrent Resources) or approved alternate.



               h.    Drywells shall be located a minimum of
100 feet away from water wells and underground storage tanks (except
stormwater underground storage tanks).



               i.   Top of the drywell grate shall be set 2
inches above the bottom elevation of the retention basin.



               j.    Number and type of drywells are to be
called out on the engineering plans.



               k.   Each drywell will be percolation tested
after installation and a 50% value of its disposal rate shall be used, up to
but not exceeding 0.5 cfs. The percolation test results are to be submitted
to the development services project engineer with the final as-built drawings
of the stormwater collection and retention plan.



               l.    Drywells which encounter perched water
shall be sealed in the perched water zone of the well.



               m.   All drywells shall be registered with
the ADEQ and constructed by an ADEQ licensed contractor. The approved drywell
registration shall be submitted to the city by the developer at the time
as-builts are submitted. A tabulation showing drywell number, registration
number, and percolation rate will be added to the grading plan coversheet
before submitting as-builts.



               n.   The property owner of record shall be
responsible for the design, performance, operation and maintenance of
drywells used with on-site retention.



               o.    Drywells that cease to drain a project
area in a 36-hour period shall be replaced by the maintenance authority with
new ones.



               p.    Drywells are not to be located within
public street ROW or private street roadway tracts unless authorized by the
city engineer.



            3.   Storm drain discharge. Discharge to an
existing storm drain with a maximum discharge of 1 cubic foot per second. A
waiver is required.



            4.   Drainage channel discharge. Discharge to a
drainage channel either natural or man-made of sufficient capacity to convey
the anticipated flows from the tributary drainage area. A waiver is required.



            5.   Prohibited discharge. Water cannot be
discharged into a city street, gutter or alley.



         (b)   Pump station (waiver required).



            1.    Permitted direction:



               a.   To an open channel, either natural or
man-made;



               b.    Subsurface direction to a nearby storm
sewer system with a maximum discharge of 1 cubic foot per second; or



               c.    Surface to a storm sewer system if
pumped water can be discharged directly into a catch basin or other inlet.



            2.   Water cannot be discharged into a city
street, gutter or alley.



            3.   Pump stations shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 9 of Volume II of the FCDMC Drainage Design Manual,
except as noted below.



               a.    Pumping facilities shall be set at an
elevation at or above the anticipated level of the 100-year event,
considering that a total power failure may occur.



               b.   Pumps shall be capable of handling
solids up to a maximum of 3 inches.



   (J)   Nuisance water. Each basin, particularly those used as a park,
shall be graded such that there are one or more “sump” areas wherein
runoff from the more frequent storms and nuisance runoff may be
retained/detained without flooding the balance of the basin, with preference
to surface percolation.



   (K)   Embankments.



      (1)   Detention or retention facilities should be constructed
below the natural ground surface.



      (2)   The use of embankments to impound stormwater runoff
requires prior approval by the development services project engineer.
Embankments become small dams that can be a serious potential downstream
flood hazard.



      (3)   If approval is obtained, all the design requirements
shall comply with Section 8.2.3, Embankment Design Criteria, of Chapter 8 of
Volume II of the FCDMC Drainage Design Manual.



      (4)   The developer must provide the city with as-built
certification by a State of Arizona registered geotechnical or civil engineer
experienced in dam technology, that the embankment was designed and
constructed properly, is stable and will safely impound the design volumes of
water.



   (L)   Underground retention storage requirements.



      (1)   Underground retention shall only be considered in
commercial and industrial zoned areas.



      (2)   Each request for underground storage will be evaluated
on an individual basis and permitted if approved by the development services
project engineer.



      (3)   The following guidelines are not meant to be exclusive
and, based on the type of underground storage approved, may require
additional data and details be submitted to the city engineer.



         (a)   Installation of corrugated metal pipe (“CMP”)
shall be in accordance with MAG Standard Specification No. 621, MAG Standard
Detail 510 and a note on strutting spacing, if required, demonstrating that
they are within manufacturer’s specification and recommendation for
installation. Excavation, bedding and backfill shall be in accordance with
MAG Standard Specification No. 601 and material per MAG Standard
Specification No. 760;



         (b)   Provide the depth of groundwater and the depth of
the proposed installation. Provide soil boring results to at least 10 feet
below the bottom of the proposed drywell;



         (c)   Demonstration of a 50-year life of the
installation (lining and coating must be specified). Aluminized CMP is
usually good for more than 50 years depending on the soil chemistry;



         (d)   Traffic/load bearing capacity of the installation.
Pipe gauge and corrugation size of CMP and D-load for RCP must be specified;



         (e)   The storage pipe must drain into a dual chamber
drywell. Include a detail of how the installation will be drained into the
drywell. The standard drywell detail does not address anything other than
normal installation. The sedimentation chamber and drain must be lower than
the tank drain so the tank drains completely. The system must drain within 36
hours;



         (f)   Provide a backfill detail. Include material and
compaction requirements, particularly under the haunches and to the
springline of the pipe;



         (g)   Provide a minimum 30-inch diameter manhole shaft
at each end of underground pipes up to 150 feet in length. Underground pipes
longer than 150 feet require an additional minimum 30-inch manhole shaft
every 150 feet or fraction thereof. All manhole shafts shall be equally
spaced no more than 150 feet measured from center to center.



            1.   A 30-inch manhole frame and cover can be used
at grade with a concrete collar where subject to wheel loads. Provide
assurance that the pipe will structurally accommodate the manholes where
there is traffic loading on the manhole.



            2.   The manhole shaft is to be 30 inches in
unobstructed diameter. No projections or obstructions are permitted into the
manhole shaft. If the manhole shaft is to be provided with a ladder, the
distance from any part of the ladder measured on the side of the ladder to
the opposite wall of the manhole shaft shall not be less than 30 inches. This
may result in the necessity of a larger diameter manhole to accommodate a
ladder. A detail of how the ladders are to be anchored must be specified and
the material to be used for the ladders in order to assure a 50-year life.



         (h)   Provide assurance that the material used for the
piping is suitable for the site’s soil (letter from the Soils Engineer);



         (i)   Specify water-tight manufactured joints;



         (j)   Provide end walls for pipe per manufacturer’s
recommendation with a detail or MAG Standard Detail 427;



         (k)   Cover to be 3 feet minimum in traffic areas (or
manufacturer’s recommendation); and



         (l)   RGRCP is suggested for strength and durability.
Structural strength calculations based on subgrade capacity are required in
areas subject to wheel loads.



      (4)   The above requirements are to be shown or specified on
the plan or otherwise satisfactorily addressed. The requested assurances are
to be provided for the city’s project file.



   (M)   Operation and maintenance.



      (1)   Maintenance of on-site detention or detention facilities
within the city shall be the responsibility of the property owner.



      (2)   All retention basins that will be maintained by the city
shall be improved by the developer per city standards for retention basin
development and installed prior to the city’s acceptance of the retention.
Retention basins, when not privately maintained, shall be dedicated to the
city in fee title as stormwater retention basins or drainage ROW. In the case
where private retention basins receive water, other than that which falls
upon the property and adjacent streets and/or alleys, the areas shall be
designated as easement areas for retention purposes and shall have a recorded
restrictive covenant requiring perpetual maintenance.



   (N)   Retention basins within SRP transmission line ROW.



      (1)   Retention basins are to be designed to the latest
SRP’s requirements.



      (2)   Developer shall submit drawings to the city and SRP for
approval. SRP will consider both existing and planned future power facilities
in their review. SRP approval letter shall be forwarded to the city engineer
before final city approvals.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-11 DRAINAGE EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS.



   For a drainage easement, the following apply:



   (A)   A drainage easement is an area designed and used for
conveyance and/or retention of stormwater runoff in which nothing can be
placed which will impede, divert or cause the runoff to have an adverse
affect on adjoining property.



   (B)   The city engineer requires that all drainage easements and
covenants be recorded on a subdivision plat or for those projects that do not
require a land subdivision map or plat, the easements and covenants will be
recorded by a separate instrument or document.



   (C)   Public easements and covenants shall be prepared and recorded
by the city engineer. Private easements and covenants shall be prepared and
recorded by the developer or representative after review and approval of the
associated documents.



   (D)   It is the developer’s responsibility to execute or cause the
execution of the legal documents. The developer shall return the executed
documents to the city engineer along with any recording fees as well as
provide recorded copies of all private easements in order to receive
construction document approval and/or permits.



      (1)   Public drainage easements. A public drainage easement is
required if the stormwater conveyance or storage occurs per the following:



         (a)   The conveyance is through city property.



         (b)   The storage is on city property.



         (c)   Where stormwater is conveyed from public
right-of-way onto private property.



         (d)   Public easements can only be extinguished through
city council action.



         (e)   The developer’s engineer shall provide the
following documents with the construction documents for the preparation of a
public drainage easement:



            1.   A sealed legal description of the easement
area (Exhibit “A”) (see Figure 10-7.1 in Article 10-7); and



            2.   A graphic exhibit of the easement area
(Exhibit “B”) (see Figure 10-7.2 in Article 10-7).



      (2)   Private drainage easements. Where the stormwater runoff
will be retained on private property in which any of the following is true, a
private drainage easement is required.



         (a)   Where the stormwater is conveyed across property
lines; or



         (b)   Where stormwater is stored in a common retention
area.



      (3)   Temporary drainage easements. Where the stormwater is
retained in an area subject to future development, the easement can be
described as a “temporary drainage easement.” These easements are treated
the same as regular drainage easements in that they are required to be
recorded and can only be extinguished through the submittal of revised
easement documents for city review and approval and the subsequent recording.



      (4)   Drainage covenants. A drainage covenant is a restrictive
promise specifying the use of the property relating to storm runoff, drainage
and retention. A drainage covenant shall be recorded for private property
when it conveys or retains stormwater runoff from public streets or property.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-12  CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   A responsible professional (e.g., civil engineer of record,
land surveyor and the like) must certify that the drainage and retention
facilities were constructed in accordance with the approved plans or as noted
on provided as-built plans and that the facilities conform to city standards.



   (B)   The responsible professional shall utilize the drainage and
retention certification letter, Exhibit 10-4.2 following the text of this
Article to certify the stormwater management facilities.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-13  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   The City of Apache Junction, having entered into the National
Flood Insurance Program by Resolution 79-41, adopted on November 7, 1979, is
required to provide adequate floodplain management and control measures, with
effective enforcement, consistent with criteria set forth by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (“FEMA”) and Section 1910 of the National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations (“NFIPR”). This action:



      (1)   Allows residents of the community to acquire federally
subsidized flood insurance;



      (2)   Provides for local floodplain management;



      (3)   Allows for a unified national program for managing flood
losses; and



      (4)   Provides for safer living conditions.



   (B)   The following excerpts are taken from the Federal Register:



      (1)   Flood insurance shall not be sold or renewed unless the
community has adopted and uniformly enforces adequate minimum floodplain
management regulations;



      (2)   Requires all building sites be reasonably safe from
flooding and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement,
with materials resistant to flood damage and by methods to minimize flood
damage. Specific requirements are provided for manufactured homes;



      (3)   Requires public utilities and facilities (includes
septic systems) be constructed to minimize flood damage and prevent
infiltration of floodwaters and system contamination;



      (4)   Requires certification that alteration or relocation of
a watercourse does not adversely affect upstream and downstream properties;



      (5)   Requires assurances that the flood carrying capacity
within altered or relocated portions of watercourses be maintained;



      (6)   Requires evacuation plan and alternate vehicular access
and escape routes be provided in Arizona;



      (7)   Requires a State of Arizona registered civil engineer or
architect certify that floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, up-lift forces and other factors
associated with the base flood elevation;



      (8)   Requires that a grading and drainage plan be prepared by
a State of Arizona registered civil engineer;



      (9)   Requires compliance by new construction or expansion by
existing developments or when repair, reconstruction or improvement equals or
exceeds 50% of the value of the existing development;



      (10)   Requires all encroachments, including fill and new
construction be prohibited so as to not increase the base flood elevation;



      (11)   Prohibits the placement of new manufactured homes
within regulatory floodways;



      (12)   Variances:



         (a)   Granting a variance is generally limited to lot
sizes of less than ½ acre.



         (b)   Variances shall not be issued within a designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels would result.



         (c)   Variances shall only be issued with a showing of
good and sufficient cause and exceptional hardship, providing the variance
will not result in increased flood heights, threats to public safety and
expense, nuisances or conflicts.



         (d)   Variances will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.



      (13)   Failure to adopt or enforce floodplain management
regulations will result in suspension of the community flood insurance
program; and



      (14)   FEMA elevation certificate prepared by a State of
Arizona registered civil engineer or land surveyor is required.



   (C)   In order to comply with federal requirements, developers and
engineers shall provide the following information:



      (1)   Confirm what flood zone the development is located
within.



      (2)   Confirm or determine the base flood (Q100) elevation.



      (3)   Confirm the lowest floor (including basement) is
elevated or floodproofed to 1 foot above the base flood level (additional 1
foot freeboard flood elevation is recommended).



      (4)   Confirm watercourses enter and leave areas to be
developed in their natural locations, and that flows or highwater elevations
are not increased to the detriment of upstream and downstream properties.



      (5)   Ensure that hydrologic data is presented in accordance
with the standards found in this article.



      (6)   Refer to and comply with provisions of Apache Junction
City Code Vol. II, Chapter 5, Floodplain Management.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-4-14  OTHER PERMITS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Flood Control District of Maricopa County (“FCDMC”).



      (1)   Drainage Design Manual. The developer and associated
design professionals are expected to be aware of and comply, except as
modified by the city, with the regulations contained in the FCDMC publication
Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County, Volumes I, II and III, which
provide guidelines for the design and construction of public and private
stormwater systems.



      (2)   Floodplain use permit.



         (a)   FCDMC has stormwater facilities within Apache
Junction and will issue a floodplain use permit when required and as
appropriate. See http://www.fcd.maricopa.gov/  (see Permits link) or call
602-506-1501.



         (b)   The following may be required when all or part of
a proposed project lies near or within a 100-year flood zone as designated by
the FEMA:



            1.   Contact FCDMC prior to plan review submittals
to the city, to determine whether a floodplain use permit is required.



            2.   If required, submit development plans to the
FCDMC for plan review and approval. Obtain floodplain use permit prior to
city plan review approval. Note that changes to grades, structures, lower
floor level and the like will require re-approval by the FCDMC.



            3.   The grading plans, drainage report map and
final plat shall show the location of the floodplain according to the FIRM.



            4.   The grading plans shall show pad and finished
floor elevations complying with the floodplain use permit.



            5.   Construction and inspections for work above
the lowest floor level is not permitted prior to obtaining floor level
certification from the FCDMC.



   (B)   Pinal County Air Quality Control District (“PCAQCD “);
earth moving and dust control.



      (1)   PCAQCD regulates development projects that involve
earth-moving operations or dust-generation operations that will disturb 0.10
contiguous acres or greater. For additional information please see the
website: http://www.pinalcountyaz.gov/AirQuality/pages/home.aspx.



      (2)   As described in Apache Junction City Code, Vol. I, the
developer shall provide Apache Junction’s development services department
with copies of his, her or its PCAQD permit.



   (C)   Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (“ADEQ “).



      (1)   Water quality. ADEQ regulates the quality of stormwater
discharges, including those directed to drywells. The developer is
responsible for designing and installing; and the landowner is responsible
for operating and maintaining the storm drain system to meet applicable
regulations.



      (2)   Drywells.



         (a)   Prior to drilling, installing or abandoning a
drywell, permission must be obtained from ADEQ. The city requires
notification of the ADEQ registration numbers for storm drain drywells
proposed to be installed as part of a land development project. For
additional information regarding this aspect of ADEQ, please see the link:
http://www.adeq.state.az.us/environ/water/permits/.



         (b)   Prior to the issuance of any city permit, it is
the responsibility of the registrant of record or drywell owner to obtain the
required ADEQ drywell registration and to keep this registration on file as
part of the project file and to provide copies as necessary in conformance
with ADEQ regulations and/or requirements.



      (3)   Notice of Intent (NOI).



         (a)   As prescribed by the Arizona Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (“AZPDES”) general permit for discharge from
construction activities to the waters of the U.S., any development project in
Apache Junction which will disturb one contiguous acres or greater, shall
complete a Notice of Intent (“NOI”) form. For additional information see
the link: http://www.adeq.state.az.us/environ/water/permits/  or call
602-771-4632.



         (b)   A copy of the completed NOI shall be provided to
Apache Junction’s development services department prior to or in
conjunction with the issuance of any construction and/or ROW permits.



      (4)   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (“SWPPP “).



         (a)   When a construction project disturbs more than 1
contiguous acre or greater of land in Apache Junction, a SWPPP will be
prepared.



         (b)   A copy of the NOI and the SWPPP shall be
maintained on the site and available for review. Any elements of the grading
and drainage plan pertinent to or referenced on the SWPPP shall be considered
a part of the SWPPP.



         (c)   The operator shall perform, at a minimum, a visual
inspection of the construction site once every month and within 24 hours of
rainfall greater than or equal to half of inch or more. The operator shall
prepare a report documenting his/her findings on the conditions of the SWPPP
controls and note any erosion problem areas. The operator’s report is to be
submitted to the city’s engineering inspector for review. Facilities shall
be maintained as necessary to ensure their continued functioning. In
addition, all temporary siltation controls shall be maintained in a
satisfactory condition until such time that clearing and/or construction is
completed, permanent drainage facilities are operational and the potential
for erosion has passed.



         (d)   The operator shall amend this plan as necessary
during the course of construction to resolve any problem areas which become
evident during the construction and/or during rainfalls. All changes to the
SWPPP must conform to the Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County,
Arizona, Volume III, Erosion Control.



         (e)   The permittee shall file a Notice of Termination
(“NOT”) after completion of construction and placement of final landscape
materials. A copy of the NOT is to be submitted to the engineering division
to final the SWPPP permit.



         (f)   The permittee shall save all records, including
the NOI, SWPPP, NOT, and inspection reports, on file for a minimum of 3 years
from the date of filing the NOT.



         (g)   The implementation of these plans and the
construction, maintenance, replacement, and upgrading of these facilities is
the responsibility of the permittee/contractor until all construction is
approved and the NOT is submitted to the engineering division.



         (h)   The facilities shown on this plan must be
constructed in conjunction with all clearing and grading activities in such a
manner as to ensure that sediment-laden water does not enter the drainage
system or violate applicable water standards. The facilities must be
installed and in operation prior to any grading or land clearing. Wherever
possible, maintain natural vegetation for silt control.



         (i)   A copy of the contractor’s NOI and 5 copies of
the reviewed and signed SWPPP must be received by the city engineer prior to
any grading and drainage permit being issued.



         (j)   All SWPPP documents shall follow the Drainage
Design Manual for Maricopa County, Arizona, Volume III, Erosion Control.



   (D)   Army Corps of Engineers (“Corps “).



      (1)   Section 404 permitting. The developer and associated
design professionals are expected to be aware of and comply with the
permitting regulations contained in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. See
http://www.spl.usace.army.mil (see Regulatory link) or call the Phoenix
project office of the Corps at 602-230-6900.



      (2)   404 areas identified.



         (a)   Areas of proposed projects that are designated by
the Corps as within the jurisdiction of Section 404 shall be clearly
identified and delineated on the improvement plans and land subdivision maps
or plats.



         (b)   The drainage report shall also identify and
delineate Section 404 Areas on all exhibits, figures and the like as well as
provide a narrative discussion regarding the 404 designation, permit holder
identification and procedures to modify those designations.



      (3)   Authority to modify. The city does not have the
authority to authorize any modifications, encroachments or deletions to 404
designated areas. It is the 404 permit holder’s responsibility to monitor
and manage the 404 Areas in accordance with the permit granted by the Corps.



(Ord. passed  - - )



EXHIBIT 10-4.1, DRAINAGE AND RETENTION AGREEMENT (SAMPLE)



For tax purposes:  EXEMPT PER



A.R.S. § 11-112.4.A.3



When recorded mail to:



City of Apache Junction



Engineering Division



Department of Public Works



575 E. Baseline Ave.



Apache Junction, AZ  85219




DRAINAGE AND RETENTION AGREEMENT




An agreement for the diversion and disposal of stormwater runoff subject to
certain terms and conditions contained herein is hereby provided over, under
and across the real property described as:



Retention basins within the land covered by this "Drainage and Retention
Agreement" shall not at any time hereafter be filled, altered or deviate from
the elevations and required volume shown on the approved improvement plans
and drainage report on file at the office of the City Engineer unless written
authorization is granted by the City Engineer.  The property owner(s) shall
not at any time hereafter block, obstruct or impede in any manner the flow of
water across or through the property and into the retention basin(s).  The
owner(s) shall have an obligation to maintain the retention facilities and/or
structure(s) as approved by the City of Apache Junction in accordance with
development plans of the original project.  Owner(s) will not be allowed to
erect any building or structure on the drainage and retention paths or in any
way result in a reduction of percolation that would cause the basin to retain
runoff more than 36 hours after a storm.  In addition, the owner(s) must
maintain the retention basin and provide an acceptable means for assuring
that all basins drain within the 36-hour time period.  In the event damage
to any property results from violating these Covenants, said owner(s) agree
to restore at their own expense all such damage.  This Covenant agreement
shall be conveyed and continued with the transfer of title or ownership of
said property to any and all future owners or assigns.



                                                   
                                                 
           



City Engineer               Owner/Developer Signature



                                             
                         



                  Name Printed/Title



                                             
                         



                  Company Name



                                             
                         



                  Address



For City Engineer



STATE OF ARIZONA   )



            )



County of Pinal      )



This instrument was acknowledged before me this       day of        
                      , 20   



By                                                
                                                 
                 



   Notary Public               My Commission Expires



 



For Owner/Developer



STATE OF



County of



This instrument was acknowledged before me this       day of        
                      , 20     



By                                                
                                                 
                 



   Notary Public               My Commission Expires



EXHIBIT 10-4.2, DRAINAGE AND RETENTION CERTIFICATION LETTER (SAMPLE)



I hereby certify that the drainage structures and the Retention Basin(s) for
[Project Name], located at                                  
                                  in the City of Apache
Junction have been built according to the approved plans and the project has
been As-Built under my supervision. The Retention Basin(s) calculations are
as follows:



Retention Basin (1)



Volume required per design: XXXX (CF)



Volume provided per As-Built: XXXX (CF)



Retention Basin (2)



Volume required per design: XXXX (CF)



Volume provided per As-Built: XXXX (CF)



Retention Basin (3)



Volume required per design: XXXX (CF)



Volume provided per As-Built: XXXX (CF)



 



Surveyor seal and signature



(Ord. passed  - - )



ARTICLE 10-5:  WATER



Section



   10-5-1   General information



   10-5-2   Water demands



   10-5-3   Design criteria



   10-5-4   Plan preparation standards



   Figure 10-5.1, Water Service Area



§ 10-5-1  GENERAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   These standards set forth a uniform engineering approach for
determining water demand and minimum criteria for design of water
distribution mains. The standards are structured to accommodate designers who
are preparing construction plans for private development. It is not intended
to provide standards that are all encompassing, to be substituted for
innovative design. The user of sound engineering principles is encouraged to
develop public water system designs that are not only economical to construct
but are economical to operate and maintain.



   (B)   The City of Apache Junction has 2 water entities supplying the
city with water: Arizona Water Company (“AWC”)and Apache Junction Water
Community Facilities District (“WUFCD”) or also referred to as Apache
Junction Water District (“AJWD”). Figure 10-5.1 following the text of
this Article shows the limits of service for each of the water companies.
Where they abut, a determination will be made of who will provide the service.



   (C)   New public water distribution facilities shall be designed in
accordance with AWC standards within their service area or in the case of the
WUFCD, standards set forth in this chapter, associated detail drawings, and
where these standards are silent, Maricopa Association of Governments
(“MAG”) Standard Specifications and Standard Details, Arizona Department
of Environmental Quality (“ADEQ”) Bulletin No. 10, and American Water
Works Association (“AWWA”) Standards.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-5-2  WATER DEMANDS.



   Developer will provide with plan submittals estimated demands for
maximum day flows based on the following:



   (A)   Water main design shall be based on maximum day flows, as
listed in Table 10-5.1 below, plus fire flows.



   (B)   Appurtenances (booster, reservoirs and the like) shall be
designed for peak hour of the maximum day demand with provisions for fire
flow and emergency flows as required.



   (C)   The peak hour is 1.7 times the maximum day demand.



   (D)   System pressures should be maintained between 60 and 100 psi
for maximum day velocity.



   (E)   The system should not exceed 5 fps or a head loss of 10 feet
per 1,000 feet, whichever is limiting.



Table 10-5.1



Maximum Day Flows



 

Proposed Development
 

Maximum Gallons Per Capita Per Day (gpcpd)





Low density residential

   Less than 5 dwelling units per acre
 

440 gpcpd



Medium density residential

   5 to 7 dwelling units per acre
 

440 gpcpd



High density residential

   Greater than 17 dwelling units per acre
 

440 gpcpd



Commercial, industrial mix
 

240 gpcpd



Commercial/industrial mix
 

240 gpcpd



Commercial high rise
 




   No landscaping or desert landscaping
 

180 gpcpd



   With landscaping
 

240 gpcpd



Industrial (does not include process water)
 

130 gpcpd



Hotel/motel
 

200 gal. per room



Schools
 




   Without lunch and/or shower facilities
 

75 gal. per student



   With lunch and/or shower facilities
 

125 gal. per student



Malls/retail areas
 

1.5 gal. per sq. foot





 



   (F)   If a proposed development does not fit one of the above areas
and the maximum is not identified in Table 10-5.1 - Maximum Day Flows, then
the maximum day flow will be calculated at 220 gallons per person per day.



   (G)   The population density for less than 5 dwelling units per acre
is 3.2 persons per unit and 2 persons per unit for population densities of 5
or more dwelling units per acre.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-5-3  DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Pipe sizing.



      (1)   (a)   Public water main installation of pipe smaller
than 6 inches is not standard and will only be allowed when directed by the
city engineer in very unusual circumstances.



         (b)   The minimum standards for water distribution pipe
sizing is as follows:



 


Street Classification

 

Size



Local street
 

8 inch



Collector
 

12 inch



Parkway and arterials or section line streets
 

16 inch or as directed by the city engineer




 



      (2)   Mains designed as single feed systems with more than one
fire hydrant shall be minimum of 8 inches diameter. An 8-inch diameter main
configured as a looped system with two feeds can serve up to 6 fire hydrants.



      (3)   A 6-inch diameter single feed system water main is
permitted only in cul-de-sacs of 350 feet or less with a maximum of 1 hydrant.



   (B)   Pipe material.



      (1)   All pipe for water lines up to and including 16-inch
diameter, shall be minimum Class 50 ductile iron pipe (DIP) which meets all
applicable standards and specifications. Material for pipes larger than 16
inches shall be approved by the AWC or WUFCD prior to construction.



      (2)   All fittings shall be ductile iron or AWC or WUFCD
approved equal.



      (3)   Pipe shall meet all applicable AWWA C-400 standards and
specifications, including the Underwriters Laboratories (“UL”), Inc.



      (4)   Lot testing, per AWWA C-400, may be required at the
discretion of the WUCFD district engineer or an AWC representative. Testing
shall be performed at an independent testing lab, approved by the AWC or
WUFCD (cost of testing to be paid by supplier or contractor). Certifications
and test results, for each lot to be used, shall be delivered to the AWC or
WUFCD inspector prior to delivery of pipe to the job site.



      (5)   When necessary, restrained joints shall be in accordance
with MAG Standard Details 302-1 and 302-2. EBBA Iron “Megalugs” are the
acceptable standard for restraints.



   (C)   Pipe locations.



      (1)   As a minimum, water mains shall be installed along the
frontage of the property being developed, when it is adjacent to public ROW
or public utility and facilities easements. The main will be extended from
the ending point of the existing water main across the entire frontage of the
property needing the water, at the property owner’s expense. As expressed
elsewhere in this article, water mains may require looping (feeds from two
sources) to create adequate flows.



      (2)   A 6-foot minimum horizontal separation from any parallel
underground utility is required. In all major streets and other active
utility corridors, a utility conflict review will be required by the city
engineer.



   (D)   Back/low preventions.



      (1)   AWC or WUFCD is responsible for protecting the quality
of the public water supply. To prevent contamination of the public water
supply by backflow and cross-connections, the AWC or WUFCD shall identify
premises requiring backflow prevention and approved types of assemblies to
prevent backflow.



      (2)   All required backflow prevention assemblies shall be
owned and maintained by the property owner.



      (3)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon
installation and annually thereafter by a certified tester and results of
that test forwarded to AWC or WUFCD.



      (4)   All services 2 inches and larger shall require backflow
protection. All master metered residential, all commercial and all industrial
services shall require backflow prevention. In some cases smaller services
not in one of the preceding categories may require backflow protection as
determined by the AWC or WUFCD. All unmetered fire systems shall be equipped
with backflow prevention assemblies supplied with a metered detector loop.



      (5)   All above-ground backflow prevention assemblies 3 inches
and larger shall be painted a neutral (earth tone) color to blend in with its
surroundings.



      (6)   All above-ground backflow prevention assemblies smaller
than 3 inches shall be placed in protective cages painted a neutral (earth
tone) color to blend in with its surroundings.



      (7)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be located outside
of public right-of-way on private property.



   (E)   Water services.



      (1)   All water services 2 inches in diameter and smaller
shall be Type K copper tubing. Large copper tubing shall be handled so that
kinks do not develop, thus causing a water restriction.



      (2)   All brass service fittings shall be Ford or Mueller
unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Corporation stops, curb stops
and angle stops shall include a ball style valve.



      (3)   All service line fittings on services 2 inches and
smaller shall be compression style (Ford Quick Joint, Mueller 110 or approved
equal), with the exception of corporation stop to saddle and angle stop to
meter, which shall be threaded. No soldered joints will be allowed below
ground.



      (4)   Corporation stops at the main shall be secured with
brass or epoxy coated double strap saddles. No direct tapping of main lines
for corporation stops will be allowed. Corporation stops shall be male iron
pipe thread (“MIPT”) inlet and compression style outlet.



      (5)   Services using corporation stops at the main shall be
tapped at approximately the 10:00 o’clock or 2:00 o’clock position on the
main. Services tapped at 12:00 o’clock (straight up) shall be used for air
release valves. Regular service taps at the 12:00 o’clock position shall be
used when other tap locations are not an option and only with approval from
the city engineer.



      (6)   Water services larger than 2 inches on a pressurized
water main shall be installed per MAG Standard Detail 340. Live (wet) taps of
water mains shall be coordinated with the AWC or WUFCD inspector. Tapping
tees (sleeves) shall pass a pressure test at a minimum 200 psi for 60 minutes
before the actual tap is made.



      (7)   Pressure reducing valves are required to be installed on
the customer side of the water meter, where the static pressure exceeds 99
psi. Maintenance of the pressure-reducing valve shall be the customer’s
responsibility.



      (8)   The developer is responsible for the installation of all
necessary water services for the development.



      (9)   Meter boxes for services 2 inches and smaller shall be
multi-layer plastic with a vertical load rating of 25,000 pounds minimum (Mid
States Plastics, Inc. BCF Series or approved equal). Boxes shall have
vertical sides for ease of adjusting. Boxes shall have a rigid flange molded
in the top of the box to hold its shape and provide support in concrete or
asphalt or soft or sandy soil. Cover shall be ductile iron with hinged meter
reading lid.



      (10)   Meter boxes for services 2 inches and smaller in
traffic areas shall be concrete. Under certain circumstances the above stated
plastic boxes may be used with specific approval of the AWC or WUFCD. Covers
in traffic areas shall be welded steel.



      (11)   The developer shall size water services to properly
serve the proposed project being constructed. Service sizes shall be plainly
indicated on the plans submitted. Proposed water service sizes shall be
reviewed and approved by the AWC or WUFCD.



      (12)   Single water services shall not serve properties under
separate ownership without the written approval of the city engineer.



      (13)   The developer’s contractor shall install the water
meter vault and provide the meter for all services over 2 inches. Vaults
shall have full opening aluminum covers with spring assist. Vaults shall be
installed per MAG Standard Detail 321 and include the service inlet and
outlet piping. Water meters and other equipment shall be installed using
clearances and other details found in MAG Standard Details 3451 and 345-2.
Detailed drawings or manufacturer’s literature with lid and door dimensions
shall be presented to the city engineer for approval before installation.



      (14)   Services will be turned on by AWC or WUCFD personnel
only. It is unlawful for anyone other than an employee for the AWC or WUFCD
or someone under his or her direct supervision to operate valves that will
activate water services. Water services will only be turned on after a
responsible individual has completed all appropriate paper work to open an
account and all applicable fees have been paid.



   (F)   Water meters.



      (1)   The AWC or WUFCD provides and installs all meters for
services 2 inches and smaller at the owner’s or developer’s expense.
Meters for services larger than 2 inches shall be supplied by the
owner/developer. Meters 2 inches and smaller shall be Precision brand, model
PMM, or District-approved equal, with electronic ECR register and “Touch
Read” meter reading system. Under certain circumstances, 2-inch services
may require compound meters. Meters for domestic use larger than 2 inches
shall be Sensus compound or Metron single jet meters as directed by the AWC
or WUFCD, with electronic ECR register and “Touch Read” meter reading
system or AWC or WUFCD-approved equal. Any domestic service 2 inches or
larger shall require backflow protection behind the meter. All master metered
residential services shall require backflow prevention.



      (2)   Meters used for a system that is a combination of
domestic use and fire protection shall be Sensus Compact FireLine assemblies
or approved equal with ball valves and test ports. All iron parts on meter
shall be epoxy coated inside and out. Combination service shall require
backflow protection behind the meter.



      (3)   Large meters, on potable lines not combined with fire
systems, 3 inches and larger shall be installed with a minimum 2-inch bypass
with valves to allow a continued water source should the meter need to be
repaired or replaced.



      (4)   The architect, engineer or applicant shall include the
projected water flow rate requirements for the proposed water services on the
project on the plans. Care should be taken in sizing meters and services to
sufficiently supply the needs. The AWC or WUCFD will review the information
provided on plans and specifications and make the final determination of
meter size requirements.



      (5)   Temporary fire hydrant meters are required in obtaining
construction water and can be ordered from the AWC or WUFCD.



   (G)   Fire hydrants.



      (1)   Fire hydrants in the public rights-of-way or public
properties shall be installed per MAG Standard Details 360 and 362.



      (2)   The normal location of fire hydrants is the northeast
corner of street intersections. Mid-block fire hydrants shall be placed on
the same side of the street as the water main line whenever practical.



      (3)   All fire hydrants installed in the system shall be
connected to the water main with a minimum 6-inch water line connection and
have a minimum 6-inch main valve.



      (4)   Maximum spacing for fire hydrants in general is 500
feet. Superstition Fire and Medical



District (“SFMD”) has final approval for hydrant spacing and flow
requirements.



      (5)   All fire hydrants shall be set to blue top hub per MAG
Standard Specification 756.3. There shall be a minimum of 18 inches of
clearance from the lowest nozzle to finish grade.



      (6)   A minimum clear distance of 3 feet from the centerline
of the fire hydrant is required.



      (7)   Fire hydrant outlets shall have National Standard
Threads. Fire hydrants approved for installation on AWC or WUFCD water mains
are:



         (a)   Kennedy - Guardian;



         (b)   Mueller - Super Centurian;



         (c)   Waterous - Pacer; and



         (d)   Clow - Medallion.



   (H)   Valve standards, spacing and location.



      (1)   Twelve-inch and smaller:



         (a)   Maximum of 600-foot spacing in
industrial/commercial districts;



         (b)   Maximum of 800-foot spacing in residential areas;



         (c)   Maximum of 30 single-family units or 5 valves per
shutdown;



         (d)   One valve on each side of major crossing, such as
canals, railroads, freeways and the like; and



         (e)   One gate valve between main and each fire hydrant.



      (2)   Sixteen-inch and larger: maximum of 1,000-foot spacing.



      (3)   Epoxy coated, resilient seated gate valves are required
on water mains 12 inches in diameter or smaller. All gate valves shall
conform to Section 630.3 of the MAG Uniform Standard Specifications. All
valves must meet or exceed AWWA C-509 or C-515 standards.



      (4)   Sixteen-inch mains may have either gate or butterfly
valves depending on the application. Final determination with regard to which
valve shall be used shall be decided by the city engineer. Valves must
conform to Sections 630.3 and 630.5 of the MAG Uniform Standard
Specifications respectively. Gate valves shall also meet or exceed AWWA C-509
or C-515 standards.



      (5)   Butterfly valves or approved equal are required on water
mains larger than 16 inches in diameter. All butterfly valves shall conform
to Section 630.5(A) of the MAG Uniform Standard Specifications.



      (6)   Butterfly valve manual operators shall be furnished with
ground level position indicators. Position indicators shall attach to the
extension stem and shall indicate the relative positions, which direction to
turn the operator to open and close the valve, and how many turns to close
the valve from the fully open position.



      (7)   Certified shop drawings shall be submitted to the city
engineer for review and approval prior to shipment of the butterfly valves.



      (8)   Tapping sleeves and valves are to conform to Section
630.4 of the MAG Uniform Standard Specifications and be installed per MAG
Standard Detail 340. All wet taps shall be performed by a contractor approved
by AWC or WUCFD.



      (9)   All valve boxes and covers shall be installed per MAG
Standard Detail 391-1, Type “A.” All valve boxes used by the AWC or WUCFD
shall be manufactured for that specific purpose. No PVC pipe or other
“field designed” boxes will be allowed.



      (10)   Pressure reducing and pressure sustaining valve
stations shall be of a 2-stage design; i.e., a valve for normal and high
flows, and a valve for low flows. Valves shall be installed in a vault of an
approved design behind the sidewalk. Valves and vault shall be reviewed and
approved by the city engineer prior to ordering.



      (11)   Approved air vacuum release devices shall be installed
on all water mains 12 inches or larger in diameter at locations where the
slope changes from positive to negative, and vice versa. Air release devices
may also be required on mains smaller than 12 inches as determined by the
city engineer.



      (12)   Water line valves shall meet or exceed the pressure
classification of the water line. Valve pressure rating should be noted on
the plans.



   (I)   Easement width.



      (1)   Six-inch and 8-inch water:    20-foot minimum;



      (2)   Twelve-inch water main: 20-foot minimum; and



      (3)   Over 12-inch: Width based on design conditions.



      (4)   Additional easement width may be required by the city
engineer if, in his or her opinion, excessive laying depth of the pipe would
require the additional width for maintenance purposes.



   (J)   Installation depth. Water mains shall be installed to minimum
depth measured from finished grade to top of pipe as follows:



 

Size
 
Minimum Depth


8-inch and smaller
 
36 inches


12-inch and 16-inch
 
48 inches


16-inch and smaller in major streets
 
48 inches


20-inch and larger
 
Special design



 



   (K)   Water construction requirements.



      (1)   All water main design shall take into consideration the
Water Construction Notes, set forth in Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, §
10-2-15.



      (2)   The engineer and the contractor shall verify the
stationing, elevations and type of pipe to be matched at all field closure
points.



      (3)   The contractor shall contact “Blue Stake” 5 working
days prior to construction.



      (4)   The contractor shall pothole all existing utilities
ahead of his or her construction to allow for any necessary adjustments to
the grade line.



      (5)   No other utilities shall be installed in the same trench
as the water main.



      (6)   Vertical realignment by means of pipe deflection shall
not exceed ½ the pipe manufacturer’s recommendation. Deflection angle
information shall be given on the plans. Vertical realignment by means of
bends and offsets shall be per MAG Standard Detail 370 for water mains 6
inches to 12 inches in diameter. Water mains larger than 12 inches shall have
vertical realignment detailed by the engineer.



      (7)   One joint of pipe (ten feet minimum) shall be installed
on all stubs after valve installation.



      (8)   All fittings and hydrants requiring thrust blocking
(kickers) shall be wrapped in a minimum of 2 layers of 6 mil plastic
sheeting, and care shall be taken to keep concrete separate from bolts,
barrel drains, followers and the like.



      (9)   All new water mains shall be disinfected and flushed
following AWWA Standard C 651-99.



      (10)   It is policy to require the use of a fire hydrant meter
by the contractor to obtain construction water. New water line shall be
filled through the hydrant meter unless an alternate method is approved by
the city engineer. The contractor shall obtain a fire hydrant meter from the
AWC or WUFCD and pay all fees and water bills. If the use of a fire hydrant
meter is not possible, the AWC or WUFCD inspector will tabulate the number of
times the water line is filled and estimate the amount of water used and the
contractor will be charged accordingly.



   (L)   Reclaimed water. All reclaimed water lines shall be designed
and installed per M.A.G. Standard Details listed under M.A.G. Specifications
Section 616.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-5-4  PLAN PREPARATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Plans shall be on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets.



   (B)   Symbols shall be per MAG Standards supplemented by AWC or
WUCFD details.



   (C)   Orientation of each plan sheet shall be shown by a north arrow.



   (D)   A general notes sheet(s) shall contain the Water Construction
Notes listed in Article 10-2, Construction Plan Requirements, Apache Junction
City Code Vol. II, § 10-2-15.



   (E)   Plans shall be prepared on vellum, linen or Mylar. Sepias are
not permitted.



   (F)   A cover sheet is required on plans of more than 2 sheets when
water plans are not part of the general set.



   (G)   Each sheet shall be identified by sheet number and project
name.



   (H)   All sheets shall have the State of Arizona engineer’s signed
registration seal prior to submittal to the city for approval.



   (I)   Cover sheet, when part of separate water plans, shall contain:



      (1)   Project title;



      (2)   Developer (address, telephone number and contact name);



      (3)   Engineering firm (address, telephone number and contact
name);



      (4)   Appropriate signature approval blocks and utility review
block;



      (5)   Properly oriented vicinity map;



      (6)   Properly oriented key map;



      (7)   Water main construction notes (see Apache Junction City
Code Vol. II, § 10-2-15 of this Chapter);



      (8)   Materials list, and estimated quantities;



      (9)   Appropriate processing numbers: D.C.O. (subdivision,
re-zoning, site plan and the like) quarter section and associated plans
tracking numbers;



      (10)   Legend;



      (11)   Index of plan sheets; and



      (12)   Benchmarks used.



   (J)   The key map is a small map of the project site that provides a
system overview and is used to index the plan sheets. The key map shall show
the following:



      (1)   all streets, alleys, easements, tracts and parcels shall
be identified;



      (2)   water mains, fire hydrants, valves and production
facilities (tanks, booster and the like); and



      (3)   index of plan sheets indicated by single line with
arrows showing beginning and end of each sheet.



   (K)   The plan sheets shall show the following to proper scale:



      (1)   All streets, alleys and easements.



         (a)   Streets shall be identified by name.



         (b)   Streets, alleys and easements shall be dimensioned
at least once and at all breaks.



         (c)   Monument line of streets shall be shown.



      (2)   All abutting lots shall be identified by lot number,
tract and subdivision.



      (3)   Location of all existing utilities, structures, paving
and other topographic features affected by construction.



      (4)   All connections to existing water lines with fittings
clearly labeled and method of connection specified.



      (5)   If applicable, proposed sewer main must be shown. Sewer
main shall be shown in a “lighter weight” line to identify it as being
informational only and not a part of this plan.



   (L)   Scale shall be per Article 10-2, Construction Plan
Requirements, Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-2-5(D).



   (M)   Original plan sheets shall be sufficiently clear to allow
legible prints to be half-sized. The size of lettering and symbols shall be
1/8-inch minimum. Shading is not permitted.



   (N)   Each plan sheet shall show:



      (1)   Project title;



      (2)   Sheet number;



      (3)   North arrow to orient each line;



      (4)   existing utilities with size and location in ROW;



      (5)   New construction with valves, fire hydrants, tees,
bends, crosses, taps, tapping sleeve and valves and other appurtenances shown;



      (6)   Match lines to show continuation of lines from sheet to
sheet; and



      (7)   ROW limits shall be shown in plan view.



   (O)   Valves shall be located at point of curvature of the curb
return at intersection and property lines in mid-block.



   (P)   Location of fire hydrants and valves shall be referenced from
the street monument line.



   (Q)   All fittings shall be identified.



   (R)   Fire hydrants shall be located in accordance with MAG Standard
Detail 362.



   (S)   Valve boxes shall be Type “C” per MAG Standard Detail 391.
Valves shall be resilient seat up to 16-inch.



   (T)   Meter service connections shall be shown to each lot or
parcel. Service may be stationed from street intersection monuments or from
individual lot property lines, except on curved streets and in cul-de-sacs,
where the connection must be stationed both on the main and from applicable
property lines.



   (U)   Meter service connection locations in other than a residential
subdivision must be out of traveled roadway/sidewalk. They may be located in
planter area, parking lot island and the like, and should be sufficiently
above finish grade to minimize flooding. Meter locations shall be easily
accessible from a street or traveled way.



   (V)   Summary of quantities sheet shall be submitted with the plans.
Items shall be listed as follows:



 

Item
 
Unit




Blow off
 
Each


Fire hydrants
 
Each


Lateral valve
 
Each


Main line valves
 
Each


Meter box
 
Each


Pipe encasement/sleeving
 
Linear foot


Tapping sleeve and valve
 
Each


Water main
 
Linear foot


Water service line
 
Linear foot


Each item shall be broken down by size and material.




 



   (W)   A large development may require the modeling of the
development for water volume, pressure and fire flows. The requirement shall
be determined by the city engineer. If required, the modeling shall use the
WUCFD’s Waterman model titled “AJ Water Model.”



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-5-5  ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All approved water line construction plan sheets shall be submitted to
the development services project engineer in electronic format per §
10-1-5(C).



(Ord. passed  - - )



FIGURE 10-5.1, WATER SERVICE AREA







 



 



ARTICLE 10-6:  SEWER



Section



   10-6-1   General comments



   10-6-2   Sewer line extension policy



   10-6-3   Design and construction standards



   10-6-4   Construction within public right-of-way



   10-6-5   Electronic submittal requirements



§ 10-6-1  GENERAL COMMENTS.



   This Article describes the engineering design standards and guidelines
for providing the required sewage collection within the City of Apache
Junction and within the approved 208 Plan Sewer District boundary.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-6-2  SEWER LINE EXTENSION POLICY.



   See Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, § 10-1-4(D) of this Chapter for
the sewer line extension policy.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-6-3  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   All design and construction shall be in accordance with and approved by
the Superstition Mountains Community Facilities District No. 1 (“SMCFD”).
The most current SMCFD Standard Specifications of Construction shall be used
for guidance but are not binding on the city engineer’s authority.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-6-4  CONSTRUCTION WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Trenching and pavement replacement. For sewer line extensions
and sewer taps in existing pavement areas within public ROW, the pavement
replacement shall be per Apache Junction Standard Detail AJ-200M, Type
“S.”



   (B)   Manholes. All manholes constructed in the pavement areas
within public ROW shall have the tops of the frames and covers at surface
grade and a concrete collar constructed per M.A.G. Standard Detail 422.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-6-5  ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All approved sanitary sewer construction plan sheets shall be submitted
to the development services project engineer in electronic format per §
10-1-5(C).



(Ord. passed  - - )



ARTICLE 10-7:  SITE DEVELOPMENT



Section



   10-7-1   Site plan; preliminary



   10-7-2   Site development



   10-7-3   Public right-of-way and easement dedication



   10-7-4   Public improvement assurance alternatives



   10-7-5   Electronic submittal requirements



   Figure 10-7.1, Exhibit "A" legal description (Sample)



   Figure 10-7.2, Exhibit "B" Map (Sample)



   Exhibit 10-7.1, Performance Bond (Sample)



   Exhibit 10-7.2, Letter of Assurance (Sample)



   Exhibit 10-7.3, Improvement Guarantee Agreement



§ 10-7-1  SITE PLAN; PRELIMINARY.



   The preliminary site plan review process and requirements are set forth
in the city “Preliminary Design Review Packet.”



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-7-2  SITE DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   General information. All new developments shall provide for
vehicle parking, refuse collection, SFMD emergency vehicle access,
landscaping, waste control, on-site private water and sewer systems, and
on-site stormwater retention per all applicable city codes, ordinances,
utility company requirements and the following standards.



   (B)   Refuse collection stations. The city requires that all refuse
shall be collected and disposed of by a private contractor.



   (C)   Waste control. See the applicable sections of these standards
for any waste control requirements.



   (D)   Vehicle parking and storage yard facilities.



      (1)   All developments shall provide for on-site vehicular
parking per the following standards: Current city Zoning Ordinance
requirements for on-site street parking and loading, as set forth in Apache
Junction City Code Vol. II, Article 1-17, Parking, Loading, and Interior or
Private Street Standards.



      (2)   All developments that have temporary access, parking and
storage areas shall provide a minimum of a double chip seal treatment or a
treatment that is approved by the city engineer. The treatment provided shall
be maintained by the owner until the permanent pavement section is placed.
The double chip seal treatment shall consist of (minimum):



 

First Application
 
0.6 gallons of CRS-2P per square yard


30 pounds of 3/8-inch low volume treated chips per square yard


Second Application
 
0.4 gallons of CRS-2P per square yard


20 pounds of 3/8-inch low volume treated chips per square yard



 



   (E)   SFMD access.



      (1)   General information. All developments shall provide
access for SFMD vehicles and personnel per the following standards. It is the
developer’s responsibility to contact the SFMD to determine the specific
requirements for the development.



      (2)   Access width, turning radius and minimum surface
treatment.



         (a)   A 20-foot (minimum) wide access is required for
SFMD access.



         (b)   1.   Turning radii per SFMD details are
required at all entrances and interior driveway intersections where access is
required.



            2.   Ladder truck access is required for all
development except the following:



               a.    Mini-storage facilities when the
office is located adjacent to public streets.



               b.    Storage yards when non-combustible
materials are the only items stored.



         (c)   1.   For areas that have temporary access to
structures, a double chip seal treatment or a treatment that is approved by
the city shall be provided and maintained for the access until the permanent
pavement section is placed.



            2.   The double chip seal treatment shall consist
of (minimum):



 

First Application
 
0.6 gallons of CRS-2P per square yard


30 pounds of 3/8-inch low volume treated chips per square yard


Second Application
 
0.4 gallons of CRS-2P per square yard


20 pounds of 3/8-inch low volume treated chips per square yard



 



      (3)   Building access.



         (a)   Buildings shall be located so that SFMD apparatus
may be parked within 150 feet of the farthest point on the ground floor of
the building. This 150-foot dimension is measured along the route a person
would follow from the truck to a given point on the building.



         (b)   A fire sprinkler system shall be installed per
Fire Code requirements. Specifications for the sprinkler system vary with the
type of development. It is the developer’s responsibility to contact the
SFMD to determine the specific requirements for the development.



         (c)   SFMD connections shall be per the SFMD
requirements.



         (d)   Retention areas shall not be considered as part of
the required access.



         (e)   Provide a minimum of 14 feet, 6 inches vertical
clearance.



         (f)   There shall be a minimum 10-foot setback from fire
lanes.



         (g)   Any roadway intended for SFMD access shall not
have a grade greater than 8%.



         (h)   Fire lane signs shall be posted on SFMD access
perpendicular to the flow of traffic. Signs shall be visible from both
directions and mounted between 5 feet and 7 feet above final grade. Signs
shall be installed a maximum of 75 feet apart and at any horizontal change in
direction.



         (i)   The SFMD does not allow speed bumps more than 4
inches high or any obstructions that may impede an emergency vehicle response
on a SFMD access roadway.



         (j)   Multi-unit occupancies shall post premises
identification, as approved by the SFMD, when bordering SFMD access. Numbers
shall be on a contrasting background.



      (4)   Security gates. Private security gates which, in the
opinion of the Fire Chief and/or the Police Chief, hamper the adequate
responses to emergencies by public safety services, shall be equipped with
both a Knox keypad and a pre-emptive device approved by SFMD.



         (a)   The equipment shall be capable of fail-safe
operation in case of power loss. In the event of an emergency, a means shall
be provided to leave gates unlocked.



         (b)   An approved list of devices may be obtained
through SFMD.



   (F)   Landscaping; general information. See Apache Junction City
Code, Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Article 1-8, Landscaping.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-7-3 PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND EASEMENT DEDICATION.



   (A)   General comments. The following requirements apply to the
preparation of survey documents which are to be used to dedicate land to the
public or to grant an easement to the public for roadway, drainage, flood
control, utility line, emergency or service vehicle access, or other public
uses. Some of these requirements may be waived by the city engineer if it is
demonstrated that the requirements are not appropriate because of the size or
nature of a development.



   (B)   Streets, rights-of-way and public easements. All proposed
streets, ROW and easements shall be identified on both the preliminary and
final subdivision plats. The final subdivision plat shall contain a
dedication for all ROW and public easements. The development services project
engineer shall establish required dedication language.



   (C)   Private utility easements. All easements proposed for
dedication to a private utility company shall be identified on both the
preliminary and final subdivision plats. The final subdivision plat shall
contain an offer of dedication for all such easements to the appropriate
utility company. Acceptance of such offers shall be the responsibility of the
utility company.



   (D)   Vehicular non-access easement (“VNAE”). VNAEs shall be
shown on the subdivision plat. No driveway or vehicle gate shall be installed
which would permit a vehicle to access or cross a VNAE. VNAEs adjacent to
public ROW are also subject to review and approval by the city engineer in
addition to the development services project engineer.



   (E)   Other easements. Other easements required by the general plan,
the zoning ordinance or the city engineer shall be shown on both the
preliminary and final subdivision plats.



   (F)   Prepare legal descriptions and exhibits. For public ROW and
easements not included in the final plat, prepare Exhibits “A” and
“B” as follows:



      (1)   Exhibit “A”. Prepare a legal description of each
property on a separate sheet. A surveyor registered in the State of Arizona
shall sign and date his or her fixed seal, and provide the public works
department - engineering division with Exhibit “A” on acid-free paper.
See Figure 10-7.1 following this article for a sample Exhibit “A”.



      (2)   Exhibit “B”. Prepare an exhibit of each property on
a separate sheet.



         (a)   Include:



            1.   Property’s legal description from title
report;



            2.   Construction project name;



            3.   Project number;



            4.   Assessor’s parcel numbers of all adjacent
property;



            5.   Any plat information; and



            6.   Additional ROW required including sufficient
dimensioning to provide a legal description.



         (b)   A surveyor registered in the State of Arizona
shall sign and date his or her fixed seal, and provide the public works
department - engineering division with Exhibit “B” on acid-free paper.
See Figure 10-7.2 following this article for a sample Exhibit “B”.



      (3)   Developer shall pay any recording fee(s) and ROW and/or
easement acquisition costs.



      (4)   The city engineer will:



         (a)   Prepare the warranty deed cover documents;



         (b)   Have the documents signed and notarized; and



         (c)   Have the documents recorded.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-7-4  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT ASSURANCE ALTERNATIVES.



   Assurance of construction shall be provided prior to the approval of
the improvement plans.



   (A)   Assurance of construction options are as follows:



      (1)   Posting a 100% performance bond issued by an Arizona
qualified surety (see Exhibit 10-7.1 following this article);



      (2)   Establishing a cash trust; said funds to be deposited in
a financial institution to the credit of the city (see Exhibit 10-7.3
following this article);



      (3)   Posting with the city a certificate of deposit for 100%
of the estimated cost issued by a banking institution authorized to issue
same; or



      (4)   Filing with the city an executed letter of assurance or
contract of guarantee between the city and a trust company, banking
institution or other financial institution approved by the city and
authorized to enter into such contracts (see Exhibit 10-7.2 following this
Article).



   (B)   The amount of the security is to be based upon the cost
estimate prepared by a registered professional civil engineer or licensed
contractor in an amount to cover the complete installation of the off-site
improvements and requires concurrence by the city engineer.



   (C)   The security shall provide for its forfeiture to the city in
the event that the improvements were started but not completed or not
accepted by the city.



   (D)   Posting a 100% warranty bond issued by an Arizona qualified
surety (see Exhibit 10-7.1 following this article) if provisions for a
warranty bond are not already included in a performance bond.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-7-5  ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All approved construction plan sheets and reports shall be submitted to
the development services project engineer in electronic format per §
10-1-5(C).



(Ord. passed  - - )



FIGURE 10-7.1, EXHIBIT "A" LEGAL DESCRIPTION (SAMPLE)



Portion of Lot 1 of C.A. Subdivision



Project #:



Additional Right-of-Way Parcel #101-05-??



Owner of Record:



EXHIBIT “A”



LEGAL DESCRIPTION



A portion of Lot 1 of the ABC Subdivision, according to the plat of record in
the office of the County Recorder of Pinal County, Arizona, more particularly
defined as follows:



Beginning at the North 1/4 Corner of Sec. 19, T1N, R8E, G&SRB&M, Pinal
County, Arizona; thence S 0°05'W, a distance of 60' along the midsection
line of said Sec. 19, Thence N 89°55'W, a distance of 25' to a point in the
West R/W line of Delaware Drive, being also the point of tangency of a
right-of-way curvature line, being also a point in the East line of Lot 1 of
the Pueblo Del Sol Subdivision and being the Point of Beginning; thence S
0°05W along said West R/W line of Delaware Drive and said East line of Lot
1, a distance of 3.00'; thence N 89°55W, a distance of 5.00' to an angle
point in the new R/W line and new property corner of said Lot 1; thence N
37°57'49"W, a distance of 29.21' to a point in the existing southerly R/W
line of Superstition Boulevard and a point in the North property line of said
Lot 1, being 62.00 east of the Northwest corner of said Lot 1; thence
easterly along said North property line a distance of 3.00' to a point of
curvature of a curve to the right; thence southeasterly along said curve of
radius 20', a curve length of 32.42' to the Point of Beginning, containing
approximately 235.1 square feet more or less, and further defined on Exhibit
“B,” attached hereto, and made a part hereof.



FIGURE 10-7.2, EXHIBIT "B" MAP (SAMPLE)







 



EXHIBIT 10-7.1, PERFORMANCE BOND (SAMPLE)



   Bond #               



   Expiration Date:                



PROJECT NAME:



PROJECT ADDRESS:



WHEREAS,                                              
            (“Principal”) and                        
                          a corporation organized and existing
under the laws of the State of                               
      and duly authorized to transact surety business in the State of
Arizona (“Surety”) are held and firmly bound unto the City of Apache
Junction, an Arizona municipal corporation (“Obligee”) in the sum of  
                  lawful money of the United States of America, for
the payment of which we bind ourselves, our heirs, successors and assigns
jointly, severally, and firmly.



WHEREAS, Principal is required by Obligee to post a performance bond for
curb, gutter, sidewalk, streetlights, paving, concrete, utilities, and all
other off-site improvements required by the approved plans on file at
Obligee’s Development Services and public works departments.



NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED that once construction has started, in the event
the improvements in the above described project are not completed, as
evidenced either by a lack of work on the improvements for a period of 60
calendar days, or improvements as constructed are not acceptable to
Obligee’s Engineer and not in compliance with Obligee’s standards, and
Principal refuses to make satisfactory corrections, then Obligee may, upon
certified letter to Surety, draw upon the Performance Bond to the amount
necessary to complete the improvements or make satisfactory corrections.



Should the condition of this bond be fully performed, this obligation shall
become null and void; otherwise it shall be and remain in full force and
effect.



Surety hereby stipulates and agrees that no change, extension of time,
alteration or addition to the terms of this Agreement or the specifications
accompanying the same shall in any manner affect its obligations on this
bond, and it does hereby waive notice of any such change, extension,
alteration or addition.



A 10% Warranty Bond of the total amount set forth in the Performance Bond or
a continuance of the Performance Bond shall be required for a 1-year Warranty
Period, which starts at the final acceptance of the entire project by the
city engineer. In no event shall the Obligee be obligated to use Obligee’s
funds for any Public Improvements.



 



SIGNED, SEALED AND DATED THIS               DAY OF            
                    , 20         



                                                   
                                                 
                                       



Principal                  Surety



By:                                                
                  By:                            
                               



                     Attorney-in-Fact



Bank Seal               *   Surety Signature to be notarized



                  *   Provide copy of Power of Attorney
for Surety “Attorney-in-Fact”



EXHIBIT 10-7.2, LETTER OF ASSURANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS (SAMPLE)



Assurance for construction of improvements within the (Project Name)



For the purpose of providing the Assurance of Construction of Improvements
within the corporate areas of the City of Apache Junction (“City”),   
                                                   
      (“Owner”) (also herein referred to as “Developer,”) and  
                                                   
        (Institution) herein referred to as “Financial Institution,”
licensed to do business in Arizona, represent as follows:



1. Financial Institution is committed to provide an irrevocable line of
credit or sufficient funds to Developer, to cover the entire cost of
installing improvements, consisting of, but not limited to: utilities,
paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm drainage, streetlights, irrigation,
including engineering and inspection costs, and the cost of replacement or
repairs of any of the above improvements which become damaged in the course
of construction. Said credit or funds shall be in the aggregate amount of: 
                            ($                     
                  ) based upon a cost estimate submitted by
Developer and approved by the city engineer. The city has the right to review
the contents of the Letter of Credit to ensure no conflict of interest exists
between the developer and the financial institution.



It is agreed that once construction has started, in the event the
improvements in the above-described project are not completed as evidenced
either by a lack of work on the improvements for a period of sixty (60)
calendar days, or improvements as constructed are not acceptable to the city
engineer and not in compliance with City standards, and Developer refuses to
make satisfactory corrections, then the City of Apache Junction may, upon
certified letter to the Financial Institution, draw upon the line of credit
in the amount necessary to complete the improvements or make satisfactory
corrections.



Ten percent (10%) of the total amount set forth in said cost estimate must be
retained for a 1-year Warranty Period, which starts at the final acceptance
of the entire project by the city engineer. In no event shall the City be
obligated to use City funds for any Public Improvements.



This line of credit shall remain in force and effect until the improvements
for said project have been completed and accepted by the Public Works
Director or the city engineer, or their designees, as evidenced by letter.



DEVELOPER            State of                        
      Subscribed and sworn to before me by



                                          County of
                      this             day of          
              , 20        .



BY:                                                
                   



                                                  
                                                   
                                               



         Notary Public                  My
commission expires



TITLE:                                        



FINANCIAL INSTITUTION   State of                            
  Subscribed and sworn to before me by



                                          County of
                      this             day of          
              , 20        .



BY:                                                 
                 



                                                  
                                                   
                                               



         Notary Public                  My
commission expires



TITLE:                                        



Approved By:            State of                      
        Subscribed and sworn to before me by



                                   



CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION   County of Pinal this             day of  
                                , 20       



BY:                                                 
                 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                 



         Notary Public                  My
commission expires



TITLE:                                        



Approved as to form:



                                                   
         



City Attorney



EXHIBIT 10-7.3, IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF APACHE
JUNCTION AND (                                         
      ) (SAMPLE)



This Agreement made and entered into this             day of      
                              , 20        , by and between
(                                                  
                    )  (“Developer”) and the CITY OF APACHE
JUNCTION, an Arizona municipal corporation (“City”) (collectively, the
“Parties”) for improvement guarantee for the project known as        
                                (the “Project”) located
at                                                  
                            (the “Property”).




RECITALS




A.   The City requires a performance guarantee sufficient to complete the
public improvements as shown on the Improvement Plans of the Project.



B.   Both Developer and City desire that a Certificate of Deposit
(“security”) be pledged to the City in the amount (“Improvement
Guarantee Amount”) sufficient to insure and guarantee that certain
improvements, as hereinafter described, are made to the Property. The
Certificate of Deposit shall be based on the Construction Cost Estimate as
set forth in Exhibit A provided by Developer’s Consulting Engineer and
approved by the development services project engineer and made part of this
Agreement.



C.   The Parties desire to set in writing their Agreement regarding the
holding and distribution of such funds and the guarantee of the improvements
to be made as set forth below.




AGREEMENT




NOW, THEREFORE, the Parties hereto agree as follows:



1.   Improvement Guarantee Amount. The Parties, and each of them, hereby
direct (Financial Institution Name) (“Bank”) to pledge to City for the
benefit of Developer and City the Improvement Guarantee Amount, a Certificate
of Deposit which shall be an amount of (                       
        words                                      )
($                                  ). It is the specific
intent and desire of the Parties that such Improvement Guarantee Amount be
pledged to City for the purpose of guaranteeing that Developer performs work
on the public improvements to the Property, which improvements will be made
in accordance with City’s engineering standards and any utility
companies’ standards. The Improvement Guarantee Amount shall be held by
Bank in an interest bearing account, which shall be an account established
solely for the purposes set forth in this Agreement and shall be pledged to
City by Bank specifically for such improvements. Such specific improvements
to the Property are those listed on Construction Cost Estimate in Exhibit A.



2.   Distribution of Funds. The Parties agree that the Improvement
Guarantee Amount shall only be reduced by City in an amount or amounts equal
to completed work as specified in Exhibit A when, and only when, City’s
public works department and any utility companies verify that such work has
been completed, approved and inspected. No partial payment for any line item
in Exhibit A shall be allowed. Ten percent (10%) of the total amount set
forth in Exhibit A must be retained for a 1 year Construction Warranty
Period, which starts at the final acceptance of the entire project by the
city engineer.



3.   Authorization Documents. For Developer to be eligible for payment or
reduction in the amount of security under the terms of this Agreement, it
must submit the following documents to City (herein the “Authorization
Documents”):



   a.   A written statement signed by Developer indicating that such
improvements are completed and reduction in security is requested.



   b.   A written statement signed by city engineer or his applicable
designee verifying that the construction improvements claimed to be performed
by Developer have in fact been so performed as the case may be.



   c.   Written statements signed by the affected utility companies
verifying that the construction improvements claimed to be performed by
Developer have in fact been performed and accepted, as the case may be.



4.   Instruction to City. City agrees to notify Bank of the amount of
reductions to the security in accordance with the provisions set forth herein
and in a timely manner once the Authorization Documents noted above have been
received subject to the administrative procedures established by city
engineer. City may rely upon the Authorization Documents as full
authorization to make the reductions requested therein, and shall incur no
liability for acting in accordance with such Authorization Documents. In the
event of a dispute between Developer and city engineer concerning the
reduction of the Improvement Guarantee Amount, City shall not be obligated to
reduce any portion of the Improvement Guarantee Amount until City receives
Authorization Documents signed by both Developer and city engineer and in
accordance with the established administrative procedures.



5.   Certification of Receipt of Funds. City further agrees that it shall
certify to Developer in writing when City has received the funds set forth in
Section 1 above. The Parties agree and understand that this Agreement shall
not become effective until this certification has been received by Developer.



6.   City Administrative Fee. City shall charge an administrative fee
based on the amount set forth in Exhibit A to administer this Agreement. The
administrative fee shall be as follows:



ADMINISTRATIVE FEE



(Per Exhibit ‘A’ - Construction Cost Estimate)



 


Cost Estimate

 

Fee




$10,000 to $ 99,999

 

$500




$100,000 to $ 499,999

 

$1,000




$500,000 to $ 999,999

 

$2,000




$1,000,000 to $4,999,999

 

$4,000




$ 5,000,000 to $9,999,999

 

$8,000




$10,000,000 or more

 

$10,000




 



7.   Forfeiture of Improvement Guarantee Amount. It is agreed that once
construction has started, in  the event the improvements in the above
described project are not completed, as evidenced either by a lack of work on
the improvements for a period of sixty (60) calendar days, or improvements as
constructed are not acceptable to the city engineer and not in compliance
with City standards, and the Developer refuses to make satisfactory
corrections, the City of Apache Junction may, upon certified letter to the
said Bank, draw from the Certificate of Deposit the amount necessary to
complete the improvements or make satisfactory corrections. In no event shall
City be obligated to use City funds for any Public Improvements.



8.   Indemnification. Developer agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold
harmless City, its elected officials, appointees, officers, departments,
divisions, employees and agents, from any and all claims, liabilities,
disputes, expenses or lawsuits brought by any party as a result of any
negligent acts or omissions of City, its elected officials appointees,
officers, departments, divisions, employees, and agents involving the
obligations under this agreement, including but not limited to attorney fees,
court costs, damages, and all appellate proceedings expenses.



   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have executed this Agreement on the
date and year first above written.



DEVELOPER:                  FINANCIAL INSTITUTION:



(DEVELOPER NAME)               (BANK NAME)



By:                                                 
                By:                             
                       



Its:                                               
               Its:                             
                       



CITY:



CITY OF APACHE JUNCTION, an Arizona municipal corporation



By:                                                 
   



Its:                                               
     



APPROVED AS TO FORM:



                                                   
         



R. Joel Stern City Attorney



STATE OF ARIZONA   )



            )



COUNTY OF         )



On                             , 20                ,
before me,                                            
    , a Notary Public in and for said State, personally appeared      
                                            ,
personally known to me (or proved to me on the basis of satisfactory
evidence) to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within instrument
and sworn to me that he/she executed the same in his/her authorized capacity
for (DEVELOPER NAME).



WITNESS my hand and official seal



                                                  
                 



     Notary Public



(seal)



STATE OF ARIZONA   )



            )



COUNTY OF         )



On                             , 20                ,
before me,                                            
    , a Notary Public in and for said State, personally appeared      
                                                   
, personally known to me (or proved to me on the basis of satisfactory
evidence) to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within instrument
and sworn to me that he/she executed the same in his/her authorized capacity
for (DEVELOPER NAME).



WITNESS my hand and official seal



                                                  
                 



    Notary Public



(seal)



ARTICLE 10-8:  SUBDIVISION PLATS



Section



   10-8-1   General information



§ 10-8-1  GENERAL INFORMATION.



   Refer to the city’s subdivision regulations set forth in Apache
Junction City Code Vol. II, Chapter 2, Article 2-2 for further information.



(Ord. passed  - - )



ARTICLE 10-9:  AS-BUILT DRAWINGS



Section



   10-9-1   As-built requirements



   10-9-2   Submittals



   10-9-3   Minimum technical requirements



   10-9-4   Electronic submittal requirements



§ 10-9-1  AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS.



   City construction permits will not be released nor any type of
construction accepted until certified as-built plans have been submitted to
and approved by the city.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-9-2  SUBMITTALS.



   (A)   One set of as-built Mylar plans shall be submitted to the city
for permanent record. The as-built Mylars shall be copies from the original
Mylars that contain all the original signatures. The Mylar can be either
Mylar or photo Mylar (minimum size 22 inches by 34 inches, maximum size 24
inches by 36 inches, 4 mil double mat and be of a quality allowing scanning
into electronic format. No vellum or paper copies will be accepted.



   (B)   If the project is developed in phases, as-built plans for each
phase shall be submitted once the work is complete in that phase. Letters of
completion and acceptance will not be issued until all items out of tolerance
have been corrected and all final as-builts have been submitted and approved
by the city.



   (C)   As-built plans shall be signed and sealed by a State of
Arizona registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor with the
“AS-BUILT CERTIFICATION” approval block. The “AS-BUILT CERTIFICATION”
approval block is only needed on the cover sheet.



   (D)   An electronic copy of the as-built drawings shall be submitted
in either PDF or TIF format on a properly labeled CD.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-9-3  MINIMUM TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Paving as-built plans.



      (1)   Station for all grade breaks;



      (2)   Back of curb offset dimension and centerline station at
all changes in alignment;



      (3)   Top of curb, gutter and pavement centerline elevations
at all grade breaks, curb returns, valley gutters, plus any other location
necessary to adequately show drainage; and



      (4)   Survey monuments - installation and accuracy
certification.



   (B)   Storm drain as-built plans.



      (1)   Street centerline station and offset dimension to all
structures and changes in alignment and/or changes in grade; and



      (2)   Top and invert elevations for all structures.



   (C)   Grading and drainage as-built plans.



      (1)   Elevations at all drainage control points (e.g.,
retention overflow point, tops and bottoms retention basins, drywall rims,
valley gutters, curbs);



      (2)   Dimensions of all retention areas;



      (3)   Retention calculations revised to as-built condition;



      (4)   First floor or pad elevations; and



      (5)   Location of all existing structures (e.g., buildings).



   (D)   Water as-built plans.



      (1)   Water Utility Community Facilities District
(“WUCFD”).



         (a)   Street centerline station and offset dimension to:



            1.   All fire hydrants and fittings (e.g., valves);



            2.   Main at all changes in alignment
(horizontally and/or vertically); and



            3.   All horizontal control points (e.g.,
centerline intersects, PC, PT).



         (b)   Station and elevations given at all vertical
alignment changes;



         (c)   Centerline station and offset to each service tap;
size of tap and dimension to nearest side property line; and



         (d)   Centerline station, offset and elevations to all
changes in vertical alignment (e.g., dips, bends and the like) required to
avoid conflicts with other utilities shall be noted.



      (2)   Arizona Water Company (“AWC”). Per AWC requirements.



   (E)   Sewer as-built plans. Per SMCFD requirements.



   (F)   Street light and traffic signal as-built plans.



      (1)   Station location and monument line off-set dimension to
center of pole for all street lights;



      (2)   J-box verification and location;



      (3)   Location of all traffic signal poles, cabinets, J-boxes
and related conduits;



      (4)   Loop detector verification and location;



      (5)   Any abandonment of existing conduits and facilities
shall be noted;



      (6)   Verification and location of signage related to traffic
signal.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-9-4  ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All approved construction plan sheets and reports shall be submitted to
the development services project engineer in electronic format per §
10-1-5(C).



(Ord. passed  - - )



APPENDIX 10-A:  DOWNTOWN CORE AREA AND B-3 ZONING DISTRICT



Section



   10-A-1   General comments



   10-A-2   Intent



   10-A-3   Location



   10-A-4   Design guidelines



§ 10-A-1  GENERAL COMMENTS.



   This Appendix 10-A describes the engineering design guidelines for the
special designated area known as the “Downtown Core Area” and the B-3
zoning classification.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-A-2  INTENT.



   The Downtown Core Area will be a mixed-use area that will include
commercial and residential in a walking environment.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-A-3  LOCATION.



   The Downtown Core Area is shown on Apache Junction Standard Detail
AJ-12.1.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-A-4  DESIGN GUIDELINES.



   The design guidelines are detailed in the City of Apache Junction’s
Commercial Design Guidelines and the Apache Junction Main Street Design
Dictionary.



(Ord. passed  - - )



APPENDIX 10-B:  RURAL AREA



Section



   10-B-1   General comments



   10-B-2   Intent



   10-B-3   Design guidelines



§ 10-B-1  GENERAL COMMENTS. 



   This section describes the Engineering Design Guidelines for the
special designated area known as the “Rural Area.”



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-B-2  INTENT.



   The Rural Area is intended to have a rural character to it with no
curb, gutter, sidewalk or street lights. The terrain and vegetation shall be
minimally disturbed.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-B-3  DESIGN GUIDELINES.



   (A)   Street section and right-of-way requirements. See Apache
Junction Standard Details AJ-20.6 through AJ-20.8 for the street section and
ROW requirements for the Rural Area.



   (B)   Curb and gutter. No curb and gutter shall be constructed
normally, but special circumstances may require some. The city engineer will
decide when curb and gutter and the type shall be required.



   (C)   Sidewalk. No sidewalk shall be constructed in the Rural Area.



   (D)   Street lights. No street lights shall be constructed in the
Rural Area.



   (E)   Vertical profile of street. The vertical profile of a street
in the Rural Area should have the proposed edges of pavement near the
existing ground to reduce the need for constructed slopes and to facilitate
overland drainage and/or existing wash crossings in dip-sections.



   (F)   Stormwater drainage. The stormwater drainage shall normally be
conveyed across the Rural Area streets in a dip-section per MAG Standard
Detail 552. The dip-section shall only be used where:



      (1)   The calculated Q100 drainage flow will be less than 12
inches maximum depth at the dip-section.



      (2)   The calculated Q100 drainage flow velocity at the
dip-section shall not be detrimental to a vehicle crossing the dip-section.



      (3)   A dip-section needs to act as a spillway area for a
larger drainage flow that will not be able to be conveyed totally under the
street section (e.g., FEMA designated areas) when the depth or velocity is
too great for a normal dip-section.



   (G)   The city engineer shall reserve the right to require
modifications to the above standards along major arterial streets within the
Rural Area.



(Ord. passed  - - )



APPENDIX 10-C:  LOST DUTCHMAN HEIGHTS



Section



   10-C-1   General comments



   10-C-2   Intent



   10-C-3   Location



   10-C-4   Design guidelines



§ 10-C-1  GENERAL COMMENTS. 



   This section describes the Engineering Standards for the special
designated area known as “Lost Dutchman Heights.”



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-C-2  INTENT.



   Lost Dutchman Heights is the area south of Baseline Avenue. This area
will become the southern portion of Apache Junction and has great potential
for large parks, waterways, trail systems, residential, commercial, light
industrial and business park users, and a good lifestyle.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-C-3  LOCATION.



   Lost Dutchman Heights is shown on Apache Junction Standard Detail
AJ-12.1.



(Ord. passed  - - )



§ 10-C-4  DESIGN GUIDELINES.



   (A)   Street section and right-of-way requirements.



      (1)   The principal arterial and parkway roadways are shown in
the Lost Dutchman Heights Concept Plan prepared for Arizona State Land
Department, a copy of which is on file in the development services
department. The streets are detailed in Apache Junction Standard Details
AJ-20.4 and AJ-20.5 and include 10-foot meandering sidewalks and raised
landscaped medians.



      (2)   The remaining street sections are detailed in Apache
Junction Standard Details AJ-20.1 through AJ-20.4.



   (B)   Utility locations.



      (1)   No utilities shall be constructed under the pavement
areas in the principal and parkway section streets except to cross
intersections.



      (2)   The utility locations shall be:



         (a)   The sewer and water locations shall be on opposite
sides of the roadway between the back of curb and sidewalk (see Standard
Details AJ-20.9 and AJ-20.10).



         (b)   The other utilities (gas, telephone, cable TV and
the like) shall be located between the sidewalk and right-of-way line (see
Standard Details AJ-20.9 and AJ-20.10).



   (C)   Street lights. The street lights for the principal arterial
and parkway street sections shall be double-masted and mounted in the median.



   (D)   Stormwater management.



      (1)   There are a number of large washes that traverse the
Lost Dutchman Heights area including two FEMA “floodplain” designated
washes (Weekes Wash and Siphon Draw). All streets crossing these washes will
need to have a method of conveying the 100-year storm runoff under the
streets, and provide for overtopping of larger storm events to be contained
within the crossing.



      (2)   On-site area stormwater management will need to meet the
requirements of Apache Junction City Code Vol. II, Engineering Standards,
Article 10-4 of this Chapter.



      (3)   A number of washes in the Lost Dutchman Heights area
have been designated “Waters of the U.S.” and may require an Army Corps
of Engineers “404 Permit” to develop within or adjacent to these
designated washes.



APPENDIX 10-D:  STANDARD DETAILS



Detail



Apache Junction Standard Details



   AJ-12.1   Special Area Map



   AJ-13.1   Open Trench/Open Pit/Utility Pole Fencing/Barricade Detail



   AJ-15.1   Shallow Pit Percolation Test Requirements



   AJ-20.1   Local Street Cross Sections



   AJ-20.2   Collector Street Cross Section



   AJ-20.3   Arterial Street Cross Sections



   AJ-20.4   Principal Arterial Street Cross Sections - Lost Dutchman
Heights



   AJ-20.5   Parkway Cross Section - Lost Dutchman Heights



   AJ-20.6   Local Street Cross Sections - Rural Area



   AJ-20.7   Collector Street Cross Section - Rural Area



   AJ-20.8   Arterial Street Cross Sections - Rural Area



   AJ-20.9   Principal Arterial Utility Locations - Lost Dutchman
Heights



   AJ-20.10   Parkway Utility Locations - Lost Dutchman Heights



   AJ-20.11   “Main Street” Cross Section



   AJ-20.12   “Main Street” Plan View



   AJ-21.4   Partial Principal Arterial or Parkway Street Cross Section



   AJ-28.1   Street Sign



   AJ-28.2   Street Sign Installation



   AJ-200M   Backfill, Pavement and Surface Replacement



Apache Junction Water Company Standard Details



   AJW-101   3/4-inch to two-inch Water Meter Setting Detail



   AJW-102   Combination Air-Release Valve Assembly 2 Inches and Smaller



   AJW-103   Typical Main Dead-End Blowoff Assembly



   AJW-106   Valve Box and Operator Extension Assembly



   AJW-120   Bore Casing Detail



APACHE JUNCTION STANDARD DETAILS



AJ-12.1 - SPECIAL AREA MAP







 



AJ-13.1 - OPEN TRENCH/OPEN PIT/UTILITY POLE FENCING/BARRICADE DETAIL







 



AJ-15.1 - SHALLOW PIT PERCOLATION TEST REQUIREMENTS







 



AJ-20.1 - LOCAL STREET CROSS SECTIONS







 



AJ-20.2 - COLLECTOR STREET CROSS SECTION







 



AJ-20.3 - ARTERIAL STREET CROSS SECTIONS







 



AJ-20.4 - PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL STREET CROSS SECTIONS - LOST DUTCHMAN HEIGHTS







 



AJ-20.5 - PARKWAY CROSS SECTION - LOST DUTCHMAN HEIGHTS







 



AJ-20.6 - LOCAL STREET CROSS SECTIONS - RURAL AREA







 



AJ-20.7 - COLLECTOR STREET CROSS SECTION - RURAL AREA







 



AJ-20.8 - ARTERIAL STREET CROSS SECTIONS - RURAL AREA







 



AJ-20.9 - PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL UTILITY LOCATIONS - LOST DUTCHMAN HEIGHTS







 



AJ-20.10 - PARKWAY UTILITY LOCATIONS - LOST DUTCHMAN HEIGHTS







 



AJ-20.11 - "MAIN STREET" CROSS SECTION







 



AJ-20.12 - "MAIN STREET" PLAN VIEW







 



AJ-21.4 - PARTIAL PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL OR PARKWAY STREET CROSS SECTION







 



AJ-28.1 - STREET SIGN INSTALLATION







 



AJ-28.2 - STREET SIGN INSTALLATION







 



AJ-200M - BACKFILL, PAVEMENT AND SURFACE REPLACEMENT







 



APACHE JUNCTION WATER COMPANY STANDARD DETAILS



AJW-101 - 3/4-INCH TO TWO-INCH WATER METER SETTING DETAIL







 



AJW-102 - COMBINATION AIR-RELEASE VALVE ASSEMBLY 2 INCHES AND SMALLER







 



AJW-103 - TYPICAL MAIN DEAD-END BLOWOFF ASSEMBLY







 



AJW-106 - VALVE BOX AND OPERATOR EXTENSION ASSEMBLY







 



AJW-120 - BORE CASING DETAIL







 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Arizona Revised Statutes





References to Prior Document





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES



 

A.R.S. Cite
 
2008 Code Section




4-209(B)
 
1-17-1


Title 9, Article 6 et seq.
 
2-1-3


Title 9, Article 6.2
 
2-6-2


9-461 et seq.
 
1-11-9


9-461
 
Art. 2-7


9-461 through 9-463.06
 
2-1-3


9-461.02
 
1-16-2


9-462 et seq.
 
1-1-1


9-462.04
 
1-16-5, 1-16-6, 1-16-12


9-462.04(A)(4)(c)
 
1-16-6


9-462.05 et seq.
 
1-16-1


9-462.05
 
1-16-1, 1-17-1


9-462.05.B
 
1-16-16


9-462.06
 
1-16-4, 2-5-5


9-463 et seq.
 
2-6-2


9-463.03
 
2-1-8


9-463.05
 
7-1-2, 7-1-4, 7-1-6, 7-1-7, 7-1-9, 7-1-10, 7-1-11, 7-1-12, 7-1-16, 7-1-19,
7-1-20


9-463.05(T)(4)
 
7-1-13


9-463.05(T)(7)
 
7-1-4


9-471, et seq.
 
1-16-10


9-471(A)(3)
 
1-16-10


9-500.05
 
7-1-4, 7-1-16


11-112.4.A.3
 
Exh. 10-4.1


12-124
 
1-16-16


12-901 et seq.
 
7-1-17


12-904 et seq.
 
1-8-13, 9-1-9


12-1131 et seq.
 
1-4-2


Title 26, Chapter 2, Article 2
 
5-1-2


Title 32
 
Art. 2-7


Title 33, Chapter 9
 
2-6-2


33-1201 et seq.
 
2-6-2


34-201 et seq.
 
7-1-16


Title 36, Chapter 28.1
 
1-6-12, 1-17-1


Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2
 
5-1-12


41-1492(5)
 
1-17-1


41-2142(26)
 
7-1-4


Title 45, Chapter 6
 
5-1-12


45-576
 
2-1-3, Art. 2-7


Title 48
 
10-3-6


Title 48, Chapter 21, Article 1
 
5-1-12


48-3601 et seq.
 
5-1-1


48-3609(H)
 
5-1-12


48-3610
 
5-1-1


48-3613
 
5-1-12, 5-1-13


Title 49, Chapter 1, Article 3.1
 
5-2-1


49-102
 
5-2-1


49-201(28)
 
5-2-1


49-431
 
10-2-14


49-701(4)
 
1-17-1


49-701(14)
 
1-17-1


49-701(39)
 
1-17-1


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR DOCUMENT



 

Prior Document
 
2008 Code




Ch. 5 Art. I, § 1.01
 
5-1-1


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 1.02
 
5-1-2


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 1.03
 
5-1-3


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 1.04
 
5-1-4


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 2.01
 
5-1-5


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.01
 
5-1-6


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.02
 
5-1-7


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.03
 
5-1-8


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.04
 
5-1-9


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.05
 
5-1-1


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.06
 
5-1-11


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.07
 
5-1-12


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.08
 
5-1-13


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.09
 
5-1-14


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.10
 
5-1-15


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.11
 
5-1-16


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 3.12
 
5-1-17


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 4.01
 
5-1-18


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 4.02
 
5-1-19


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 4.03
 
5-1-20


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.01
 
5-1-21


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.02
 
5-1-22


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.03
 
5-1-23


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.04
 
5-1-24


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.05
 
5-1-25


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.06
 
5-1-26


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 5.07
 
5-1-27


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 6.01
 
5-1-28


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 6.02
 
5-1-29


Ch. 5 Art. I, § 6.03
 
5-1-30


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 1.01
 
5-2-1


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 2.01
 
5-2-2


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 2.02
 
5-2-3


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.01
 
5-2-4


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.02
 
5-2-5


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.03
 
5-2-6


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.04
 
5-2-7


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 3.05
 
5-2-8


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 4.01
 
5-2-9


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 4.02
 
5-2-10


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 4.03
 
5-2-11


Ch. 5 Art. II, § 5.01
 
5-2-12


Ch. 8 § 8-1-1
 
8-1-1


Ch. 8 § 8-1-2
 
8-1-2


Ch. 8 § 8-1-3
 
8-1-3


Ch. 8 § 8-1-4
 
8-1-4


Ch. 8 § 8-1-5
 
8-1-5


Ch. 8 § 8-1-6
 
8-1-6


Ch. 8 § 8-1-7
 
8-1-7


Ch. 8 § 8-1-8
 
8-1-8


Ch. 8 § 8-1-9
 
8-1-9


Ch. 8 § 8-1-10
 
8-1-10


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed/
Eff. Date
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
5-1-1—5-1-30, 5-2-1—5-2-12


985
 
3-18-1997
 
8-1-1—8-1-10


1399
 
5-20-2014
 
7-1-1—7-1-21, 7-2-1—7-2-3, 7-3-1—7-3-3, 7-4-1—7-4-3, 7-5-1—7-5-3,
Appx. 7-A


1402
 
5-6-2014
 
1-1-1—1-1-8, 1-2-1—1-2-6, 1-3-1—1-3-3, 1-4-1—1-4-3, 1-5-0—1-5-4,
1-6-0—1-6-27, 1-7-1—1-7-6, 1-8-1—1-8-15, 1-9-1—1-9-4,
1-10-1—1-10-10, 1-11-1—1-11-16, 1-12-1, 1-13-1—1-13-3, 1-14-1,
1-15-1—1-15-3, 1-16-1—1-16-16, 1-17-1


- -
 
- -
 
10-1-1—10-1-5, 10-2-1—10-2-17, Appx. 10-2A, 10-3-1—10-3-8,
10-4-1—10-4-14, Exh. 10-4.1, Exh. 10-4.2, 10-5-1—10-5-5, 10-6-1—10-6-5,
10-7-1—10-7-5, Exh. 10-7.1—Exh. 10-7.3, 10-8-1, 10-9-1 - 10-9-4, Appx
10-A-1—Appx 10-A-4, Appx 10-B-1—Appx 10-B-3, Appx 10-C-1—Appx 10-C-4,
Appx 10-D


1452
 
- -2017
 
2-1-1—2-1-24, 2-2-1—2-2-5, 2-3-1—2-3-8, 2-4-1—2-4-2, 2-5-1—2-5-5,
2-6-1—2-6-5, Art. 2-7


 
 
 
 
 




 


