   
  
CITY OF BENSON  
  
ZONING REGULATIONS 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
 PAGE 
  
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT 4 
  
Section One - Definitions 5 
  
Section Two - Provisions 15 
  
Section Two A – Conditional Uses 16   
  
Section Three - Site Plan Required 22 
 
Section Three A – Community Master Plan Approval 24 
  
Section Four - Establishment of Zoning Districts 37 
  
Section Five - R-1 Districts 40 
  
Section Six - R-2 Residential Districts 42 
  
Section Seven - R-3 Residential Districts 43 
  
Section Seven A - Rural Transitional District 45 
  
Section Eight - B-1 Neighborhood Business District 47 
  
Section Nine - B-2 General Business District 49 
  
Section Ten I-1 Light Industry District 53 
  
Section Eleven - I-2 Heavy Industry Districts 56 
  
Section Twelve - Supplemental Regulations  58 
  
Section Thirteen - Keeping of Livestock and Pets  67 
  
Section Fourteen - Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations 68 
  
Section Fifteen - Sign Regulations 76 
  
Section Sixteen –   Removed 90 
  
Section Sixteen A – Recreational Vehicle Parks 93 
  
Section Seventeen - Outdoor Lighting Regulations 97 
  
Section Eighteen - Non-Conforming Use 116 
  
Section Nineteen - Amendments 117 
  
Section Twenty - Administration and Enforcement 120 
 
Section Twenty A-Violations of These Regulations 123 
  
Section Twenty-One - Board of Adjustment 124 
 
Section Twenty-Two - Severability Clause 131 
  
Section Twenty-Three - Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances  132 
  
Section Twenty-Four - Historic Preservation Ordinance  133 
 
Section Twenty-Five – Citizen Review Process 143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT 
  
  
TITLE:  These regulations shall be known and cited as the “Benson Zoning Regulations”, and shall be referred to herein as “these regulations”. 
  
PURPOSE:  The Purpose of these regulations are to secure adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population, to secure land and undue concentration of population, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to lessen or avoid congestion in the streets, to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, another safety, morals, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Benson, Arizona. 
  
INTENT:  It is the intent of these regulations not to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties; provided, however, that where these regulations impose a greater restriction upon the use of buildings, structures or land, the provisions of these regulations shall prevail. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
SECTION ONE - DEFINITIONS 
  
The word person includes a firm, association, organizations, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
  
The word shall is mandatory and the word may is permissive. 
  
The word lot includes the words plot or parcel. 
  
The word building includes the word structure. 
  
The words used or occupied includes the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied. 
  
When not inconsistent with the context, the present tense includes the future tense; the singular number includes the plural; and the plural number includes the singular. 
  
All words and terms shall be interpreted according to their common usage unless otherwise defined. 
  
Pertaining to land use, the standard system for identifying and coding land uses activities in “Standard Land Use Coding Manual”.  U.S. Department of Transportation, reprinted December, l969, Washington, D.C., shall be used as a reference for determining the use of land for the purposes of the Zoning Regulations. 
  
Accessory Building - A detached building on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal building.  An accessory building attached to the main building shall be considered to be a part of the main building and shall maintain any yards required for a main building. 
  
Accessory Use - A use on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use. 
  
Acre - An area comprising forty-three thousand, five hundred, sixty (43,560) square feet. 
  
Alley - A way dedicated and open to the public, which affords a secondary means of, access to the back or side properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
  
Amendment - A change in the wording context, or substance of these regulations, an addition or deletion, or a change in the zoning district boundaries or classifications upon the official zoning map, which imposes any regulation not heretofore imposed or removes or modifies any such regulation theretofore imposed. 
  
Automobile Graveyard - Any establishment or place of business maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked, abandoned, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.  (added by Ordinance No. 316 12/6/88) 
Broadcast Studio – An establishment containing one or more broadcasting studio for over-the-air, cable or satellite delivery of radio or television programs, or studios for the audio or video recording or filming of musical performances, radio or television programs or motion pictures. This term does NOT include a transmission tower.  
(added by Ordinance No. 574) 
 
Buildable Area - That net portion of the lot remaining after deducting all required yards from the gross area of a lot. 
  
Building - A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for housing, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kinds. 
  
Building Height  - The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of structure. 
  
 Carport - An accessory building or portion of a principal building with two (2) or more open sides designated or used for the parking of motor vehicles.  Enclosed  
storage facilities may be provided as part of a carport. 
  
Commission - Benson Planning and Zoning Commission. 
  
Common Area - An area designated to serve two (2) or more dwelling units or separate uses with convenient access to the area. 
  
Conditional Use – A use that may locate in certain zoning districts provided it will not be detrimental to the public good nor impair the integrity and character of the zoned district, and will be suitable to the community at large. (added by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
Council - The elected governing body of Benson. 
  
Dwelling - Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes. 
  
Dwelling, Single Family - A detached residence designed for occupancy by one (1) household only.  This shall include manufactured homes when placed on a permanent foundation, converted to real property, and taxed as a site-built dwelling as provided by law.  (amended by Ordinance No. 316, 12/6/88) 
  
Dwelling, Multiple Family - A residence designed for occupancy by two (2) or more households, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
  
Dwelling Unit - One (1) or more rooms designed for occupancy by one (1) household for living purposes and having its own cooking and sanitary facilities. 
  
Factory-Built Structure - Any structure that is wholly, or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site. (added by Ordinance No. 316, 12/6/88)  
  
Factory-Built Housing - A factory-built structure designed for long-term residential use.  For the purposes of these regulations, factory-built housing consists of three (3) types: modular homes, mobile homes, and manufactured homes.  (added by Ordinance No. 316, 12/6/88) 
  
Feedlot - A feeding operation on a parcel of land where livestock are kept or exchanged in corrals or yards on a sustained basis and where feed is brought to the yard.  It is operated for the purpose of accommodating the needs of others in whole or in part for a fee or fees paid to the operator or owner for the accommodations, materials, and services received. 
  
Fence - A structure built to separate two parcels of land or to separate a parcel of land into different use areas. 
  
Fertilizer Plant  - A place where animal matter is collected, processed or stored on a commercial basis, excluding sewage treatment plants. 
  
Floor Area - The sum of the gross horizontal areas of every floor, of all buildings on the lot measured from the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating the buildings, including basement floor area, elevator shaft and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment, penthouse, attic space whether or not a floor has been actually laid and having headroom of seven (7) feet or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, and roofed porches, but not including any space devoted to parking, or to loading and unloading. 
  
Garage - An accessory building or portion of the principal building designed or used for the shelter or storage of self-propelled vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the principal building. 
  
Grade, Natural - The average elevation of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of a building. 
  
Guest House - An attached or detached accessory building used as a temporary dwelling for guests of the occupants of the main building, and which is never rented or offered for rent.  A guesthouse providing cooking facilities shall be considered a dwelling unit. 
  
Home Occupation - An activity carried on by the occupant of a dwelling as a secondary use, including professional and semi-professional offices when conducted and entered from within the dwelling, in connection with which there is no public display of stock-in-trade upon the premises, not more than one (1) non-resident of the premises is employed and not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the floor area of one story of the principal building, or a detached home workshop of not more than two hundred (200) square feet in area is used for such home occupation; and provided that the residential character of the dwelling is not changed by said use and that such occupation does not cause any sustained changes by said use and that such occupation does not cause any sustained or unpleasant or unusual noises, vibrations, noxious fumes, odors, or cause any parking or traffic congestion in the immediate neighborhood. 
  
Hotel/Motel - A building, or group of buildings, used primarily for accommodation of transient guests in rooms or suites. 
  
Household - An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption and usual servants living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be related, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
  
Junk - Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.  (added by Ordinance No. 316, 12/6/88) 
  
Junkyard - Any establishment or place of business maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and including garbage dumps sanitary landfills.  (amended by Ordinance No. 316, 12/6/88) 
  
Landscaping - The application or use of some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers or lawns.  In addition, the combination may include rocks, and such structural features as fountains, pools, art works, screens, walls, fences, or benches. 
  
Lots - A legally created parcel of land under one (1) ownership of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required by these regulations. 
  
Lot, Corner  - A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.  A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost points of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
  
Lot Coverage - The percentage of the area of a lot, which is occupied by all buildings or other covered structures. 
  
Lot Depth - The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
  
Lot, Interior - A lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) frontage on a street other than an alley. 
  
Lot, Lines - The lines bounding a lot. 
  
Lot Line, Front - The boundary of a lot which separates the lot from the street.  For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner and through lots, all lot lines separating the lot from streets shall be considered front lot lines. 
  
Lot Line, Rear - The Boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line; except that in the absence of a rear lot line as is the case of the triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line may be considered a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than ten (10) feet. 
  
Lot line, Side - The boundary of a lot which is not a front line or a rear lot line. 
  
Lot of Record - A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Cochise County Recorder; or a lot, parcel or tract of land described by metes and bounds, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the Cochise County Recorder. 
  
Lot Width - The distance between side lot lines measured across the rear of the required front yard parallel to the street or street chord. 
  
Lot, Zoning - A single parcel of land, or one or more lots of record, designated by its owner as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control, meeting all of the requirements set forth in these regulations. 
  
Manufactured Home - A factory-built structure that is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 United State Code Section 5401 and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles.  A mobile home is not a manufactured home, except as hereinafter provided.  (added by Ordinance No. 316, 12/6/88) 
  
Mobile Home - A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of l974, which became effective June 15, l976.  In many cases, mobile homes were built to a voluntary industry standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)-A119.1 Standards for Mobile Homes.  (amended by Ordinance No. 316 12/6/82) 
  
Manufactured Home Park - A parcel of land under single ownership on which three or more mobile and/or manufactured homes are occupied as residences, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. (amended by Ordinance No. 472 6/21/2004) 
  
Mobile Home Space - A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home or recreational vehicle together with its accessory structures. 
  
Mobile Home Subdivision - A subdivision designed and intended for sale, lots, for residential occupancy in mobile homes. 
  
Modular Home - Factory-built housing certified as meeting the local or State Building code as applicable to modular housing.  Once certified by the state, modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes.  (added by Ordinance no. 316, 12/6/66) 
  
Non-Conforming Building - A building, structure, or portion thereof, which does not conform to the requirements of these regulations applicable to the zoning districts in which such building is situated, but which legally existed prior to the effective date of these regulations. 
  
Non-Conforming Lot  - A lot of record or parcel of land having less area, frontage or dimensions that required by these regulations for the zoning district in which it is located, but which was lawfully established and recorded prior to the effective date of these regulations. 
  
Non-Conforming Use - A use of a building or parcel of land which does not conform to the requirements of these regulations but which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of these regulations.  
  
Nursery School  - A public or private school or kindergarten providing day care and/or education to five (5) or more children six (6) years old or under. 
  
Parking Garage - An enclosed building used for parking, storage, or rental of motor vehicles. 
  
Permitted Use - A use specifically permitted or a use analogous to those specifically permitted. 
  
Planned Area Development – A planned development consisting of lands either under single or multiple owners acting in concert to develop multiple uses on contiguous parcels of land consisting of not less than twenty (20) acres of developable area, regardless of the zoning districts, with the end product being a better quality mixed use development of residential, recreational and/or business uses that can not otherwise be achieved reasonably with the lot size, setback, building height and related requirements set forth in other provisions of the zoning regulations. (added by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
Prohibited Use - A use not specifically permitted or a use analogous to those not specifically permitted. 
  
Railroad - Includes the land used for general railroad purposes, including mainline and switching trackage, repair shops, stations, communications equipment, roundhouses and storage facilities, but not including railroad equipment (miniature or otherwise) operated by this owner as a hobby or as part of the equipment of an amusement resort. 
  
Recreational Vehicle - A movable or portable dwelling unit forty (40) feet or less in length and eight (8) feet or less in width, built on a chassis, designed primarily for temporary living quarters for recreational or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. 
  
Self-service Station  - A space, building or part thereof, arranged or designed to be used for retail sales or supply of motor fuels. 
  
Setback - The shortest distance between the property line and the foundation, wall or main frame of a building or structure. 
  
Sign - Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but excluding any flag, badge or insignia of any government or government agency, or of any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar organization, any official traffic control device, and any notice posted according to law; the display of any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, picture, outline, beacon, or spectacular, either in whole, in part, or in combination, whereby such display is made on, attached to, or is a part of a structure erected for the purpose, or is on, attached to, or a part of any other structure, surface or thing, including but not limited to, the ground or any rock, tree or other natural object, which display is visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel in, or over which it is located.  
  
Sign Accessory - A basic category of signs which direct attention to a business, profession or activity conducted on the premises on which the sign is located, including: 
  
 (a) Bulletin Board - A wall or ground sign announcing activities of a permitted educational, governmental or religious institution or recreation area. 
  
 (b) Contractor's Sign - A temporary wall or ground sign designating the name of persons or firms engaged in construction or repair on the premises. 
  
 (c) Developers’ Sign - A temporary wall or ground sign designating the use which will occupy the premises at some future date. 
  
 (d) Home Occupation Sign - A wall sign identifying a permitted home occupation on the premises. 
  
 (e) Identification Sign - A wall, ground or roof sign identifying a permitted principal use, but which bears no advertising or message other than the name, year established, street number and kind of business or activity conducted on the premises. 
  
 (f) Name Plate Sign - A wall or ground sign identifying the name and address of the occupant of the premises. 
  
 (g) Real Estate Sign - A temporary wall or ground sign advertising the premises for lease, rent or sale. 
  
 (h) Subdivision Development Sign  - A temporary wall or ground sign advertising the sale of properties in a subdivision. 
  
 (i) Temporary Sign - A sign that is displayed no longer than one (1) year.  (An extension to the one-year limit may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission). 
  
 (j) Utility Sign - A wall or ground sign marking the entrance or exit to the parking lot or other permitted accessory use. 
  
Sign, Free-standing - A sign support by uprights or braces placed upon or in the ground, and not attached to any building. 
  
Sign, Non-Accessory - A basic category of signs which direct attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or other activity or thing, not exclusively related to the premises on which the sign is located; including directional signs as hereinafter defined: 
  
 (a) Directional Sign - A sign directing or informing the public as to the location of publicly owned facilities: historical or scenic points of interest; educational, charitable or religious institutions; hospitals or sanitariums; and major business districts. 
  
Sign, Projecting – A sign which is attached to a building or structure and extends beyond the wall of the building or line of the structure more than twelve (12) inches. 
  
Sign, Roof - A sign which extends above and is supported by the roof of a building. 
  
Sign, Wall  - A flat sign placed against or attached to an exterior front, side or rear wall of a building, including signs placed parallel to and extending not more than twelve (12) inches horizontally out from the wall of a building. 
  
Story - That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above, or if there is no floor above, the space between such floor and the ceiling above.  A basement shall be considered a story if its ceiling is more than five (5) feet above the average established grade of its perimeter, or if it is used for business purposes by other than janitors or domestic servants in the same building. 
  
Street - A way dedicated to the public, which affords that principal means of access to abutting property. 
  
Street Line - The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street, the right-of-way line of a street. 
  
Structural Alteration - Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or exterior walls, or which expands the height of area thereof.  
  
Structure - Any thing constructed or erected with fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings towers, swimming pools, walls, fences and billboards. 
  
Structure, Temporary - Anything constructed or erected which is readily movable and intended to be used, or used for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) consecutive days.  Such temporary structure shall be subject to all applicable requirements of these regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. 
  
Use - The purpose, for which land or building is occupied or maintained, arranged, designed or intended. 
  
Use Permitted Upon Application - A use specifically permitted upon application to and with written approval of the Zoning Commission. 
  
Use, Principal - The main use of land or a building as distinguished from an accessory use. 
  
Variance - A relaxation or waiver of the terms of these regulations where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
  
Wall - Any barrier, separate structure, for screening purposes forming a physical barrier, which is so constructed that 100 percent (100%) of the vertical surface shall be closed solid, except for approved gates or other access ways.   
  
Yard - space an open unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from two and one-half (2 1/2) feet above the general level of the graded lot upward, provided, however, that fences and walls may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations as indicated herein. 
  
Yard, Front - A yard on the same lot with principal building extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the nearest front wall line of the principal building.  Any attached carport, porch, or structure, or part thereof, shall be considered as part of the principal building. 
  
Yard Rear - A yard on the same lot with a principal building extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest rear wall line of the principal building.  Any attached carport, porch, or structure, or part thereof, shall be considered as a part of the principal building. 
  
Yard, Required  - The minimum open space unoccupied and unobstructed as specified by these regulations for front, rear and side yards, as distinguished from any yard area in excess of the minimum required. 
  
Yard, Side - A yard on the same lot with a principal building extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the nearest side wall line of the principal building.  Any attached carport, porch, or structure, or part thereof, shall be considered as a part of the principal building. 
  
Zoning District - Any portion, of the incorporated area of Benson, in which the same zoning regulations apply. 
SECTION TWO - PROVISIONS 
  
Conformance Mandatory 
  
 Except as otherwise provided by these zoning regulations, no building shall hereafter be used, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, nor shall any land be used, except in conformity with these regulations for the zoning district in which the land or building is located. 
  
Minimum Requirements 
  
      The provisions of these Zoning Regulations are minimum requirements.  Where these regulations impose a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law, the provisions of these Zoning Regulations shall control. 
  
Private Agreements 
  
The provisions of these Zoning Regulations shall apply independently of any easement, covenant or other agreement between private parties. 
  
Permitted Uses 
  
 Uses designated as permitted by any zoning district regulation shall be permitted upon approval of the Zoning Inspector.  No such approval shall be granted except upon compliance with all of the regulations specified for the zoning district in which the use is sought to be maintained. 
  
Uses Permitted Upon Application (deleted by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
Exceptions for Lots of Record 
  
 For any lot or parcel of record of less width or area than required by the use regulations of that zoning district in which it is located where such lot is shown upon tentative subdivision plat duly approved by the Commission or is shown upon a final subdivision plat recorded or where such lot or parcel for which a bona fide deed or contract of sale is in full force and effect at the time these Zoning Regulations become effective and said deed or contract of sale is of record in the office of the Cochise County Recorder, then said lot or parcel of record may be used for any permitted use or use permitted on appeal in that zoning district provided all use regulations are complied with. 
  
Moving of Buildings (deleted by Ordinance No. 431) 
  
  
SECTION TWO A – CONDITIONAL USES (added by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
2-A-1 Purpose 
2-A-2 Conditional Uses 
2-A-3 Authority and Approval 
2-A-4 Location Criteria 
2-A-5 Application for Conditional Use 
2-A-6 Review Procedures 
2-A-7 Revocation of Conditional Use Permit 
2-A-8 Automatic Termination of Conditional Use 
  
Section 2-A-1 Purpose 
  
Each district in the City contains designate permitted uses available as a matter of right.  In addition to the designated uses in each district, there are conditional uses, neither permitted as a right nor prohibited by law, which may be compatible within the district.  These are privileges, which must be applied for and approved by the City. 
  
It is the intent of this section to provide a set of procedures and standards for conditional uses of land or structures which, because of their unique characteristics relative to locational features, design, size, operations, circulation and public interest or service, require special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and the community as a whole.  It is the purpose of the regulations and standards set forth below to: 
  
1.                              Allow practical latitude for utilization of land and structures and maintain adequate provisions for the protection of the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the community and adjacent properties; and, 
  
2.                              Provide procedures for periodic review of conditional use permits to provide for further conditions to assure more appropriate conformity of such uses to the public welfare. 
  
3.                              Promote the goals of the General Development Plan with consideration to the aesthetic integrity of the area. 
  
Section 2-A-2 Conditional Uses 
  
The following are conditional uses which may be permitted in certain districts subject to the standards detailed herein. 
  
A.                               Utility structures, including, but not limited to substations, telephone switching stations, electrical generation facilities and other facilities required for the transmission of power or communications. 
  
B.                                Sewage facilities, including but not limited to pump stations, or sewage or storm water treatment plants. 
  
C.                               Water systems, including, but not limited to treatment plants, storage reservoirs, pump stations or other major facilities associated with the supply or distribution of water. 
  
D.                               Solid waste transfer stations and solid waste landfills. 
  
E.                                Recycling centers. 
  
F.                                Emergency service facilities or other public service facilities needing locations in the area to permit effective service within the area. 
  
G.                               Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges. 
  
H.                               Elementary and high schools. 
  
I.                                  Institutional buildings such as hospitals, colleges, churches and synagogues. 
  
J.                                  Cemeteries. 
  
K.                               Nursing care institutions. 
  
L.                                Day care, group homes in residential districts. 
  
M.                              Specialized treatment homes, halfway houses, and domestic violence shelter facilities. 
  
N.                               Sending or receiving towers for radio, television or communications. 
  
O.                               Bed and breakfast facilities for short stays with meal service restricted to registered guest only. 
  
P.                                Swap meets (added by Ordinance No. 431) 
  
Q.                               Auto Sales and Auto Repair (added by Ordinance 431.) 
  
Section 2-A-3 Authority and Approval 
  
A.                             The Planning & Zoning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for a conditional use permit.  In permitting a new conditional use or the alteration of an existing conditional use, the Planning & Zoning Commission may impose, in addition to those standards and requirements specified by the Zoning Regulations, additional conditions which it finds necessary to avoid detrimental impacts and to otherwise protect the best interests of the surrounding area or the community as a whole.  These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
  
1.  Limiting the manner in which the use is conducted, including restricting the time a certain activity may take place and restraints to minimize such environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare and odor. 
  
2.  Establishing special yard, open space, parking requirements, lot area or dimensional requirements. 
  
3.      Designating the height, size, appearance or location, of a building or other structure or use. 
  
4.    Designating the size, number and location and nature of vehicle access points. 
  
5.  Designating the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other improvements of a parking area or loading area. 
  
6.   Limiting or otherwise designating the size, location, height and lighting of signs. 
  
7.   Limiting the intensity of outdoor lighting and require its shielding. 
  
8.   Requiring diking, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property and designate standards for its installation and maintenance. 
  
9.   Designation the size, height, and location of screening and materials for a fence. 
  
10.  Protecting and preserving existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat or another significant natural resource. 
  
Section 2-A-4  Locational Criteria  
  
A.   The provisions of this section are designed to provide siting criteria and guidelines for the imposition of additional conditions not specifically provided for herein, to the end that such uses will: 
  
1. Be consistent with the intent and purpose of the district in which it is proposed to locate such use; 
  
2.   Meet the requirements of the General Development Plan with regard to providing benefit to the general welfare of the public. 
  
3.  Fill a probable need of the public, which can best be met by a conditional use at this time and in this place. 
  
A.   Conditional Uses shall be located subject to the following specific standards: 
  
1.   Buffering, screening or other means shall be used where necessary to protect the privacy and safety of neighboring properties. 
  
2.   Solid waste landfills, transfer stations, natural gas storage, sewage treatment plants and electrical generating facilities shall not be in or adjacent to established residential areas. 
  
3.    Solid waste landfills, transfer stations, natural gas storage, sewage treatment plants and electrical generating facilities will not be provided access from residential streets.  Recycling centers, water reservoirs, telephone communication and switching facilities shall not provide access from residential streets. 
  
4.  The site layout conforms to the established street and circulation pattern and the General Development Plan. 
  
5.   Noise levels and lights from the facility will not interfere with adjacent land uses, or in any way create a nuisance. 
  
Section 2-A-5  Application for Conditional Use 
  
A.      A request for a conditional use, modification of an existing conditional use permit, or a review of an existing conditional use permit shall be initiated by the property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application with the Community Development Department.  Such application shall include: 
  
1. Full information regarding the proposed locations, area, height, and placement of such use, and shall be accompanied by a site plan. 


 
2. A vicinity ownership map drawn to scale showing all parcels in the vicinity adjacent to and surrounding the property proposed for conditional use within three hundred (300)  feet of the exterior boundaries of the property.  


 
3. A typed or printed list containing the names and mailing addresses of the owners of parcels within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries as indicated in Item 2. Above and identified by the same number as on the vicinity ownership map.  Correct zip codes must be shown for each address. 


  
B.  An application filed pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required fee.  Such fee shall be determined according to a fee schedule established by the City Council. 
  
C.  The Community Development Director shall review each application for technical compliance with established application requirements. The application shall be formally accepted for approval processing or rejected within five (5) working days. 
  
Section 2-A-6 Review Procedures 
  
A.  All applications for conditional use permits shall be considered by the Planning & Zoning Commission at a public hearing. 
  
B.  The public hearing notice shall contain: 
  
1. The location and description of the proposed conditional use; and, 


 
 2.  The time and place of the public hearing at which comments on the proposed use may be presented. 
  
C.  The Planning & Zoning Commission shall review each application to insure compliance with the criteria and requirements set forth in this ordinance. 
  
Section 2-A-7  Revocation of a Conditional Use Permit 
  
A.  Any previously granted conditional use permit may be revoked by the Planning & Zoning Commission, after a hearing conducted in the manner required for approval of the original conditional use permit upon any one of the following grounds: 
  
 1.   Failure to comply with the conditions of approval. 
  
 2.   Discontinuance of the use for a period in excess of one (1) year. 
  
 3.   Failure to comply with applicable provisions of the  
General Development Plan regarding design, size or use requirements. 
  
 4.  A change in the General Development Plan or requirements of the district  within which the use is located that have the effect of no longer allowing a new conditional use permit application to be considered in such district. 
  
B. Revocations shall have the effect of making the previously granted conditional use permit void until a new application is submitted and granted or in the case of A.4. above, shall have the effect of making the previously granted conditional use a non-conforming use. 
  
Section 2-A-8 Automatic Termination of a Conditional Use 
  
 Unless otherwise approved, a conditional use permit shall automatically become null and void one (1) year after the effective date upon which it was granted unless utilization was started. 
  
  
  
SECTION THREE - SITE PLAN REQUIRED 
  
 Except as exempted in this section, a site plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Community Development Director, shall be considered the primary condition for the establishment of any building, structure to be constructed on a development site in any zoning district, or use, undertaken, constructed or planned in any zoning district.  A use permit shall be required for all uses which are not exempted by the provisions of this section whether or not any construction is involved.  When due to a change of plans or circumstances, it becomes necessary to revise an approved site plan; a new site plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Community Development Director.  (amended by Ordinance No. 316,  12/6/88 and Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 The Community Development Director shall be authorized to review and approve site plans submitted in conjunction with the establishment of any building, structure or use involving improvements having a valuation of less than $20,000.00.  For site plans with a valuation of $20,000 or greater, the Planning & Zoning Commission shall have the authority to approve. (added by Ordinance No. 316, 12/6/88 and amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98 and Ordinance No. 431 December 18, 2001). 
  
Exemptions 
  
     Development meeting the following criteria shall be exempt from the requirement to submit a development site plan detailed elsewhere in this section: 
  
 (a) Single-family residences and accessory buildings constructed in an approved subdivision in an R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning district.  These developments shall be handled with a site plan submitted to the Zoning Inspector in conjunction with the Building Permit Application. 
  
 (b) Mobile home residences and accessory buildings placed on lots in established mobile home parks or approved subdivisions in R-3 zoning districts.  These developments shall be handled with a site plan submitted to the Zoning Inspector in conjunction with the Building Permit Application. 
  
 (c) Multi-family residences consisting of less than five (5) units per lot.  These developments shall be handled with a site plan submitted to the Zoning Inspector in conjunction with the Building Permit Application. 
  
Site Plan Requirements 
  
 Two (2) 24 x 36 copies of the Plan and twelve (12) 11 x 17 copies shall be submitted for review and approval by the Commission.  Proof of Ownership and Proof of Agency shall consist of a copy of a title report issued not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of submittal by a title company authorized to conduct business in the State of Arizona.  If the land is owned by a corporation, Proof of Agency shall consist of a Corporate Resolution designating the individual to act as agent.  The Corporate Resolution must be certified by the secretary of the corporation, and authenticated by the corporate seal, or acknowledged in the form prescribed by ARS 33-506.2. 
  
     If the land is owned by a partnership, Proof of Agency shall consist of a written document designating an individual to act as agent.  The document must be certified and acknowledged in the form prescribed by AS 33-506.1. 
  
 Such site plan shall include the following information upon the appropriate number of plan sheets: 
  
 (a) Location sketch show in dimensions, shape, area, and precise legal description of the development site, and its relationship to the surrounding zoning district(s), at any appropriate scale. 
  
 (b) Existing conditions data: 
  
        (1) Location, sizes, and shape of all existing buildings and structures. 
  
(2) Location, width, and alignment of all existing abutting and on-site streets, alleys, and easements and other public or private rights-or-way or reservations. 
  
(3) Location of all existing abutting and on-site improvements such as pavement, sidewalks, curbs and curb cuts, gutters, storm and/or sanitary sewer facilities, drainage structures, water lines (including size), and fire hydrants (within 500 feet of the site). 
  
(4) Existing hydrologic data, to include all pertinent elevations and inflow and outflow courses and locations, reflected on a one-foot contour internal overlay of the development. 
  
(c) Proposed conditions data: 
  
(1) Location, size and shape of all buildings and structures, including any existing buildings and structures to be retained and/or renovated. 
  
(2) Location, width, and alignment of abutting and on-site streets, alleys, easements, and other public or private rights-of-way or reservations proposed for construction and/or dedication. 
  
(3) Location of all proposed abutting and on-site improvements such as parking lots, pavement, trash collection areas, sidewalks, curbs and curb cuts, gutters, storm and/or sanitary sewer facilities (including termini at on-site and/or off-site connections), drainage structures, water lines (including size), and fire hydrants.  
  
(4) Drainage plan for the development site referenced to the existing hydrologic data overlay and reflecting the ultimate flow conditions imposed by full development on the site.  All pertinent elevations and grades of buildings, structures, and elevations and grades of buildings, structures, and improvements, and inflow, on-site, and out-flow courses and locations, to include assumed flow quantities and calculations, shall be reflected.   
  
Development Schedule 
  
 An application for establishment and maintenance of any building, structure or use constructed or to be constructed on the development site in an R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, B-2, I-1, or I-2 zoning district, shall be accompanied by a development schedule, indicating, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge, the appropriate date on which construction of the project will begin, progressive stages of development, if any, anticipated rate of development, and completion date. 
  
Significance of Approval 
  
 Final site plan approval of a commercial development is valid for one year from date of approval and may be extended one time for six months from the expiration date of original approval by the Commission upon written request from the developer, 30 days prior to expiration of original approval. 
  
SECTION THREE A - COMMUNITY MASTER PLAN APPROVAL  
(APPROVED BY Ordinance No. 490 on May 16, 2005) 
  
Intent 
 
Community Master Plans (CMP) are intended to accommodate, encourage and promote large developments with innovative mixed-use design involving residential and nonresidential land uses, which together form an attractive, harmonious unit in the community.  The planned development, if so specified at the time of CMP approval, may include standards, regulations, or criteria that differ from those regulations pertaining to other districts in the City’s Zoning Ordinance. 
  
The CMP is further established to provide both the developer and the City with reasonable assurances that specific, proposed uses, intensities and phasing are not inconsistent with the adopted General Development Plan. 
  
COMMUNITY MASTER PLAN APPLICABILITY 
 
The provisions of this Section shall apply to all CMP documents, and any additional or supplemental information that is deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator, or their designee, to meet the following objectives:   
  
 a.  To accommodate variations in building design, lot arrangements and land uses for a maximum choice in the types of environment for residential and commercial facilities;  
  
b.  To provide for a coordinated and compatibly arranged variety of land uses,    with efficient and safe traffic circulation, including the separation of pedestrian from vehicular traffic, through innovative site planning;  
  
c.  To maintain quality of living excellence with the provision of usable open space standards to minimize adverse environmental impact on surrounding areas; and,  
  
d.  To assist in fulfilling the goals, objectives and policies of the City of Benson General Development Plan and amendments thereto.  In the event that the submitted CMP does not conform with the current General Development Plan, the applicant shall be required to apply for a modification of the General Development Plan.  
  
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMISSION OF A CMP 
  
A CMP will only be allowed under the following conditions: 
  
a.  The project for which the CMP is developed must be at least 640 acres in size; 
  
b.  The property in question is already annexed into the City of Benson; 
  
c.  The property must have an existing Development Agreement with the City of Benson or the developer must be in the process of finalizing a Development Agreement at the time of submission of the preliminary CMP application; and, 
  
d. The property has underlying zoning at least equal to the R-2 district under the City’s Zoning Ordinance. 
 
Permitted Uses 
 
All uses permitted within the CMP are to be determined by the underlying zoning district, or by an approved development plan for the site.  Residential neighborhoods shall include a range of housing types, lot styles and designs.  In the development of a balanced community, a variety of housing within one project shall be deemed most in keeping with the objectives of this Section.  All other uses shall be determined by the compatibility of such uses with each other as well as with surrounding land uses and shall conform to policies  as established in the City of Benson General Development Plan. 
  
General Development Plan Conformance 
 
Densities and intensities permitted in the CMP shall conform with the City of Benson’s General Development Plan.  Modification of General Development Plan land uses within the CMP boundaries are permitted without a General Plan amendment if the overall acreage of the more intense category remains unchanged or decreases and said modification provides for a balanced mixture of land uses.  Increases in the more intense General Development Plan classifications require a General Development Plan amendment.  Upon adoption of the Preliminary CMP, the City will process a minor General Development Plan amendment to show the changes resulting from the Preliminary CMP approval on the City’s General Plan and all costs for said amendment shall be borne by the applicant. 
  
COMMUNITY MASTER PLAN DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES 
 
A CMP approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in the form of a preliminary CMP application consisting of a graphic layout with accompanying narrative and sufficient description and documentation to identify the nature, mix and general arrangement, density, open space, and quality of the project, which may be approved upon review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
  
A pre-application meeting shall be held between the owner or owner’s representative(s) and the City.  A formal application shall then be submitted for public hearing, before the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.  Within two (2) years of Preliminary CMP approval, the applicant shall submit the Final CMP to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In the event the Final CMP is not submitted for approval to the Planning and Zoning Commission within two (2) years of Preliminary CMP approval, all development rights will lapse.   The Commission’s recommendations on the Final CMP shall be referred to the City Council for review and action. 
 
A. PRELIMINARY CMP APPLICATION: 
  
A preliminary development plan (showing general land use concepts, but not requiring lotting plans at this stage) shall be submitted to and accepted by the Zoning Administrator or designee, for consistency with Benson codes, policies and plans, and shall indicate the following: 
  
1.      Locational information including an area map showing adjacent property ownership and existing uses within three hundred feet (300’) of the parcel, and a legal description of the metes and bounds of the parcel. 
  
2.      Physical constraints to the site’s development; existing topographical features, including any portions of the site that are subject to flooding (indicating the extent and frequency, retention areas, calculations and maintenance responsibility); proposed roadway or major utility line extensions which may impact development; and such other impediments to the property’s use and improvement as may be present or planned for the future. 
  
3.      A Preliminary Development Plan addressing: 
  
a.  The location and nature of the various uses and their areas in acres (summarizing land use areas), maximum number of dwelling units and approximate percentage allocation by dwelling type, calculation of the residential density in dwelling units per gross acre; 
  
b.  The proposed arterial and collector circulation system, including any improvements (public or private) needed to accommodate additional traffic; 
  
c.   The open space system (including a general statement regarding ownership and maintenance) with indication of responsiveness to General Development Plan recreation, open space and perimeter treatments; 
  
d. Surrounding land uses and zoning; and, 
  
e.  Shall submit evidence of consistency with the goals of the General Development Plan of the proposed land use compatibility and projected community requirements. 
  
4.      Project narrative, including a descriptive summary of the overall project and any proposed deviations from the existing development standards in the City subdivision and zoning regulations. 
  
B.                 PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW: 
  
The Zoning Administrator, or their designee, in writing, may waive any of the above required information which is not applicable; or require additional information when necessary to clarify any aspect of the project or its potential impacts on the community. 
  
1.      The preliminary development plan shall be reviewed by the City of Benson Community Development Department and any other agencies deemed appropriate by the department. The department shall compile and return written comments within forty-five (45) days. 
  
2.      Thereafter, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the preliminary development plan and transmit their recommendations to the City Council for Council action. 
  
3.      The City Council may adopt the recommendations of Planning and Zoning Commission without holding a second public hearing if there is no objection, request for an additional public hearing, or protest at the Planning and Zoning Commission’s public hearing.  The Council shall be required to hold an additional public hearing if requested by the applicant, if any person appears in opposition at the Commission hearing, if any person has filed a written protest regarding the Commission hearing, or if requested by any member of the City Council. 
  
a.  The City Council may approve a Preliminary CMP, only upon finding that that the proposal is in general conformance with the goals of the City of Benson General Development Plan. 
  
b.                  The Council may, as necessary, attach conditions to CMP approval, which may include but are not limited to the following considerations:  intensities and densities; use limitations; landscaping; screen planting; setback and height of building; paving, location of drives and parking areas; storm drainage and storm water retention; public and/or private open space; shape and size of lots; fences and walls; adequacy of vehicle and pedestrian circulation and access; timing and phasing; elevations and architectural theme; or any other reasonable considerations the Council finds germane to maintain community character and neighborhood quality. 
  
C.                 FINAL COMMUNITY MASTER PLAN APPROVAL: 
  
The Final CMP review and approval is intended to be a review of the technical issues necessary to demonstrate that the approved land uses and densities approved in the Preliminary CMP approval can be adequately serviced, and to set design specifications to be utilized in the development and platting of the project.  Unless the technical review shows that the approved land uses and/or densities cannot be adequately serviced, or unless the applicant requests changes in the approved land uses and/or densities, approvals granted in the Preliminary CMP approval may not be modified as part of this review and approval.  Final CMP review and approval (either for the entire property covered by the Preliminary CMP approval or for a portion of the property) may be processed simultaneously with subdivision review.  The plans required under this section may be submitted in a form which satisfies the requirements of the subdivision regulations for final plat approval if submitted at the same time.  Portions of the CMP which are intended for development at later stages, one year or more from the date of sought approval, shall not be required to show precise lot or siting dimensions but shall be individually processed prior to the issuance of development permits.  The applicant shall submit twenty-five (25) copies of the final development plan, 11” X 17” in dimension, to the Community Development Department containing the following information, unless specifically provided otherwise: 
  
1.      All information required on the preliminary development plans revised in response to preliminary plan approval, with plans showing location and type of all improvements including schematic grading plans with proposed treatment of sloped retention areas and the following explanatory, supporting details: 
  
a.  A statement of intended design philosophy and environmental quality (text, graphics, or photographic examples);  
  
b.          Specific design standards to be utilized throughout the project, including but not limited to, sidewalks, roadways, trails, signage, walls, fencing and other urban design elements; 
  
c.  Traffic analysis, including interior roadways, typical development envelopes for residential uses and building arrangements for recreational, employment, commercial or institutional uses; 
  
d.            Standards including demand and capacity analyses for municipal systems such as transportation, water supply sewage disposal, and other community facilities, such as schools, public safety, cultural and social services such as libraries or multi-generational activity centers; and, 
  
e.   If the development is to be phased, a general indication, with chronology of the intended total project’s staging; and, if applicable, a list of development standards from which departure is requested stating justifications for each in terms of increased environmental quality. 
  
2. Plans and elevations indicating a variety of building types, materials, colors, and the number of dwelling units by type to be constructed pursuant to this review; and, for subsequent phases, the timing of development in numerical order, if applicable; 
  
3. The CMP shall meet all applicable City Building Codes and City Zoning standards.  If any City standards and policies are modified as part of the submitted CMP, no separate variances to City Building and Zoning standards or policies will be necessary for those changes requested and approved as part of the CMP process. The developer shall submit and the Zoning Administrator shall make a part of the case file record all statements regarding any and all approved deviations from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
  
4. All portions of the CMP, whether under development or reserved for future phases shall be maintained free and clear of debris with posted signs prohibiting dumping of waste, scrap of fill material of any type. 
  
5. Upon City Council approval, the CMP status of the site shall be, by Ordinance, reflected on the City zoning map. 
  
6. The City Engineer’s approval of conceptual water, sewer, and drainage master plans shall be obtained as a condition of development. 
  
Development Standards  
 
The development plan shall respond to the following requirements: 
  
A.                 FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT: 
  
Quality land improvement is required of developers in exchange for the applicant’s alternative proposals for meeting or exceeding the standards of the underlying zoning district or comparable district; as such, alternative development methods may be expressly stipulated in the final development plan. 
  
1.      Density/Intensity.  Specific dwelling unit yields may be proposed for individual parcels and development units, notwithstanding otherwise applicable standards, so long as they are consistent with the principles of the General Plan. 
  
2.      Minimum Lot Area.  Single-family residential developments may propose lotting arrangements with a portion of the site in parcels with less than the otherwise applicable minimum lot area in consideration of the following criteria as well as other justifications which the applicant may provide: 
 
a.  Mixed housing types including multi-family units with attention to affordability; 
  
b.        Additional useable open space being provided; 
 
c.  Compact residential lots that are proximate to employment or a major transportation corridor interchange or create a desirable housing market, such as attracting active retirees; 
 
d.       Lots with areas less than applicable minimum lot areas are internal to the development or are adjacent to non single-family residential uses; and/or 
 
e.  Proposed neighborhood streets where garages are not dominating, porches are provided, or the like. 
 
3.    Property Improvement Specifications.  Unless otherwise requested, approved and specified on the final development plan, improvements to individual lots or sites shall conform with the standards set forth in the Zoning District tables for the district most nearly approximating proposed uses and intensities of use. 
  
a.  Parking.  Joint use parking facilities, including appropriately-buffered and screened recreational vehicle, automotive maintenance and washing areas, may be proposed. 
  
1.      Parking spaces shall be designated for parks and recreation areas. 
  
2.      Separate, designated spaces shall be provided for temporary model home sales or rental offices. 
 
b.                Signage.  Comprehensive signage packages shall be proposed to identify and provide entry monumentation, street signs and common area information; including, monument signs for free-standing non-residential uses and directory signage for retail, office or industrial park centers. 
  
c.  Other improvements.  Off-site installation of municipal system extensions, including streets, sidewalks, pathways, drainage facilities, water, sewer and private-provider utility trenching and sub-station facilities necessary to serve the development may be masterplanned in compliance with City engineering specifications or with attenuation methods and materials approved by the Public Works Director, or his designee. 
 
B.                 OPEN SPACE: 
  
Allotments of improved and preserved usable open space shall be required to be maintained and shall be specified in the final development plan for residential portions of CMP applications.  Usable open space is defined as a locale where the average slope of all areas intended for designation as open space is not more than five percent (5%) and can be used for passive or active recreation. Open space for residential areas shall be required, based on the following: 
  
1.   A subdivision with an average lot size of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall require a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) usable open space;  
  
2.  A subdivision with an average lot size of more than ten thousand (10,000) 
square feet shall require a minimum of ten percent (10%) usable open space;  
  
3.   The average lot size shall be determined by dividing the sum total of the total lot area by the number of units for the entire CMP. (Average lot size = Total lot area/units for entire CMP.); and, 
  
4.    Open Space percentages shall be distributed throughout CMP residential or open space parcels. 
  
Each open space proposal will be evaluated individually, with consideration given to the specific use of the open space and the number of dwellings in the subdivision being served by the open space.  Natural desert preserves, natural washes, storm water retention areas, golf courses, parks, and lineal pathway/trail corridors may be accepted as open space if determined to be appropriate to the development.  All open space shall be within the subdivision it is intended to serve.  
  
Amenity Expectations 
  
Development plans shall specifically address and provide positive response in terms of land improvement enrichments for the benefit of residents, or business users, their visitors and the entire Benson community, including, but not limited to, the following: 
  
A.            RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS: 
  
Safety, spaciousness, attractive appearance, streetscape, recreation, outdoor enjoyment, residential privacy and compatibility among land uses and housing types are among considerations to which development plans shall respond. 
  
1.  Design.  Planned neighborhoods’ visual appearance shall be enhanced by a creative, masterplanned Design Standards. 
  
2.        Facilities.  Housing areas are expected to provide and maintain amenities to enhance neighborhood livability and sustainability for residents of all ages. 
  
a.      Recreational facilities.  Each dwelling should be located within three thousand (3000) feet of the nearest common open space or within five hundred (500) feet of a pathway linkage (sidewalk/bikepath) to such facilities. 
  
b.      Drainage structures.  Open, flow-conducting swales, retention or detention basins, which may be coordinated with areas credited toward open space requirements, should be engineered to prevent safety hazard or creation of attractive nuisance. 
  
3.        Community Integration.  Neighborhood design contributes to City-wide enhancements as well as features which provide residential diversity and linkages among neighborhoods. 
  
a.      Pathways.  Bicycle and pedestrian connections to schools, parks, shopping and other neighborhood activity centers should be conveniently accessible from all dwellings. 
  
b.      Neighborhood identity.  Entry monumentation, banners, public art, variations in lighting fixtures or street furniture help to distinguish neighborhood units. 
  
c.      Residential safety.  Pedestrian and security lighting, non-access landscaping varieties, traffic visibility, elimination of lurking areas and public safety/emergency accessibility should be addressed. 
  
B.  COMMERCIAL, EMPLOYMENT OR INSTITUTIONAL AMENITY LAND USES: 
  
Among the considerations to which development plans shall respond, to include but not limited to, safety, reduction of traffic congestion, architectural excellence, compatible signage, landscaping/street furniture treatments in peripheral tracts and parking lots, and the integration of impacts on other properties in the vicinity.  
  
1.      Design.  Planned neighborhoods’ visual appearance shall be enhanced by creative, masterplanned themes. 
  
2.      Facilities.  Community-benefiting spaces, fixtures and conveniences should be installed and maintained in accessible, secure locations. 
  
a.       Activity centers.  Gathering places, including performance sites, outdoor dining, recreation or relaxation areas, may be provided for customers, business invitees, employees and residential neighbors’ use at appropriate times. 
  
b.      Joint use facilities.  Parking, playing fields, restrooms, drinking fountains, plazas, walkways and other facilities shall be installed and maintained for community use. 
  
c.       Transportation amenities.  Bicycle and pedestrian convenience is stressed with consideration of bus stop improvements, park-and-ride lots, employee shuttle services or comparable transportation amenities. 
  
3.      Community integration.  Non-residential development should seek to relate, both visually and functionally, with its surrounding neighborhood. 
  
a.       Open space connection.  Recreation space and multi-purpose pathways are employed as means to allow employees or customers from the adjacent neighborhood to access shopping or jobs and interact with business people. 
  
b.      Transitional buffering.  Separation distance, landscaping, walls or joint-use areas are provided to protect residential privacy and soften the impacts and edges between non-residential and housing areas. 
  
a. Impact mitigation.  Noise, glare, dust, and industrial emissions should be abated to acceptable residential levels at residential property lines.  Exposure to hazardous materials of any type is prohibited outside of enclosed, controlled-environment structures. 





 
AMENDMENT PROCEDURES FOR A CMP 
 
A. An amendment to a CMP may be initiated by the property owner or the owner’s agent upon submittal of a written application. 
B. Amendment Application: 1. The application shall be accompanied by a statement documenting the need for the amendment; 





 
2. The Community Development Director shall determine if the amendment would result in a substantial change to the CMP.   



 
     A substantial change is one which: 
  
  a.   Increases the number of total dwelling units; 
  
b.   Provides arterial street intersections at locations other than presented in the CMP; 
  
c.   Changes permitted land uses;  
  
d.   Provides densities and intensities not included in the originally proposed land use concept and configuration; 
  
e.   Changes designated open space, buffers or perimeter landscaping which was required in the preliminary application to mitigate development impacts on the site and surrounding areas; 
  
f.   As a consequence of more than one (1) non-substantial change submitted concurrently, the cumulative results significantly change the objectives or goals of the CMP; or, 
  
g.   Results in a significant change in pedestrian or traffic circulation within the CMP or surrounding area. 
  
C.   If the request is determined to be a substantial change, the Community Development Director shall refer the request to the Planning and Zoning Commission for public hearing and recommendation to the Mayor and Council for review and action. 
  
D.   The Community Development Director may administratively approve non-substantial changes.  A non-substantial change is one which:   
  
1.  Transfers of density or lots from one development unit to another; or 
  
2.  Changes development standards, so long as said changes(s) does not alter the impacted development standard or development unit by  
       greater than 15%; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION FOUR - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 
  
Classification of Zoning Districts 
  
  
 The City of Benson Arizona, is divided into zoning districts enumerated as follows: 
  
R-1 Districts - Single-family residence, further divided into the following density districts: R-1-7, R-1-8, R-1-12, R-1-21, R-1-43. 
  
R-2 Districts - Multi-family residence 
       
R-3 Districts - Multi-family residence and Manufactured home residence (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
RT Districts - Rural Transitional 
  
B-1 Districts - Neighborhood Business 
  
B-2 Districts - General Business 
  
I-1 Districts - Light Industry 
  
I-2 Districts - General Industry 
  
  
Required Conformity to District Regulations 
  
      The regulations set forth in these regulations for each zoning district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. 
  
 Except as provided elsewhere in these regulations, no building, structure, or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations hereinafter specified for the district in which it is located. 
  
 No yard or lot existing at the effective date of these regulations shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.  Yards or lots created after the effective date of these regulations shall meet at least the minimum requirements herein established. 
  
Statutory Exemptions 
  
 Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed as: 
  
             (a) Affecting existing uses of property of the right to its continued use of the reasonable repair or alteration thereof for the purpose for which used prior to the effective date of these regulations: 
  
                (b) Preventing, restricting or otherwise regulating the use or occupation of land or improvements for railroad, mining or metallurgical purpose, as herein defined, if the tract concerned is not less than two (2) contiguous acres. 
  
Classification of Annexed Areas 
  
 All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Benson Shall be automatically zoned RT, Rural Transitional, unless it can be determined that another city zoning classification would more appropriately match the previously existing County Zoning in regards to intensity of use, (amended by Ordinance No. 354, December 6th, 1993). 
  
Classification of Vacated Streets 
  
 Whenever a public street or other pubic right-of-way is vacated by official action of the Council, the zoning districts adjoining each side of such street, alley, or right-of-way shall automatically be extended to the centerline thereof, and all land area thus vacated shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
  
Official Zoning Map 
  
 (a) Establishment - The areas and boundaries of zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of these regulations. 
  
 (b) Identification - The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Clerk, and bear the seal of the City.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may, from time to time, be made or published, the Official Zoning Map located under the jurisdiction of the City Clerk shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land areas, buildings, and other structures in the city. 
  
 (c) Changes - If, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, changes are made in district boundaries or in other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on said map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Council, together with an entry signed by the City Clerk certifying to the accuracy and date.  No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.  Any unauthorized changes of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of these regulations and punishable as hereinafter provided. 
  
 (d) Replacement - In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature of number of changes and additions, the Council may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior map.  The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other error or omissions in the prior map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original zoning regulations or any subsequent amendment thereof.  The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Clerk, and bear the seal of the city under the following words:  “This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Zoning Regulations of the City of Benson, Arizona.” 
  
     (e) Interpretation - Where, due to scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the Official Zoning Map, there is an uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any district boundary shown thereon, the exact location of such boundary, shall be determined by the Board of Adjustments.  The Board of Adjustments, in reaching its determination, shall apply the following standards: 
  
(1) Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the centerlines of streets, alleys or right-of-ways, unless otherwise fixed by dimensions shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
  
(2) In subdivided property, or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the exact location of such boundary, unless same is indicated by dimensions shown on the Official Zoning Map, shall be determined by use of the map scale shown thereon. 
  
(3) If, after application of foregoing rules, uncertainty still exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary, the Board of Adjustments shall determine and fix the location of said line in accordance with the purpose and intent of these regulations. 
  
  
SECTION FIVE - R-1 DISTRICTS 
  
Intent 
  
 These districts comprise single-family residential areas and certain open land areas where such development is desirable and appears likely to occur.  Regulations are designed to stabilize and protect the Single-family character of the districts, to promote and encourage creation of a desirable environment for family life where most families include children, and to prohibit all incompatible activities.  Principal uses are therefore restricted to single-family dwellings on individual lots.  Certain essential and complimentary uses are also permitted under conditions and standards which ensure protection of the character of the districts. 
  
Divisions of R-1 District 
  
 The R-1 District, Single-Family Residence, shall be further divided into the following density districts, as hereinafter described and regulated, and to be so designated on the Official Zoning Map: R-1-7, R-1-8, R-1-12, R-1-21, R-1-43. 
  
Permitted Principal Use 
  
 One (1) single-family residence per lot, provided that for purposes or this section, the length of the dwelling shall not be greater than three (3) times the width and the roofing and siding material must blend in with the immediate neighborhood, as determined by the Community Development Director.  (modified by Ordinance No. 320, May 16th, l989 and amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98). 
  
 Recreational uses such as public or private golf courses and related facilities and improvements to include: clubhouses, restaurants, locker rooms, pro shops, cart storage facilities, driving ranges, tennis courts, health clubs, spas etc., provided that such related facilities are located on real property contiguous to the primary recreational attraction. (added by Ordinance No. 354, December 6th, 1993). 
  
  
  
Permitted Conditional Uses 
  
 The following uses are permitted as principal uses, subject to the approval of application for a specific use by the Community Development Director.  Said application shall include full information regarding the proposed location, area, height, bulk and placement of such uses, and shall, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, include submission of the proposed site plan. 
  
 Residential structures employing Energy-saving devices. 
  
Permitted Accessory Uses 
  
 Any use customarily incidental to a permitted principal use; 
  
 Private garage or carport for storage of not more than three (3) vehicles: 
  
 Garden house, tool house, ramada, and swimming pool; 
  
 Parking of one (1) travel trailer, provided that it is located in a garage, carport, or rear yard; is not provided electrical power, water supply, gas, or sanitary sewer; and is not used for living purposes; 
  
 Parking of boats, horse trailers, and similar equipment, provided that they are located in a garage, carport, or rear yard; 
  
 Guesthouse; servants’ quarter. 
  
Use Regulations 
  
 All uses permitted by these regulations or approved or conditional uses approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission shall conform to the requirements in Table One.  (amended by Ordinance No. 348 11/16/92 and Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
Only Manufactured Homes Bearing the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development identification plate will be permitted to be installed within the City, except that any mobile home or manufactured home presently existing and used as a residence within the City provided it complies with the current applicable building codes.  (amended by Ord. 467) 
  
  
  
SECTION SIX - R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
  
Uses and Structures 
  
 Within any Class R-2 Residential District, no buildings, structures or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, which shall be used except as permitted in this section, or for any other than the following specified purposes and uses. 
  
 (a) All buildings or structures and all uses permitted in Class R-1 Residential Districts. 
  
 (b) Multiple-family residences. 
  
 (c) All buildings or structures for living quarters, except multi-family residences, shall contain at least 700 square feet of enclosed floor area per dwelling unit.  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to any use permitted in this section such as garages for private cars, etc. are permitted.  (amended by Ordinance No. 299, 9/13/82) 
  
 (d) Each building or structure for living quarters shall have a lot area of not less than 5,000 square feet and each dwelling unit shall have a plot area of not less than 1,500 square feet per ground floor dwelling unit.  (amended by Ordinance No. 299, 9/13/82) 
  
 (e) Public utility buildings, water-pumping plants and storage tanks, and electric substations serving district residents, but excluding repair or storage facilities in connection therewith. 
  
 Use Regulations 
  
 All uses permitted by the regulations or approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission shall conform to the requirements in Table One.  (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98)  
  
 Only Manufactured Homes Bearing the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development identification plate will be permitted to be installed within the City, except that any mobile home or manufactured home presently existing and used as a residence within the City provided it complies with the current applicable building codes.  (Amended by Ord 467) 
  
SECTION SEVEN - R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
  
Uses and Structures 
  
Within any Class R-3 Residential District, no buildings, structures or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, which shall be used except as permitted in this section, or for any other than the following specified purposes and uses: 
  
 (a) All buildings or structures and all uses permitted in Class R-1 and Class R-2 Residential Districts. 
  
 (b) Manufactured home parks and subdivisions. (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 (c) Manufactured homes placed on a lot or parcel and to be used as a dwelling unit and not being in mobile home parks. (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 (d) All buildings, structures or manufactured homes for living quarters, except mobile homes and multi-family residences, shall be at least 500 square feet of enclosed floor area per dwelling unit.  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to any use permitted in this section such as garages for private cars, etc. are permitted.  (amended by Ordinance No. 299, 9/13/82 and Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 (e) Each lot shall have a plot area of not less than 5,000 square feet; each dwelling unit shall have a plot area of 1,250 square feet per ground floor unit. 
  
 (f) Home occupations or other conditional uses approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission. (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 (g) Public utility buildings, water-pumping plants and storage tanks, and electric substations serving district residents but excluding repair or storage facilities in connection therewith. 
  
Use Regulations 
  
 (a) All uses permitted by these regulations or approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission shall conform to the requirements in Table One.  (amended by Ordinance No. 398, 1/1/98) 
  
 (b) All Mobile and Manufactured Homes shall be skirted and securely anchored to the ground in accordance with the Manufacturer’s instructions, the Uniform Building Code or as designed by a registered engineer.  (amended by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (c) Only Manufactured Homes Bearing the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development identification plate will be permitted to be installed within the City, except that any mobile home or manufactured home presently existing and used as a residence within the City provided it complies with the current applicable building codes.  (Amended by Ord 467) 
  
Site Plan Approval 
  
 Site plan approval shall be obtained prior to any issuance of a building or use permit in R-3 Residential District.  
  
  
SECTION SEVEN A - RURAL TRANSITIONAL 
  
Intent 
  
 The RT Rural Transitional District is created to preserve to the maximum extent possible to rural lifestyle existing in the Benson city limits, while at the same time encouraging and maximizing the development of compatible commercial uses beneficial to the City’s economic well-being.  In particular, this classification authorizes the keeping and grazing of livestock, including cattle, horses, sheep, goats, poultry, rabbits, or similar animals except, that it shall not authorize the keeping of swine.  This classification also recognizes that a portion of the area affected has both a tendency and likelihood of development into commercial uses which the City desires to encourage to the extent that such commercial uses do not unreasonably infringe upon the uses and lifestyles of adjacent residential areas.  In order to direct and encourage commercial development consistent with the changing rural character of the RT district, a Special Use Permit shall be required for all non-residential uses established after the effective date of this ordinance.  (added by Ordinance No. 315, 12/6/88) 
  
Conditional Use Permits – Conditional Use Permits shall be authorized by the zoning official or the Planning and Zoning Commission which may impose such conditions and requirements as it deems appropriate.  The Conditional Use Permit may authorize any use permitted in a B-1, B-2, I-1, or I-2 District, provided that such use is found to be not incompatible with the adjacent or nearby business or residential uses.  (added by Ordinance No. 315, 12/6/88 and amended by Ordinance 398 1/1/98) 
  
Use Regulations -  
  
 (a) Building height - The height of buildings shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. (added by Ordinance No. 315, 12/6/88) 
  
 (b) Area, bulk, and placement requirements shall be identical to District R-1-8 requirements listed in Table One for those parcels not requiring a special use permit, except that minimum lot area will be four acres.  (added by Ordinance No. 315, 12/6/88 and amended by Ordinance No. 354, December 6th, 1993). 
  
 (c) All single family residences and non-residential uses permitted in R-1, R-2, and R-3, (amended by Ordinance No. 354, December 6th, 1993). 
  
 (d) All accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted if also permitted in R-3 districts without a special use permit.  (added by Ordinance No. 315, 12/6/88) 
  
 (e) The keeping and grazing of livestock, including cattle, horses, sheep, goats, poultry, rabbits or similar animals are permitted; except that, the keeping of swine is not permitted.  (added by Ordinance No. 315, 12/6/88) 
  
Site Plan Approval  - Site plan approval shall be obtained prior to any issuance of a building or use permit.  (added by Ordinance No. 315, 12/6/88)SECTION EIGHT - B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 
  
Intent 
  
 The B-1 Neighborhood Business District provides areas for retail trade shops and services in convenient locations to meet the daily needs of households in nearby neighborhoods. 
  
 The regulations are intended to preserve the essential neighborhood character of the districts to prevent the encroachment of more intensive commercial uses, to provide for compact business arrangements for maximum convenience, to minimize periphery conflicts with abutting residential properties, and to avoid any undue concentration of vehicular traffic on local streets. 
  
 Uses and structures within any Class B-1 Business District: No buildings, structures or premises shall be used, and no buildings or structures shall be erected which shall be used, except as permitted in this section or for other than the following specified purposes and uses: 
  
 (a) All uses permitted in R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts.  (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 (b)  (deleted by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (c) Professional offices, utility offices, government office, real estate offices, broadcast studios and the like. (amended by Ordinance No. 574, 1/23/2015) 
  
 (d)  (deleted by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (e) Specialty shops, beauty shops, flower shops, photography shops, bakery shops, candy shops, and the like. 
  
 (f) Restaurants, cafes, malt and sandwich shops, retail liquor shops, and the like. 
  
 (g) Laundromats or dry-cleaning establishments employing less than five (5) people, and using non-flammable solvents. 
  
 (h)  (deleted by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (i)   (deleted by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (j)  (deleted by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (k) Drive-through car washes no larger than two bays. 
  
 (l)  (deleted by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (m) Self-service gas stations where no repair or mechanical services are offered. 
  
All buildings or structures, except manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park, shall be of a permanent type construction firmly attached to a permanent foundation structure. (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
Permitted Accessory Building and Uses 
  
 Any accessory building or use customarily incidental to a permitted use shall be permitted. 
  
Additional Regulations 
  
 The additional regulations are as follows: 
  
 (a) Any use, including incidental or accessory storage, not within a completely enclosed building shall be screened solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 (b) Any lighting shall be placed so as to reflect the light away from adjoining residential districts. 
  
 (c) A minimum of six (6) foot wide landscaping strip, approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission is required along the street side(s) of any business use. (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 (d) All uses permitted by these regulations or conditional uses approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission shall conform to the requirements in Table One. (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
Use Regulations 
 All residential uses shall comply with the requirements for the corresponding residential district as shown in Table One. 
  
 All business uses shall comply with the B-1 Requirement as shown in Table One. 
  
 The height of buildings shall not exceed thirty (30) feet, (added by ordinance No. 386, 1/20/97). 
  
  
  
Site Plan Approval 
  
 Site plan approval shall be obtained prior to any issuance of a building or use permit in B-1 Neighborhood Business District.  
SECTION NINE - B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
  
Intent 
  
 The B-2 General Business District provides areas for the sale of commodities and performances of services and other activities in locations for which the market extends beyond the nearby neighborhoods.  It also provides for commercial uses concerned with wholesaling or distribution activities in locations where there is adequate access to major streets or highways. 
  
 Uses and structures within any Class B-2 Business District: No buildings, structures or premises shall be used, and no buildings or structures shall be erected which shall be used, except as permitted in this section or for other than the following specified purposes and uses. 
  
Permitted Uses 
  
 The following uses shall be permitted in B-2 General Business Districts: 
  
 (a) All uses permitted in R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts. 
  
 (b) All uses permitted in B-1 Neighborhood Districts. 
  
 (c) Motor vehicle transportation facilities and services including bus passenger terminals, bus garaging and equipment maintenance, motor freight garaging and equipment maintenance, taxicab transportation, freight forwarding services, packing and crating services, travel arranging services, and transportation ticket services. 
  
 (d) Retail trade of parts and accessories for all mechanical applications. (amended by Ordinance 449, 8/19/02) 
  
 (e) Automobile service stations. 
  
 (f) Retail trade of apparel and accessories. 
  
     (g) Retail trade of furniture, home furnishings, household appliances and equipment. 
  
 (h) Funeral and Crematory services. 
                   
 (i) Business services, including advertising services, consumer and mercantile credit reporting services, adjustment and collection services, duplicating mailing and stenographic services, dwelling and other building services, new syndicate services, employment services, and auto washing services. (amended by Ordinance 449, 8/19/02) 
  
          (j) Repair services, electrical, radio and television, watch, clock, jewelry, re-upholstery and furniture repair, armature rewinding services, and similar light duty maintenance. (amended by Ordinance 449, 8/19/02) 
  
 (k) Special and higher education services including university college, junior college, and professional school education, vocational, trade, business, stenographic, barber and beauty schools, art and music, dancing, driving and correspondence schools. 
  
 (l) Drug stores, dry goods stores, hardware stores, grocery stores, department stores, and the like.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (m) Banks, savings and loan, finance companies, and the like.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (n) Auto supply stores selling new merchandise.  (added by Ordinance No.  336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (o) Hotels and motels with or without kitchenettes for permanent or transient purposes.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (p) Auto parking lots, for periods of not longer than one day at a time and new and used car sales lots where no mechanical work is done nor are wrecked, junked, or disabled cars stored or parked on the lot.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (q) Bus depots, bowling alleys and other recreational and amusement type businesses.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 All buildings shall be completely enclosed and shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent objectionable noise and odor outside the walls of the building. 
  
Conditional Uses Permitted Upon Appeal to Planning & Zoning Commission (amended by Ordinance No. 348 11/16/92 and Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 The following uses may be allowed by the Planning & Zoning Commission as conditional uses upon application and compliance with such additional uses upon application and compliance with such additional on-site or off-site specific requirements as the Commission deems appropriate in consideration of the surrounding affected areas: 
  
 (a)  Amusement  parks, fairgrounds, and other amusements, recreational vehicles and travel trailer parks. 
  
 (b) Wholesale trade, including motor vehicles and automotive equipment, drugs, chemicals, and allied products, dry goods and apparel, groceries and related products, electric goods, hardware, plumbing, heating equipment and supplies, machinery and other wholesale trade. 
  
 (c) Contract construction services, including general building construction services and special construction trade services, concrete services, and water well drilling services. 
  
 (d) And any use defined as “permitted use” in Section 10, I-1, “Light Industry District”. 
  
Permitted Accessory Buildings and Uses 
  
 Any accessory building or use customarily incidental to a permitted use shall be permitted. 
  
Additional Regulations 
  
 Any use, including incidental or accessory storage, not within a completely enclosed building shall be screened by a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 Any lightning shall be placed so as to reflect the light away from adjoining residential districts. 
  
 Any part of the lot not otherwise surfaced shall be landscaped. 
  
 A minimum six (6) feet wide landscaping strip is required along the street side(s) of each property. (amended by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
 All new construction, reconstruction or exterior remodeling of buildings in the area bounded by 4th Street on the South, Patagonia on the north, Ocotillo Avenue on the West and the railroad overpass on the east, shall have an exterior design which appears substantially similar to the style generally found in rural commercial districts during the period of 1880 to 1920.  The Benson Planning & Zoning Commission shall function as a design review authority in conjunction with their other duties as to the delineated area.  As a guide in determining what constitutes an acceptable period representation, the commission shall refer to references such as, but not limited to, An Ambush of Ghost by David Rothel, 1990 edition, excluding therefrom Chapter 6 and page 134, and Desert Architecture by Ralph E. Brachek, 1967 edition, Chapters 1 through 4.  (added by Ordinance 410.) 
  
Site Plan Approval 
  
 Any plan approval shall be obtained prior to any issuance of a building or use permit. 
  
Use Regulations 
  
 All residential uses shall comply with the requirements for the corresponding residential districts as shown in Table One. 
  
 All business uses shall comply with the B-2 requirements as shown in Table One.  
  
The height of buildings shall not exceed thirty (30) feet, (added by ordinance No. 386, 1/20/97). 
  
SECTION TEN - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT 
  
Intent 
  
 The I-1 Light industry district provides for light industrial uses in locations which are suitable and appropriate, taking into consideration the land uses on adjacent or nearby properties, access to a major street or highway, rail services or other means of transportation, and the availability of public utilities.  Regulations are intended to encourage development of such manufacturing, fabricating, processing, packaging and other industries as can be operated in a relatively clean, quiet and safe manner compatible with adjoining uses and without serious adverse effect, danger or hazard by reason of smoke, soot, dust, odor, radiation, noises, vibration, heat, glare, toxic fumes or other conditions to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
  
Permitted Uses 
  
 The following uses shall be permitted in I-1 light industry districts: 
  
 (a) Manufacturing of apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather and similar materials. 
  
 (b) Manufacturing or furniture and fixtures. 
  
 (c) Printing, publishing, and allied industries. 
  
 (d) Manufacturing and assembly of professional scientific, controlling, and electronic instruments; photographic and optical goods, watches, and clocks. 
  
 (e) Manufacturing of jewelry, silverware, and plated ware, musical instruments and parts; toys, amusement, sporting and athletic goods; pens, pencils, and other office and artists’ materials; novelties, notions and tobacco. 
  
 (f) Motion Picture production. 
  
 (g) Motor vehicle transportation facilities and services including bus passenger terminals, bus garaging and equipment maintenance, motor freight garaging and equipment maintenance, taxicab transportation, freight forwarding services, packing and crating services, travel arranging services, and transportation ticket services. 
  
 (h) Automobile parking structures. 
  
 (i) Wholesale trade, including motor vehicles and automotive equipment, drugs, chemicals, and allied products, dry goods and apparel, groceries and related products, electrical goods, and supplies, machinery and other wholesale trade. 
  
 (j) Warehousing and storage services including household goods warehousing refrigerated warehousing, food lockers and general warehousing and storage. 
  
 (k)  (added by Ordinance 214, 3/20/85), (deleted by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 (l) All non-residential uses permitted in B-1 and B-2 Districts.  (added by Ordinance 214, 3/20/85 and amended by Ordinance No. 354, 12/6/97) 
  
Uses Permitted Upon Appeal to Planning & Zoning Commission (amended by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
 The following uses may be permitted upon appeal in I-1 industry districts: 
  
 (a) Contract construction services including general building construction services and special construction trade services, concrete services, and water well drilling services. 
  
 (b) Public assembly for entertainment, including amphitheaters, motion picture theaters, drive-in movies, for sports including stadiums, arenas, field houses, race tracks, and for other public assembly including auditoriums and exhibition halls. 
  
 (c) Amusement parks, fairgrounds, and other amusements. 
  
Permitted Accessory Buildings and Uses 
  
 Any accessory buildings or use customarily incidental to a permitted use shall be permitted. 
  
Use Regulations 
  
 All uses permitted or permitted upon appeal in I-1 industry districts shall conform with the following use regulations: 
  
 (a) Building height - The height of buildings shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
  
 (b) Yards - Yards are not required except as follows: 
  
  (1) Front Yard – There shall be a front yard of not less than (50) feet on all lots and the front twenty (20) feet of which shall be utilized for landscaping and entrance drives.  (amended by Ordinance No. 417) 
     
                    (2) Side Yards - A side yard of not less than thirty (30) feet shall be maintained where the side of the lot abuts a residential district, or which the exterior ten (10) feet shall be utilized for landscaping. 
  
                    (3) Rear Yard - Where a lot abuts a residential district, whether or not separated by an alley, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
  
 (c)  All parking, Ingress roads, & Egress roads, shall be paved, see section FOURTEEN Required Improvements and Maintenance for surface & drainage standards.” (added by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
  
Additional Regulations 
  
 The additional regulations are as follows: 
  
             (A) All operations and storage adjacent to residential or business districts and adjacent arterial or collector streets shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building or within an area enclosed by a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height, and provided that no objects shall be stacked higher than the wall so erected. 
  
         (B) Any lighting shall be placed so as to reflect the light away from adjoining residential areas. 
  
   
  
Site Plan Approval 
  
 Site plan approval shall be obtained prior to any issuance of a building or use permit in I-1 light industry districts. 
  
  
SECTION ELEVEN - I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRY DISTRICTS 
  
Intent 
  
 The I-2 heavy industry district provides for heavy industrial uses on locations which are suitable and appropriate taking into consideration land uses in adjacent or nearby properties, access to a major street or highway, rail service or other means of transportation, and the availability of public utilities.  Regulations are intended to allow within safe limits industrial uses and structures having physical and operational characteristics which may be offensive or hazardous or which might otherwise adversely affect the economic welfare of nearby properties and uses. 
  
Permitted Uses 
 The following uses shall be permitted in I-2 heavy industry districts: 
  
 (a) All uses permitted in light industry districts. 
  
 (b) Manufacturing of food and kindred products. 
  
 (c) Manufacturing of textile mill products. 
  
 (d) Manufacturing of lumber and wood products. 
  
 (e) Manufacturing of chemical and allied products. 
  
 (f) Manufacturing of petroleum refining and related industries. 
  
 (g) Manufacturing of rubber and plastic products. 
  
 (h) Manufacturing of stone, clay and glass products. 
  
 (i) Manufacturing of primary metals. 
  
 (j) Manufacturing of fabricated metal products. 
  
Uses Permitted Upon Appeal to Planning & Zoning Commission 
  
 The following uses may be permitted upon appeal in I-2 heavy industry districts: 
  
 (a) Canneries. 
  
 (b) Meat processing plants. 
  
 (c) Junkyards. 
  
 (d) Airports and heliports. 
  
Permitted Accessory Buildings and Uses 
  
 Any accessory buildings or use customarily incidental to a permitted use shall be permitted. 
  
Use Regulations 
  
 All uses permitted or permitted on appeal in I-2 heavy industry districts shall conform with the following use regulations: 
  
 (a) Building height - the height of buildings shall not exceed thirty (30) feet without the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
  
(b)    Yards - Minimum required yards shall be the same as those of I-1 light industry districts. 


  
Additional Regulations 
  
 The additional regulations are as follows: 
  
 (a) There shall be a solid wall or fence at least eight (8) feet in height in the rear and/or side property lines that are adjacent to any residential districts.  (amended by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
 (b) Any lighting shall be placed so as to reflect the light away from adjoining residential areas. 
 (c)  All parking, Ingress roads, & Egress roads, shall be paved see section FOURTEEN Required Improvements and Maintenance for surface & drainage standards. (added by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
Site Plan Approval 
  
 Site plan approval shall be obtained prior to any issuance of a building or use permit in I-2 heavy industry districts.  
  
SECTION TWELVE - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
  
Intent 
  
 It is the intent of this section to set forth supplementary and qualifying conditions which must be complied with, in connection with uses permitted within a zoning district or districts. 
  
  
  
Sight Distance at Intersections 
  
 On Corner lots in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to remain, which materially impedes vision between a height of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersection streets in the area bounded by the street line of such corner lot and a line joining points along said street lines twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection. 
  
Swimming Pools 
  
 Swimming pools shall be permitted in all zoning districts; however, no swimming pool shall be located in any minimum required front or side yard, nor shall any such pool be closer than five (5) feet to any lot line.  Every swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than five (5) feet in height which is so constructed, gated and locked as to discourage unauthorized entry to such pool. 
  
Exceptions to height limitations 
  
 Height regulations established elsewhere in these zoning regulations shall not apply to the following in any districts: 
  
  Chimneys, conveyors, cupolas, derricks, domes, flagpoles, observation towers, parapet walls extending not more than four (4) feet above the height limit of the building, radio, television, or other communication towers, windmills, power transmission poles, church spires, monuments, belfries, bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks, fire and hose towers, cooling towers, gas holders, grain elevators, or other structures not for human occupancy; 
provided that such structures above the height limit specified for the zoning district shall not in the aggregate occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area and shall be distant not less than twenty-five (25) feet from every lot line. 
  
Elevated Storage Facilities 
  
   Any elevated storage facility, water tower, or other structure where a large weight would be supported by legs, structural wall or other supports shall be so located that if it should collapse, its reclining length would still be contained on the property on which it was erected. 
  
Flammable Storage 
  
 The following minimum regulations apply to the dispensing and bulk storage of all flammable products in all zoning districts: 
  
 (a) Retail storage tanks shall comply with State Fire Marshal regulations and the most recently adopted Uniform Fire Code. 
  
 (b) (Deleted by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
(c)  (c)   (Deleted by Ordinance No. 417) 


  
 (d) (Deleted by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
 (e) (Deleted by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
 (f) (Deleted by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
(g) (Deleted by Ordinance No. 417) 
  
Gasoline Station Pumps 
  
 In any district no gasoline pump island shall be located closer than fourteen (14) feet to any right-of-way or property line or closer than fifty (50) feet to any residential district.  (amended by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Future Street Lines 
  
 Where future street lines have been officially established by the City Council, all required setbacks shall be measured from such projected street lines. 
  
Projection into Required Yards 
  
 In all residential districts the following regulations of projections into required yards shall apply: 
  
 (a) Awnings, open fire balconies, fire escape stairs, window-type refrigeration units, suspended or roof evaporative coolers and forced air furnaces may project not more than five (5) feet over any required yard, provided that they are no closer than two (2) feet to any lot line. 
  
 (b) Except as provided elsewhere, no compressor unit, condensing unit, cooling tower, evaporative condenser or similar device shall be located closer to any interior lot line than the minimum setback required for the main building. 
  
 (c) Cornices and eaves may project not more than three (3) feet over any required yard, provided that they are no closer than two (2) feet to any lot line. 
  
 (d) Sills, leaders, belt courses and similar ornamental features, may project not more than one (1) foot over or into any required yard; a chimney or pilaster may project not more than two (2) feet into any required yard, provided that it is not more than eight (8) feet in dimension paralleling the nearest lot line.   
  
  (e) Unroofed terraces, patios, steps or similar features not over three (3) feet in height above grade may project into any required yard. 
  
The height of buildings shall not exceed thirty (30) feet, (added by ordinance No. 354 12/6/93). 
  
Fences, Walls, and Hedges     
  
 In all residential districts, the following regulations of fences, walls and hedges shall apply: 
  
(a)  (a)   No fence, wall, or hedge exceeding three (3) feet in height above grade shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to remain in or along the front or side of any required front yard except that unslatted chain link fence or wood picket fence, with at least 50% opening, not to exceed four (4) feet in height will be allowed above grade  (amended by ordinance No. 354, 12/6/93). 


  
(b)  (b)  No property line fence shall contain barbed wire, electrical current or charge of electricity, broken class or similar hazardous materials or devices, provided, however, that fences in B-1 and B-2, I-1 and I-2 Districts which enclose storage areas may have barbed wire connected therewith so long as said barbed wire is located more than six (6) feet in height above grade. 


  
 (c) All fences and walls, with the exception of retaining walls and the provisions of (a) above, will be limited to a maximum height of eight (8) feet and will be neatly constructed so as not to present an eyesore and must use the following materials: block, brick, wood, chainlink, ornamental iron, wire strand or welded wire.  (added by Ordinance No. 354 12/6/93) 
. 
Yard Space for One Building Only 
  
 No required yard or other open space around an existing building which is needed to comply with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for another building which is to be erected or established. 
  
Sale or Lease of Required Space Prohibited 
  
 No space needed to meet the width, yard area, coverage, parking, frontage on a public street or other requirement of these Zoning Regulations for a lot or building may be sold, bequeathed or leased apart from such lot or building unless space so complying is provided; nor shall any land be sold which will result in an existing or future lot for dwelling purposes that does not comply with all the provisions of these Zoning Regulations. 
  
Accessory Building Prohibited as Living Quarters 
  
 Living and sleeping quarters shall not be permitted in any accessory building in any residential district except as specifically permitted herein. 
  
Storage of Junk Prohibited in Residential Districts 
  
 No yard or other open space surrounding an existing building in any residential district, or which is hereinafter provided around any building in any residential district, shall be used for the storage of junk, debris, or obsolete vehicles and no land shall be used for such purposes, except as specifically permitted herein. 
  
Storage of Trucks Prohibited in Residential Districts 
  
 The storage of more than one (1) truck having a rated capacity of more than one and one-half (1 1/2) tons and the storage of construction equipment such as bulldozers, graders, dump trucks and others shall not be permitted on any lot in residential districts; except, however such construction equipment may be stored on a lot during construction of building thereon, but not to exceed one (1) year. 
  
Additional Setbacks in Residential Districts 
  
 Side setbacks for non-residential buildings in residential districts shall not be less than the sum of the length of the building wall measured along the side yard and the average height, divided by ten; except that no building shall be set back less than the minimum distance required in the district. 
  
Mutual Garages Across Lot lines 
  
 An accessory building such as a detached carport or garage may be constructed across a common lot line by written agreement between the two adjoining property owners when such agreement is recorded in the office of the County Recorder. 
  
Mutual Dwellings Across Lot Lines 
  
 In districts in which two-household dwellings are permitted, a two-household dwelling may be constructed across a common lot line when separated on the line by a dividing wall, provided a written agreement between the two adjoining property owners is recorded in the office of the County Recorder. 
  
Roof Drainage 
  
 Surface water from rooftops shall not be allowed to drain directly onto adjacent lots except after written agreement between the two adjoining property owners is recorded in the office of the County Recorder. 
  
  
Temporary Uses and Structures 
  
 The following regulations shall govern the operation of certain transitory or season uses: 
  
 (a) Permits - Application for a temporary building or use permit shall be made to the Zoning Inspector and shall contain the following information: 
  
(1) A description of the property to be used rented or leased for the temporary use, including all information necessary to accurately portray the property. 
  
             (2) A description of the proposed use. 
  
(3) Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, sanitary facilities, and availability of parking space to service the proposed use. 
  
 (b) Uses - The following are temporary uses and are subject to the following specific regulations and time limits, in addition to the requirements of any district in which the use is located: 
  
(1) Carnival, Circus or Music Festival - When authorized by the City Council, a temporary use permit for a carnival, circus or music festival may be issued in any district, for a period not longer than fifteen (15) days. 
  
(2) Christmas Tree Sales - A temporary use permit, when authorized by the City Council, may be issued for the display and open-lot sales of Christmas trees for a period not longer than forty-five (45) days. 
  
(3) Contractor’s Office - In any district, a temporary use permit may be issued for a contractor’s temporary office and equipment sheds incidental to a construction project.  The permit shall be valid for not more than one year but shall be renewable for one year.  The office and/or shed shall be removed upon completion of the construction project. 
  
(4) Real Estate Sales Office - In any district, a temporary use permit may be issued for a temporary real estate sales office in any new subdivision which has been approved in accordance with the City of Benson Subdivision Regulations.  The permit for such office shall be valid for not more than one (1) year, but is renewable for up to three (3) years.  The office shall be removed upon completion of the development.  A model home may be used as a temporary sales office. 
  
Permitted Home Occupations 
  
 A home occupation may be permitted upon application to the Zoning Commission in any residential district, subject to the following conditions: 
  
 (a) The home occupation must be registered with the City Clerk and subject to review by the Planning and Zoning Commission.  The Zoning Inspector will issue a permit, a copy of which will be forwarded to the County Assessor’s Office. 
  
 (b) Offices of members of recognized professional persons may be permitted, provided that no more than one person, not a member of the household, may be employed in connection with such operation in such office.  One small professional or announcement sign not over one (1) square foot in area shall be allowed affixed to the main wall of the main residence dwelling. 
  
 (c) A Public Hearing will be held for each application. 
  
Outdoor Theaters 
  
 The following minimum regulations shall apply to outdoor theaters: 
  
 (a) The minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres. 
  
 (b) No outdoor theater shall be located within three hundred (300) yards of any residential district. 
  
 (c) The face of the screen shall be located a minimum of seven hundred (700) feet back from the highway or street right-of-way line, if visible from said highway or street. 
  
 (d) Only one-way traffic shall be permitted on the site of an outdoor theater. 
  
 (e) There shall be at least one (1) emergency exit. 
  
 (f) Entrance line shall be capable of handling a minimum of thirty (30) percent of theater capacity. 
  
 (g)  Landscaping shall be provided 
  
Cemeteries 
  
 For purposes of these zoning regulations, cemeteries shall be considered as a use permitted upon appeal in any district.  The application for such use permit shall indicate among other things, the total number of lots, roads, and landscaping and maintenance provisions. 
  
Automobile Service Stations 
  
 No building or use permit shall be approved for an automobile service station unless accompanied by the following: 
  
 (a) A site plan showing the building area, service area and sales area: 
  
 (b) Rendering of buildings, the construction of which, shall be in reasonable conformity thereto. All structures shall be of a design character that is appropriate to the area in which they are to be constructed.  All canopies shall be connected to the roof of the main structure unless otherwise approved; 
  
 (c) A detailed landscape plan showing plant type, size and spacing; 
  
 (d) A solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet in height shall be required between all-automobile service station sites and adjoining residential districts: 
  
 (e) All signs and outdoor lighting shall be placed in such a manner so as not to interfere or confuse traffic or present any hazard to traffic. 
  
Recreational Vehicles 
  
 No recreational vehicles shall be used for any permanent dwelling purposes unless placed within a recreational vehicle park; permanent dwelling purposes shall be a period of time that exceeds seventy-two (72) hours.  (amended by Ordinance No. 281, 8/21/85) 
  
 Parking or storing unoccupied recreational vehicles shall be allowed in any zoning district, upon private property with the owner’s consent.  (amended by Ordinance No. 281, 8/21/85) 
  
 A repairman who operates a licensed business in Benson must acquire a permit from the Zoning Administrator for a self-contained vehicle to be lived in for up to five (5) days while the vehicle is undergoing emergency repairs.  (amended by Ordinance No. 281, 8/21/85) 
  
 No parking of recreational vehicles shall be allowed in City parks overnight or between the hours of 11:00 p.m.  and 5:00 a.m.  without a special events permit approved by the City Council.  (amended by Ordinance 281, 8/21/85) 
  
 Parking of an occupied recreational vehicle may be permitted in any zoning district provided that: 
  
 (a) The recreational vehicle is fully self-contained or the occupants have full access to approved sanitary facilities.  (amended by Ordinance No. 281, 8/21/85) 
  
 (b) The term of stay is limited to seventy-two (72) hours for outdoor sales and special events.  The term of stay is limited to thirty (30) days for private guests classified as non-business uses.  (amended by Ordinance No. 281, 8/21/85) 
  
 (c) The vehicle is parked upon the property of a consenting landowner and does not interfere with the adjoining landowner’s use or enjoyment of their property.  (amended by Ordinance No. 281 8/21/85) 
  
 (d) The landowner does not charge or receive any monetary remuneration.  (amended by Ordinance No. 281, 8/21/85) 
  
 Violations of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor subject to the penalties of Ordinance 261, Section 2 of the City Code.  (amended by Ordinance No. 281, 8/21/85) 
  
Education and Recreational Buildings and Uses 
  
 Schools, colleges, churches, public libraries, public museums, public art galleries, municipal recreational buildings, playgrounds, parks, and fraternal uses, as well as public utilities to service the district as necessary within the limits of the City of Benson, are subject to Zoning Commission approval. 
  
 No gasoline filling stations, automobile repair shop, public garages, or parking lots shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles within thirty (30) feet of a residential zone, nor shall any part of gasoline filling station, public garage or automobile repair shop be within fifty (50) feet of the grounds of any school, public playground, church, hospital, sanitarium, public library or in situations for dependents or children. 
  
Residential Districts - Yards, Height, and Accessory Structure Restrictions 
  
 (a) In the case of corner lots the administrative official shall determine the front yard, however the side yard must still meet the corner lot setback requirement as shown in Table one, (amended by Ordinance No.354 12/6/93). 
  
(1) At least one (1) front yard shall be provided having the full depth required in the district. 
  
(2) No other front yard on such lot shall have less than half the full depth required for that district. 
  
 (b) Detached accessory buildings located on the rear one-third of the lot may be erected within four (4) feet of the property line, also provided further, that when a carport is attached to the principal building it may be erected within five (5) feet of the property line.  But the carport so placed must be retained as an open shelter. 
  
 (c) In all classes of residential districts, there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet in depth measured from the principal building. 
  
 (d) Maximum building height in all residential districts: 
  
                    (1) Residential Buildings - Two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is greater. 
  
                    (2) Accessory Buildings - Fifteen (15) feet above grade. 
  
 (e) It is the intent of these regulations that all yard setbacks be measured from the property line. 
  
Uses Permitted Upon Application (deleted by Ordinance No. 431) 
  
  
  
SECTION THIRTEEN - KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK AND PETS     
  
 Horses, burros, donkeys and mules are permitted within the City of Benson, subject to the following provisions: 
  
 (a) There shall be a minimum of one (1) acre per one (1) animal maintained, exclusive of minimum dwelling site requirements. 
  
 (b) No animal shall be stabled any less than fifty (50) feet from any residence on the property or one hundred (100) feet from dwellings on other properties. 
  
 (c) Provided further, that all City, County and State sanitary and health regulations shall be complied with and met. 
  
 (d) No cattle, sheep, hogs, rabbits, poultry, or other livestock shall be kept or maintained on any property within the City of Benson, except in RT districts and in undeveloped areas of 160 acres or more under single ownership, and regardless of current zoning classification, (amended by Ordinance 354 12/6/93). 
  
 (e) This paragraph shall not be construed; however, as prohibiting the keeping of ordinary domestic pet animals upon property within said City. 
  
 (f) No exotic or unusual types of pet animals or reptiles shall be allowed within the City of Benson without approval of the Board of Adjustment. 
  
 (g) FFA and 4H projects may be allowed by the Board of Adjustments by appeal if they are determined not to be detrimental to the area. 
  
 Nothing in this section on livestock will be construed to permit any animals, whether permitted or not permitted within a particular zone, to run free and uncontrolled.  Any and all of such animals are subject to seizure and impoundment by the City of Benson at the expense of the owner thereof. 
  
SECTION FOURTEEN  - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 
  
General Off-Street Parking Regulations 
  
 In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities shall be provided in an amount not less than that hereinafter specified, for the parking of self-propelled motor vehicles, for the use of occupants, employees, patrons, members and clients of buildings and uses erected or established after the effective date of these regulations, and of existing buildings and uses which are extended, enlarged or changed thereafter. 
  
 Buildings and uses in existence at the effective date of these regulations shall be exempt from parking requirements hereinafter specified; provided, however, that whenever the usable floor area of such an existing building is changed, or an existing use of premises is extended, off-street parking for the increased floor area or use shall be provided in the minimum amount hereinafter specified for that kind of use. 
  
 The owner or occupant of any building or use subject to off-street parking requirements under these regulations shall not discontinue or reduce any existing required parking lot without first having established other parking space in replacement therefore, which replacement space meets all requirements of these regulations. 
  
 The use of off-street parking space as required under these regulations, for the storage of merchandise, vehicles for sale or rent, or repair of vehicles, shall be expressly prohibited. 
  
Computation of Off-Street Parking Requirements 
  
 When a principal building or use includes several different types of activities which generate different levels of parking need, according to the schedule set forth in this section, the minimum required number of off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of individual requirements for the several uses computed separately. 
  
 When used in computation of off-street parking requirements, the term “employees” shall include proprietors and administrative personnel as well as all other personnel engaged on the premises in the use of a building, structure, or lot.  The “number” of employees shall be the greatest number on duty on the premises at any one time, day or night. 
  
 When computation of parking requirements results in a fractional requirement, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less shall be disregarded, and any fraction over one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one (1) space. 
  
Measurements of Off-Street Parking Space 
  
 Every required off-street parking space except as hereinafter provided, shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a length of twenty feet, exclusive of access drives and aisles.  When used as a unit of measurement of unmarked parking lots, each required space shall constitute an area of not less than two hundred eighty (280) square feet which shall include drives and aisles. 
  
 Since two-wheel and three-wheel motor vehicles are becoming an accepted part of the transportation scene, provision is hereby made for determining the size and number of spaces allocated to this type vehicle in any parking lot.  The size of a space for parking a two-or three-wheel motor cycle shall be one-half (1/2) the size of that required herein for a conventional four-wheel vehicle, that is one hundred forty (140) square feet per space in an unmarked parking lot.  In parking lots with marked spaces, the size of the space shall be no less than four and one-half (4 1/2) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length provided these spaces are aligned in the same row with spaces of four-wheel vehicles.  If the parking spaces for motorcycles are separated from those allocated to four-wheel vehicles or not in the same line, the size of the motor cycle space shall be not less than four and one-half (4 1/2) feet in width and ten (10) feet in length.  In either case, the number of motorcycle spaces shall be counted in the total number of spaces required for an authorized use provided that not more than five- percent (5) of the total number of spaces are allocated to motorcycles. 
  
Location of Required Off-Street Parking 
  
 (a) For Residential Uses - Required off-street parking shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use it is intended to service; provided, however, that parking for cooperative or condominium-type multi-family residence may be provided in a parking lot not farther than two hundred (200) feet from the entrance to each dwelling unit it is intended to service. 
  
 (b) For Non-Residential Uses - Required off-street parking shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of the building or use it is intended to service, the distance being measured from the nearest point of the building or use to the nearest point of the parking lot; provided, however, that parking facilities for a stadium, auditorium, outdoor sports arena, or similar use may be located not farther than thirteen hundred (1,300) feet from the nearest point of such building or use. 
  
Methods of Providing Required Off-Street Parking 
  
 Required off-street parking may be provided by any one or combination of the following methods: 
  
 (a) By providing the required parking space on the same lot as the building or use being serviced. 
  
 (b) By the collective provisions of required parking for two (2) or more buildings or uses whereupon the total of such parking shall be not less than the sum of the requirements for the several buildings or uses computed separately; provided, however, that if two (2) or more of such buildings or uses have operating hours which do not overlap, the Board may grant a reduction of individual and collective requirements based upon the special circumstances involved.  A written contract for joint use of such facilities shall be executed between the parties concerned and copy filed with the Zoning Inspector. 
  
 (c) By securing the consent to use off-street parking facilities under another ownership which is not otherwise used during the principal operating hours of the building or use in question; provided, however, that consent shall be in written form and a copy filed with the Zoning Inspector. 
  
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking 
  
 The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for buildings, structures and uses shall be determined according to the schedule herein set forth.  For use not specifically listed, requirements shall be the same as those for the most similar use listed.  Multiple uses will be additive. 
  
 .01 Single and multi-family  1 1/2 per dwelling unit 
  
 .02 Boarding houses, resident  1 per dwelling unit plus 1 
                 clubs, hotels and motels               per guest room or suite 
                                                                       plus 1 per 3 employees 
  
 .03 Mobile home and recreation-  1 1/2 per mobile home or re- 
                 al vehicle parks                             creational site plus 1 per 
                                                                      2 employees 
  
 .04 Hospitals, sanitariums,                  1 per 3 beds plus 1 per  
        convalescent homes    resident doctor plus 1 per 
        3 non-resident employees 
  
 .05 Medical and dental    3 per doctor plus 1 per 2  
                 offices and clinics                          employees 
  
  .06 Mortuaries, funeral parlors   1 per 3 chapel seats plus 1 
                                                                           per funeral vehicle 
  
 .07 Churches, theaters                          1 per 4 seats plus 1 per 3 
           auditoriums, assembly halls          employees 
                    meeting rooms, community 
                    centers, libraries, civic 
                    clubs, museums, stadiums, 
                    outdoor sports arenas 
  
 .08 Bowling alleys                                5 per alley plus 1 per 3  
                     employees 
  
 .09 Office and public                             1 per 200 square feet of  
                    administration buildings,                 usable floor area 
          planned neighborhood, 
                     shopping centers, retail 
                     establishments, not else- 
                   where listed 
  
 .10 Restaurants, night clubs,                  1 per 4 seats or 1 per 100 
                   bars                                                   square feet of usable floor 
                                                                             area (whichever is greater) 
                                                                             plus 1 per 3 employees 
  
 11. Filling stations, beauty                      1 per service bay or service  
                   shops, barber shops                           chair plus 1 per 2 employees 
  
 .12 banks, savings and loan                     2 per teller window plus 1 per 
         agencies                                            2 employees 
  
     .13 Primary and middle                            1 per 2 employees 
                   schools, and wholesale,  
                   industrial, manufacturing 
                   establishments 
  
 .14 High schools, trade schools                1 per 10 students plus 1 per 
              employee 
  
 .15 Drive-in food or drink                         1 per 150 square feet of 
                    places where food is                           usable floor area plus 1 per 
                    consumed on the premises                  3 employees 
  
 .16 Furniture and appliance                       1 per 500 square feet of 
        stores, household equipment               usable floor area for the 
                   and apparel, repair services                 first 5,000 square feet; 
        auto and machinery sales                     thereafter, 1 per 1,000 square 
                                                                              feet of usable floor area 
  
 .17 Auto and machinery repair                   2 per service bay plus 1 per  
        shops                                                     employee  
  
 .18 Outdoor sales areas           1 per 200 square feet of site 
                                       display space and customer circulation area 
                
  
 .19 Recreation, outdoor,                             1 per 200 square feet of site 
                   except as provided                                where customers circulate, 
                   elsewhere                                              participate in, or watch 
                                                                                 recreation 
  
 .20 Racquetball, handball,           2 per court 
                   squash and tennis courts 
  
 .21 Golf Courses                                       5 per hole 
  
 .22 Roller skating rinks                              1 per 150 square feet of 
                                                                                 usable floor area and 1 per 
                                                                                 3 employees 
  
 .23 Miniature golf courses                         1 per hole 
  
 .24 Manufactured Home, New Car 
       Sales, Used Car Sales          1 per 100 sq. ft. of sales building 
  (added by Ordinance No. 431) 
 
 .25 Studio           1 per 200 sq. ft. of useable floor area 
   (added by Ordinance No. 574) 
 
Parking Lot Placement Regulations 
  
 Setback from a Street - Where a parking lot abuts a residential district across a street, a three-foot opaque obstruction to the lights from the parking automobiles must be provided between the parking lot and the street line.  This may be by the use of a masonry wall or earth berm or depressed grade or any other method that achieves the same purpose.  Where a parking lot abuts a residential district on the same side of a street and in the same block, no part of the parking lot shall be closer to the street line than the minimum required front setback for residential properties in the same block.  Regardless of the district in which it is located, every part of a parking lot shall be set back from every lot line a sufficient distance to insure that no part of any parked vehicle will project over any lot line. 
  
 Setback from an Interior Lot Line - Where a parking lot abuts a residential district along its interior side lot line, and is not separated there from by an alley, no part of the parking lot shall be closer than three (3) feet to said lot line. 
  
 Rear Setback - Where a parking lot abuts a residential district along its rear lot line and is not separated there from by an alley, no part of the parking lot shall be closer than three (3) feet to said lot line.  Where the rear lot line is contiguous to an alley, no set back is required. 
  
 Access to Parking from an Alley - Any parking lot may use an abutting alley for direct access to parking spaces; provided that the full width of the alley is dedicated to the public and fully improved with a hard, all-weather, dust-free surface, properly drained to prevent impoundment of surface water. 
  
 Access to Parking from a Street - Access to a parking lot from a street shall be limited to driveways and there shall be no direct access to any off-street parking space from a street. 
  
 Ingress and Egress - no entrance or exit to a parking lot shall be located closer to an abutting residential district than fifteen (15) feet. 
  
 Lanes and Aisles - Lanes and aisles in parking lots shall be as follows: 
  
(a) Between two rows of parking spaces oriented perpendicular to the lane or aisle, the minimum width of the lane or aisle shall be twenty-four (24) feet. 
  
(b) Between two rows of angled parking, the minimum width of the lane or aisle 
       shall be twenty (20) feet. 
  
(c)   Between one row of perpendicular parking and one row of angled parking, the minimum width of the lane or aisle shall be twenty (20) feet. 
  
(d)  Between one row of perpendicular parking and a curb, building, or other structure, the minimum width of the lane or aisle shall be twenty (20) feet. 
  
(d)  Between one row of angled parking and a curb, building or other structure, the width of the lane or aisle shall be twenty (20) feet. 


 
Required Improvements and Maintenance 
  
 Surfacing and Drainage - Every parking lot shall be paved with asphaltic concrete or Portland Cement Concrete, or a durable chip and seal that meets City standards and properly drained to prevent impoundment of surface water.  Every parking lot shall be subject to approval by the Street Superintendent and parking lots approved for a chip and seal finish shall conform to the requirements provided for in Section 301, subgrade preparation, and Section 330, chip and seal, (2 applications) of the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, sponsored by the Maricopa Association of Governments, commonly referred to as the MAG Spec’s.  Existing parking lots may be granted an annual exception by the Zoning Administrator, provided that the lot is stabilized and maintained to acceptable standards so that neither a hazard or nuisance is created.  (amended by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
 
 Screening - Where the interior side lot line or rear lot line of a parking lot, located in business or industrial districts, abuts a residential district and is not separated therefrom by an alley, a solid, unpierced, masonry screen wall not less than five (5) feet in height above grade shall be erected abutting the lot line; provided, however, that in no case shall a screen wall extend closer to a street line than the minimum required set back for residential properties in the same block. 
 Landscaping - The area between the street line and the parking lot shall be suitably landscaped and maintained by the owner or operator of the parking lot. 
 
 Lighting - Parking lots used during hours of darkness shall be lighted.  The overall height of lighting fixtures shall not exceed twenty-seven (27) feet above grade, including base, and fixtures shall be so constructed and arranged to reflect light away from any adjacent residential district.  Lighting less than thirteen (13) feet and six (6) inches will be protected against vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
 
 Any parking lot existing at the effective date of these regulations shall, within one (1) year from said date, be brought into conformance with all provisions of this section of these regulations. 
  
Off-Street Loading Requirements 
  
 In all zoning districts, for every building or part thereof, erected or enlarged after the effective date of these regulations, which is occupied or to be occupied by a manufacturing plant, storage warehouse, wholesale establishment, retail establishment, freight terminal, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, mortuary, or similar use requiring receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by motor truck, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same premises as the building or use, adequate off-street loading space meeting the minimum requirements hereinafter specified.  Loading space as hereinafter required shall not be considered as satisfying requirements for off-street parking space. 
  
 Schedule of Loading Space Requirements - 
  
 Total Floor Area of Number of Loading Spaces 
                   Building                                                       Required 
  
  1,000-10,000 square feet                                                  1 
           10,000-30,000 square feet                                                  2 
           30,000-50-000 square feet                                                  3 
           For each additional 100,000 
                square feet                                                                      1 additional 
  
 Location of Loading Space - Required off-street loading space may occupy all or any part of a required rear yard, except as provided elsewhere in these regulations, and may be partially or entirely enclosed within a building.  Where a side yard abuts an alley in a non-residential district, loading space may be located in that side yard. 
  
 Use of Alley for Maneuvering Space - Where a building or use in a non-residential district requiring off-street loading space abuts an alley, such alley may be used for maneuvering space for loading and unloading spaces; providing, however, that no alley abutting any residential district may be so used. 
  
 Measurement of Loading Space - Every required off-street loading space shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet, a minimum length of forty-five (45) feet and a minimum height of fourteen (14) feet, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space. 
  
Plans Required for Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces 
  
 Plans shall be submitted to and approved by the Zoning Inspector showing how the required parking and loading spaces are to be arrange in the area provided for the purpose.  Such plans shall show access streets, alleys and drives, location of all points of Ingress and egress, parking spaces, loading spaces, aisles and maneuvering space, and location and design of all screen walls, landscaping and lighting.  Before issuance of a Zoning Compliance Certificate, the Zoning Inspector may obtain the approval of the Public Works Director.   
  
  
  
  
  
SECTION FIFTEEN - SIGN REGULATIONS (ADOPTED BY Ord. 330 ON 12/18/89) 
  
Intent 
 Signs are herein regulated in the interests of promoting traffic safety, safeguarding the public, facilitating police and fire protection, and protecting the character of the district in which they are located.  These regulations are designed to promote the effectiveness of signs, and to prevent their over-concentration, improper placement, and excessive height, bulk and area.  In general, it is intended that signs in commercial areas be of such design to facilitate recognition of the wares and services provided, but signs of a activities are prohibited.  The degree of restriction decreases from R-1 to I-2. 
  
Definitions 
  
 Sign - Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but excluding any flag, badge or insignia of any government or government agency, or of any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar organization.  See figure below. 
  
 Sign, Accessory - A basic category of signs which direct attention to a business, profession or activity conducted on the premises on which the sign is located, including: 
  
 (a) Bulletin Board - A wall or ground sign announcing activities of a permitted educational, governmental or recreation area. 
  
 (b) Contractors’ Sign - A wall or ground sign designating the name of persons or firms engaged in construction or repair on the premises. 
  
 (c) Developers’ Sign - A wall or ground sign designating the use which will occupy the premises at some future date. 
  
 (d) Home Occupation Sign - A wall sign identifying a permitted home occupation on the premises. 
  
 (e) Identification Sign - A wall, ground or roof sign identifying the permitted principal use(s), but which bears no advertising or message other than the name, year established, street number and kind of business or activity conducted on the premises. 
  
 (f) Name Plate Sign - A wall or ground sign identifying the name and address of the occupant of the premises. 
  
 (g) Real Estate Sign  - A wall or ground sign advertising the premises for lease, rent or sale. 
  
 (h) Subdivision Development Sign - A wall or ground sign advertising the sale of properties in a subdivision. 
  
 (i) Utility Sign  - A wall or ground sign listing parking regulations or marking the entrance or exit to a parking lot or other permitted accessory use. 
  
Sign, Awning - Any sign painted on or attached to an awning. 
  
Sign, Ground - Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure. 
  
Sign, Non-Accessory - A basic category of signs which direct attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or other activity or thing, not exclusively related to the premises on which the sign is located.  Three special categories of non- accessory signs are: 
  
 (a) Billboard - a large non-accessory sign typically owned and erected by a sign company and located on major arterial streets and highways. 
  
 (b) Directional - a sign directing or informing the public as to the location of publicly-owned facilities; historical or scenic points of interest; educational, charitable or religious institutions; hospitals or sanitariums; and major business districts. 
  
 (c) Logo - a small non-accessory sign permitted and sponsored by The Arizona Department of Transportation under the provisions of the right-of-way Encroachment Laws to advertise specific motorists’ services bypassed by the interstate highway. 
  
Sign, Pole - A sign that is mounted on a free-standing pole so that the bottom edge of the sign is eight (8) feet or more above. 
  
Sign, Political - A sign supporting the candidacy of any candidate for office or urging action on any other matter on the ballot of primary, general, or special elections.  
  
Sign, Portable - Any free-standing sign that is not permanently affixed to the ground, a structure or a building, but does not include soda, newspaper or snack machines. 
  
Sign, Projecting - A sign which is attached to a building or structure and extends beyond the wall of the building or line of the structure more than twelve (12) inches. 
  
Sign, Roof  - A sign which extends above the walls and is supported by the roof of a building. 
  
Temporary Sign - A sign that is displayed no longer than thirty (30) days. 
  
Sign Vehicle – A vehicle not currently licensed for highway travel will be considered the same as a ground sign when any sign advertising a business is painted on, displayed on or attached to the vehicle.  (added by Ordinance No. 431) 
  
Sign, Wall - A flat sign placed against or attached to an exterior front, side or rear wall of a building, including signs placed parallel to and extending not more than twelve (12) inches horizontally out from the wall of a building. 
  
Sign, Window - A sign painted on or attached to the window glass or other signs mounted on the inside of the window. 
  
General 
  
 (a) This section pertains to all signs in all districts. 
  
 (b) Unless otherwise noted, all signs will be constructed and maintained in accordance with the UNIFORM SIGN CODE, the UNIFORM BUILDING CODE and the NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE as adopted by City Council. 
  
 (c) No part of any sign shall be erected within or project over any part of a public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way, except as hereinafter provided for by these regulations. 
  
 (d) Every sign and its supporting structure shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind load of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of area. 
  
 (e) No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
  
 (f) No sign shall be erected or maintained at or near any intersection of streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of its position, shape, color, or illumination, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with an authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or with any device mounted on a police or fire protection vehicle; or which makes use of the words “STOP”, ‘DANGER’,  or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
  
 (g) No sign shall be erected or painted upon or attached to any tree, rock or other natural feature, or to any fence post or utility pole.  Hazardous warning or identification signs may be attached to utility structures. 
  
 (h) Every illuminated sign shall be so placed as to prevent any glare or reflection from being cast on any adjoining residential district, or any beam or ray of light from being directed at any portion of a public street or highway in such a manner as to create a distraction or visual hazard. 
  
 (i) The regulations in this Article shall not apply to tablets of metals, stone, or other incombustible material when built into or attached to the walls of a building or structure. 
  
 (j) Directional Signs, as herein defined, may be permitted in any district subject to the following requirements: 
  
(1) Such signs shall be located along a State or Federal highway or an arterial street not more than one-quarter of a mile (1,320 feet) from the intersection of turnoff ramp or roadway providing direct access from said State or Federal highway or arterial street to the facility, institution or business district to which the public is being directed. 
  
(2) Such signs shall be permitted only upon approval by the Building Official of the size, design and precise location of each individual sign, and written approval of the land owner. 
  
 (k) Other sign regulations notwithstanding, these regulations shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict the erection and lighting of Christmas displays during the Christmas season. 
  
 (l) The Building Official may, upon receipt of application and proof of need, approve an extension of removal time for subdivision development, business, and contractors’ signs, provided that such extension shall not exceed one year beyond the removal date otherwise required by these regulations. 
  
 (m) City-Sponsored gatepost signs marking entrances to the City or signs to its parts shall be permitted as required. 
  
 (n) Banners, non-governmental flag, and pennants and other devices set in motion by the wind shall be limited to one square foot of banner, flag, pennant or other devices set in motion by the wind per one hundred (100) square foot of lot.  No single banner, non-governmental flag, pennant, or other device set in motion by the wind may exceed fifty (50) square feet.  Larger than fifty (50) square foot single banners, flags, pennants, or other devices in motion by the wind may be allowed if the applicant obtains and approved comprehensive sign plan from the PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION.  (amended by Ordinance 449 8/19/02) 
  
 (o) Flashing, intermittent, rotating, animated; beacon or similar illuminated and audible signs are not permitted except as provided under the exemption section. 
  
 (p) Permits are required for all signs except those specifically exempted under the Sign Permit section. 
  
 (q) Signage authorizations are not transferable either in whole or in part from one building frontage or business to another. 
  
 (r) On buildings having more than one street frontage, the maximum allowable square footage of on-site signs is permitted for each street frontage. 
  
Measurement of Signs (amended by Ordinance 449 8/19/02) 
  
  
(a) The area of signs composed of a letter or individual letters, without an integral background, shall be computed by measuring the sum of the squared-off area of individual letters. 
  
(b) For all other types of signs, the measurement used to calculate the size of the sign shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign; provided, however, that such perimeter shall not enclose any structural elements located outside the limits of the sign and not forming an integral part of the display. 
  
(c) The area of double-faced signs shall be calculated only on one side if the square footage of each side is the same, the message is the same, and the basis of the sign does not exceed a thirty (30) degree angle of separation between the two sides.  
  
(d) The total square footage of all face surfaces of a spherical or multi-faced sign shall be computed by measuring the sum of the squared-off area of individual letters of all face surfaces and any portion of the face surface that is an integral part of the display.  
  
Residential 
  
 (a) Signs as hereinafter provided may be erected in residential districts. 
  
 (b) Real Estate Signs - Non-illuminated wall or ground signs advertising the premises for lease, rent or sale are permitted as follows: For properties one (1) acre and less, no such sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in area and is limited to one (1) sign per property.  For properties greater than one (1) acre, but less than forty (40) acres, one sign is permitted for each street frontage and no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.  For properties in excess of forty (40) acres, one sign is permitted for each street frontage and no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) feet in area.  For properties in excess of forty (40) acres, one sign is permitted for each street frontage and no such sign shall exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area.  In all cases, no sign shall be placed closer than ten (10) feet to the property line.  Such signs shall be removed with ten (10) days. Subsequent to the leasing, rental or sale of the property.  No permit is required for real estate signs, (amended by Ordinance. No 354 12/6/97). 
  
 (c) Development Signs - Three (3) non-illuminated signs, none of which exceeds sixty-four (64) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height for a development less than twenty (20) acres or ninety six (96) square feet in area and twelve (12) feet in height for a development greater than twenty (20) acres are permitted, provided that such signs shall be located no less than one hundred (100) feet to any adjoining residential private property; and further provided that all such signs shall be removed from the premises when ninety percent (90%) of the lots or properties in the development property have been sold, (amended by Ordinance. No 354 12/6/97). 
  
 (d) Subdivision Name Signs - Permanent non-illuminated ground signs containing only the name of the subdivision; one such sign on each side of any entrance to a subdivision; subject to the approval of design, size and location by the Commission. 
  
 (e) Utility Signs - One illuminated or non-illuminated sign at each entrance or exit to a subdivision, mobile home park, or RV park, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area per sign. 
  
 (f) Roof Top, Projecting, and Commercial Non-accessory Signs - are prohibited in all residential districts. 
  
 (g) Contractors’ Sign - One non-illuminated sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area per contractor or sub-contractor listed, nor exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in aggregate area; provided, however, that each such sign shall be removed from the premises within twenty (20) days subsequent to completion of such construction or repair. 
  
 (h) Home Occupation Signs - Shall not exceed two (2) square feet. 
  
 (i) Apartment Complexes, Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks - One (1) non-illuminated sign per street frontage; not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet each is permitted. 
  
 (j) Bulletin Boards - may be illuminated and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
  
 (k) Ground Sign - No ground sign shall be placed nearer than two (2) feet to any building or other sign; no ground sign shall exceed six (6) feet in height above grade; no part of any ground sign shall extend nearer a street line than one-half the minimum required setback for the property on which it is located. 
  
Business 
  
 Introduction 
  
 (a) Benson has two (2) distinct types of business districts: General Business    (B-2) and Neighborhood Business (B-1). 
  
 (b) For the purpose of this section, Highway 80, Highway 90, 4th Street and that portion of Ocotillo between 4th street and Interstate 10 are established as the primary business corridors of Benson.  Additionally, that portion of 4th Street from Ocotillo, east to County Road and Ocotillo Street are further established as the Downtown General Business District. 
  
 (c) For the purposes of this section, a building frontage must be at least twenty (20) feet wide. 
  
General Sign Regulations for All Business Districts 
  
 (a) An Identification Sign is permitted when multiple businesses operate from a single location.  One such identification sign is permitted for each street frontage.  The intent of this provision is to provide a list of separate license businesses operating from a single building or from a business center.  Three (3) square feet of signage is permitted for each individual business and this signage is not counted against the total signage authorization for each business.  Identification signs described above may be ground, wall or projecting type signs; however, ground signs shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above grade. 
  
 (b) Window Signs, whether permanent or temporary, are permitted and do not count against the total signage authorization. 
  
 (c) Portable Signs that do not pose a safety hazard, as determined by the Building Inspector, are permitted provided that: 
  
  (1) Only one (1) portable sign per building frontage is allowed. 
  
  (2) Sign is no larger than 2 feet wide and 3 feet high. 
  
  (3) Sign is attached to the ground or building to restrict movement. 
  
(4) In areas where a public sidewalk abuts the building frontage, the portable sign must be located tight against the building. 
  
            (d) Wall Signs - No portion of a wall sign may extend above the top of the wall. 
  
 (e) Ground and Pole Signs - Ground signs are limited to a maximum height of twenty (20) feet above grade and pole signs are limited to a maximum height of thirty (30) feet above grade, except as provided in exemption section. 
  
 (f) Roof Signs are permitted provided they do not extend above the highest peak of the roof.  Buildings with flat roofs are therefore not permitted roof signs.  See figure below. 
  
 (g) Projecting Signs - no portion of a projecting sign may extend above the highest point of a building frontage. 
  
 (h) One Non-Accessory Sign for each business, except home occupations, may be permitted for a period up to one year upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.  Additionally, the following conditions must be met (amended by Ordinance 339. 4/15/97) 
  
(1) Non-accessory signs can be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet to each other. 
  
         (2) Written authorization from the landowner is provided. 
  
(3) Non-accessory signs shall be limited to a maximum of twenty (20) square feet. 
  
                    (4) Non-accessory signs are not deducted from the total signage authorization. 
  
 (i) Artistic Murals - see exemption section. 
  
            (j) Real Estate Signs - Non-illuminated wall or ground signs advertising the premises for lease, rent or sale are permitted provided that no such sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, nor shall any such sign be placed closer than ten (10) feet to any adjoining lot or closer than twenty (20) feet to any street corner.  Real estate signs are limited to one sign per each lot or parcel.  Such days subsequent to the leasing, rental, or sale of the property. 
  
 (k) Developers’ Signs - One (1) non-illuminated sign advertising the use that will occupy the premises not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area is permitted.  Signs shall not be placed closer than ten (10) feet to an adjoining lot or closer than twenty (20) feet to the property line.  Such signs shall be removed from the premises within twenty (20) days subsequent to the occupancy of the premises. 
  
 (l) Contractors’ Signs - One (1) non-illuminated sign, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area per contractor or sub-contractor listed is permitted, provided that each sign shall be removed from the premises within twenty  (20) days subsequent to completion of such construction or repair. 
  
B-1 Business Districts - One (1) or more roof, wall, ground, pole or projecting signs are permitted for each building frontage, however, no ground sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.  All businesses having a building frontage are authorized fifty (50) square feet of signage.  Additional signage authorization may be permitted based upon building frontage or property frontage as shown below.  One (1) square foot of signage 
is permitted for each one (1) linear foot of building frontage or one (1) square foot of signage is permitted for each five (5) linear feet of property frontage, not to exceed an aggregate of seventy-five (75) square feet.  Multiple, separately licensed businesses sharing a building frontage must also share the signage authorization. 
  
B-2 Business Districts 
  
 (a) One (1) or more wall, roof, ground, pole or projecting signs are permitted for each building frontage, however no ground sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet. 
  
 (b) All businesses having a building frontage are authorized seventy-five (75) square feet of signage.  Additional signage authorization may be permitted based upon building frontage, property frontage and location within the B-2 districts as shown below: 
  
         (1) For businesses located in the Downtown General Business District, two (2) square feet of signage is permitted for each one (1) linear foot of building frontage or two (2) square feet of signage is permitted for each five (5) linear feet of property frontage, not to exceed an aggregate of one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
  
                   (2) For businesses not located in the Downtown General Business District, additional signage is permitted based on the higher traffic speeds encountered in those areas.  Signage in these B-2 areas is permitted as follows: two and one-half (2 1/2) square feet of signage for each one (1) linear foot of building frontage or two and one-half (2 1/2) square feet of signage for each five (5) linear feet of property frontage, not to exceed an aggregate of two hundred (200) square feet of signage. 
  
 (c) Multiple, separately licensed businesses sharing a building frontage must also share the signage authorization. 
  
 (d) All businesses with frontages on the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT) right-of-ways must also be aware of State laws governing signage.  An extract of ADOT sign permits regulations is at the figure below. 
  
General Notes 
  
1. A permit is required for all encroaching overhanging signs and awnings. These signs and awnings are permitted in curbed urban sections for on premise advertising. 

2. No advertising signs are allowed on any intersects or rural highway rights of way. Signs on frontage roads within highway R/W in urban areas are permitted by this standard. 

3. Signs with words “Stop”, “Slowdown”, etc. or signs similar in shape or color to official traffic signs are not permitted. 

4. Lengths of signs and awnings my vary as shown except where City or County ordinances provide smaller maximums. 

5. 5  Illuminated signs attached to a building losing the R/W are permitted as shown. 

6. An outdoor advertising permit is required for off premise signs. 

7. Ground supported or portable signs shall not be placed within any right of way areas. 


  
  
 
Industrial 
  
 (a) Because industrial districts are located at the fringes of the city and increased set backs of buildings can be anticipated to allow employee parking lots, signage authorization are very liberal to allow ease of identification of these businesses. 
  
 (b) Roof top signs may extend above the roofline. 
  
 (c) Projecting signs may extend above the roofline. 
  
 (d) Pole signs are limited to a height of sixty (60) feet above grade. 
  
 (e) Ground signs are limited to a height of thirty (30) feet above grade. 
  
 (f) One non-accessory sign per business is permitted.  This authorization does not include the leasing of commercial billboards already existing within the City nor does it include billboards along the Interstate. 
  
 (g) All businesses located in I-1 zones are permitted one hundred (100) square feet of signage.  Additional signage may be permitted based on an authorization of three (3) square feet of signage per one (1) linear foot of building frontage or three (3) square feet of signage per five (5) linear feet of property frontage not to exceed an aggregate of three hundred (300) square feet of signage. 
  
 (h) Businesses locating in I-2 zones will be authorized signage similar to that permitted in I-1 districts, however, the actual signage authorization will be determined on a case-by-case basis during the site plan approval phase. 
  
Rural Transitional 
  
 By definition, these districts are rural residential, with certain areas having a tendency to develop into commercial properties.  Signage permitted in these areas is as stated in the Residential section until such time as rezoning occurs. 
  
Exemptions and Special Use 
  
 (a) Flashing, intermittent, rotating, animated, beacon or similar illuminated signs shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Planning and Zoning Commission to determine if the proposed sign would harmonize with the area to which it is proposed.  Consideration will be given to size, location, frequency and brightness of the proposed sign.  In no case will such signs be permitted if traffic safety could be jeopardized or a public nuisance be created.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may call upon City Police, Civic Leaders, The Public, or other Elected or Appointed Officials prior to making their decision. 
  
 (b) deleted - (amended by Ordinance No. 410. And deleted by Ordinance No. 449 8/19/02) 
  
 (c) Interstate (I-10) Signage - Notwithstanding any contrary provision contained in these regulations, there shall be permitted in all commercial and industrially zoned districts, except that area from the most western extremity of I-10, Exit 302, to the eastern most extremity of I-10, Exit 303, any sign which is located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the right-of-way of Interstate Route 10, provided said sign is no larger than seven hundred fifty (750) feet square feet, so long as said sign and the placing thereof is in conformance with the State of Arizona, Department of Transportation Outdoor Advertising control Regulations, and the State has issued a permit authorizing said sign. In calculating the area of any such sign, only the advertising display portion of said sign shall be included in determining compliance with the area limitations set forth herein above and any standards, limitations set for herein above and any standards, supporting structures, braces or accessories shall not be included in determining the sign area.  Double or multiple-faced signs shall be considered as if each surface area constituted a separate individual sign.  The existence of a State of Arizona sign permit shall not eliminate the need for a separate sign permit from the City.  (amended by Ordinance No. 309, 6/21/88 and No. 357, 3/21/94) 
  
 (d) A comprehensive Sign Plan may be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission by the developers of a proposed commercial development which shall include the location, size, height, lighting and orientation all proposed signs, in addition to any other information deemed necessary.  This sign plan may be submitted in conjunction with the required preliminary site plan for the development.  If the comprehensive sign plan is found to be acceptable, i.e. if the sign areas and densities shown on the plan are in conformity with the intent of these regulations and if such exceptions result in an improved relationship between the various parts of the plan, exceptions to the provisions of these regulations shall be granted. 
  
 (e) Murals - In order to encourage and promote a harmonious relationship between buildings and signs, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be the authority to approve signs which are designed into and are a part of an integrated architectural feature of a building or signs that are integrated into an artistic wall mural.  Such signage, if it represents less than twenty (20) percent of the total square footage of the mural, would not be deducted from the signage authorization for that building or business. 
  
 (f) Sign Theme - The owners of sixty (60) percent or more of the street frontage of properties on both sides of the street in any well-defined area may petition the Planning and Zoning Commission for the establishment of a special sign district for the purpose of creating an integrated special sign theme in the area.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on such a request.  The Commission may then approve signage where the provisions of these regulations would otherwise prohibit such signs. 
  
 (g) Political Signs are exempted from all regulations contained in this article for forty-five (45) days before any Election Day and all such signs must be removed seven (7) days after any Election Day.   Successful primary candidates, whose names will appear on the general election ballot, may continue to display their political signs after the primary election, but all such signs must be removed seven (7) days after the general election. No sign shall be placed within the twenty-five (25) foot triangle of land at the corner of any intersection, otherwise know as the sign visibility triangle and no sign shall be attached to any other freestanding sign.  (amended by Ordinance 529 11/10/2008) 
  
  
Prohibited and Non-conforming Signs 
  
 (a) Signs which are obscene, hazardous to traffic, imitative of official government signs (i.e. STOP, DANGER, CAUTION, etc.) create a public nuisance, obstruct visibility, or create a hazard to the public are prohibited.  Approved signs that later become a hazard or a nuisance shall be removed. 
  
 (b) Portable signs are prohibited except as permitted in the Business section. 
  
 (c) Signs with moving parts, including banners pennants or other devices set in motion by the wind are prohibited except as permitted in Exemptions section. 
  
 (d) Non-conforming Signs 
  
(1) Permanent signs, affixed to the ground or a structure, erected prior to the effective date of this ordinance, that would be in violation of this ordinance, are non-conforming signs that have grandfathered rights.  These grandfathered rights become null and void if the sign or the sign structure is destroyed. 
  
(2) The most obvious Non-conforming signs within the Benson City Limits (as of December l989) are: all billboards on 4th Street, Ocotillo, and Highway 80, all projecting signs and roof top signs in the B-2 districts that extend above the roof line. 
  
Sign Permits, Fees, and Removal 
  
 (a) Building Permits - It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, re-erect, construct, repair, alter, relocate or maintain within the City of Benson, any sign as defined in these regulations, except as hereinafter provided, without first obtaining a building permit from the Building Inspector.  Building permits shall not be required for: 
  
  
  
  (1) Nameplate signs, 
  
  (2) Home occupation signs, 
  
  (3) Real estate, Political, Contractor, Developer signs, 
  
  (4) Non- illuminated wall signs not exceeding fifty (50) square feet, 
  
  (5) Repairs or repainting not in excess of $200.00, and 
  
  (6) Window signs. 
  
 Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by, at a minimum, a site plan, construction plans, and written consent of the landowner, if appropriate. 
  
 (c) Permit Revocable - The building Official shall have the authority to revoke any permit which has been granted when he has determined that the sign authorized by the permit has been constructed or is to be maintained in violation of the permit. 
  
 (d) Liability - The granting of a building permit shall not be deemed to be a permit for or approval of any violation of these regulations.  The provisions of these regulations shall not be construed as relieving or limiting in any way, the responsibility or liability of any person, firm, or corporation, erecting or owning any sign, or resulting from the negligence or willful acts of such person, firm or corporation or its agents, employees or workmen, in the construction, maintenance, repair or removal of any sign erected in accordance with a permit issued hereunder.  Nor shall issuance of such permit be construed as imposing upon the City or its officers or employees, any responsibility or liability by reasons of the approval of any signs, material or devices under the provisions of these regulations. 
  
 (e) Sign Permit Fees 
  
(1) For non-illuminated wall signs, not exempted above, building permit fee is established at $15.00. 
  
(2) For non-illuminated ground signs, constructed of wood and not exceeding a height of twenty (20) feet above grade, the building permit fee is established at $15.00. 
  
(3) For all other signs, the building permit fee shall be as established in the Uniform Building Code. 
  
(f)  Removal of Signs - Any sign which advertises a business no longer conducted or products no longer sold, at the location of the sign, shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building or property on which such sign is located within ten (10) days after such business has terminated.  The Building Official is hereby authorized to cause removal of such signs thirty (30) days after written notification is provided to the property owner.  All costs associated with such removal will be billed to the property owner(s). 
SECTION SIXTEEN – Removed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Removed 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION SIXTEEN A – Recreational Vehicle Parks (added by Ordinance No. 398 1/1/98) 
  
Section 16A - Recreation Vehicle Parks 
  
 16-A-1  Intent 
 16-A-2 Location 
 16-A-3 Permitted Uses 
 16-A-4 Accessory Uses 
 16-A-5 Conditional Uses 
 16-A-6 Prohibited Uses 
 16-A-7 Site Development Standards 
 16-A-8 Appendix 1 
  
Section 16-A-1  Intent 
  
The intent of this regulation is to encourage development of well planned recreational vehicle parks, and to provide minimum standards for these Parks.  These regulations govern recreational vehicle parks that offer spaces for rent, lease, or sale.  All parks must comply with the Benson Subdivision Regulations.  (amended by Ordinance No. 407 and 410.) 
  
Section 16-A-2  Location 
  
All recreational vehicle parks shall be located in B-2 zoning districts and shall comply with the City of Benson General Development Plan.  Recreational vehicle parks shall abut a major arterial or collector street. 
  
Section 16-A-3  Permitted Uses  
  
The following uses are permitted within the recreational vehicle parks: 
1. One occupied Recreational Vehicle per space, or 
2. A Manager’s quarters, to include an approved skirted manufactured home. 
3. Two Accessory uses per recreational vehicle space. 
(amended by Ordinance No 466) 
  
Section 16-A-4  Accessory Uses 
  
1.  Accessory uses for recreational vehicle or park model parks include community recreation buildings, facilities, laundry buildings, an office building, child care facilities, and other facilities designed for the benefit of the park residences. 
2.     Accessory uses for recreational vehicle park spaces include carports, ramadas, cabanas, covered patios, and storage rooms.   
3.      Accessory buildings shall not be used as sleeping quarters. 
  
Section 16-A-5  Conditional Uses 
  
1.  A boat, auto, RV, or trailer storage area, provided it is in an enclosed area or surrounded by not less than a 6 foot fence or wall, completely screened from view from all sides.  
2.  Recreational uses intended primarily for the occupants of the park.  
3.  Model sales area, provided not more than five (5) spaces are devoted to this use.  The Planning & Zoning Commission may permit an additional sales area where the park occupies more than twenty (20) acres. 
4. Convenience store. 
5. A propane station. 
6. Vehicle wash area. 
7. Other conditional uses approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission that would primarily serve the residents of the park. 
8. Dump stations.  
  
Section 16-A-6  Prohibited Uses   
    
1. Truck campers that are removed from the truck. 
2. Any retail business not for the exclusive use of the park residents.  
  
Section 16-A-7 Site Development Standards 
  
1. Minimum Park Size: five (5) acres 
2. Minimum Park Setback:  twenty feet (20’) from all City street frontages measured from the right-of-way line and 10 feet on all other sides.  The street setback areas shall be landscaped and screened with a minimum five (5) foot high decorative masonry wall.  These setback areas shall contain a minimum of one (1) tree, not less than fifteen (15) gallons, per forty (40) lineal feet of street frontage, with forty five percent (45%) vegetative cover in shrubs and groundcover on the street side of the wall.  The landscape and screening plan shall be approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
3.  Park Standards 
a. Minimum space size: fifteen hundred (1500) sq. ft. for recreational vehicle spaces and two thousand four hundred (2400) sq. ft. for park models.  
b.  Minimum common recreation area per unit: one hundred fifty (150) sq. ft. 
c.  Minimum width per space: thirty feet (30’) for each RV, forty feet (40’) for park models. 
d.  Minimum depth per space:  fifty feet (50’) for each RV, sixty feet (60’) for park models. 
e. Minimum setbacks for spaces shall be the same as for property lines in the R-3 District.  (amended by Ordinance No. 407) 
f. All park models shall be skirted with materials that will harmonize with the design and materials used on the park model. 
g. Installation permits and inspections are required for park models.  Permit fees are established by City Council. 
h. All park models shall be installed and anchored according to Section 16-A-8 Appendix 1. 
i. Detached storage buildings are permitted on each recreational vehicle space.  All storage buildings shall be located in the rear ½ of the recreational vehicle space.  Detached storage buildings shall not encroach into the required setbacks, and are subject to the fire wall requirements set in the Uniform Building Code.  
j. Accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible with the recreational vehicle or park model itself, and shall meet required set backs. 
k.  When a carport is attached to the principal building, it may be erected within five(5) feet of the space line.  The carport so placed must be retained as an open shelter.  (added by Ordinance No. 407. 
  
4. A Common Recreation Area shall be provided in recreational vehicle parks. Plans for the common recreation areas shall be submitted for approval to the Planning & Zoning Commission.   
5.  Access to all spaces shall be from the interior of the park or subdivision.   
6.  Private streets shall be a minimum paved width of twenty-four feet (24').   
7. At least one (1) parking space per rental unit space, and at least two (2) parking spaces per sales space shall be provided.  In addition, at least one (1) additional guest parking space shall be provided for each ten (10) rental spaces. 
8.The maximum height for any structure on a recreational vehicle Space shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.  
9. All structures not located on a recreational vehicle space shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the structure. 
10. All utility lines shall be placed underground within the park.  Each space shall be provided with water, sanitary sewer, and electric lines.  Telephone lines, cable TV lines, and gas lines, if installed, will also be underground.  Fire hydrants shall be installed as required by the City of Benson Regulations.  
11. All parks shall have street lighting.  
12. All parks have a minimum of two vehicular entrances.  One entrance may be kept closed to the general public, but is required to meet public safety standards for emergency ingress and egress. 
Section 16-A-8 Appendix 1 (deleted by Ordinance 466) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 SECTION SEVENTEEN – OUTDOOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS 
 
Section 1.  Intent.  It is the intent of this regulation to encourage outdoor lighting practices and lighting systems, which will minimize light pollution, light trespass, and glare thus curtailing the degradation of dark skies and protecting citizens from unwanted lighting by others. Dark skies are a natural resource for humans and animals and as such should be preserved as best as possible. Furthermore, reduction of light pollution by allowing outdoor lights to illuminate only what needs to be lit promotes a more natural environment for people and wildlife of our area, and protects individual privacy by discouraging the intrusion of light trespass, light pollution, and glare. 
 
This regulation is also intended to conserve energy and resources and maintain a safe and secure nighttime environment by encouraging efficient lighting systems that optimise visual acuity for safety reasons.  Gradual changes from light to dark and dark to light gives the eye time to safely adjust to changing lighting conditions. 
  
It is also recognized that topographic and atmospheric conditions in South-eastern Arizona are unique for optimal astronomical observation and research.  As such, observatories have been established in Cochise, Pima, and Graham counties, and the City of Benson area.  The provisions herein contained, promote the reduction of light pollution, which interferes with the successful operation of such observatories. 
 
Section 2.  Conformance with Applicable Codes. All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this Code, the Building Code, the Electrical Code, and the Sign Code of the City of Benson as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection.  
 
Section 3.  Applicability.  
 
3.1  New Uses, Buildings and Major Additions or Modifications.  
 
 3.1.1 The requirements of this Outdoor Lighting Code apply to any and all new uses and major and minor additions to land uses, developments, buildings, or structures.       
 
 3.1.2 If a major addition occurs on a property, the entire property shall comply with the requirements of this Code. For purposes of this section, the following are considered to be major additions: 
 
3.1.2.1 Additions of 25 percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or parking spaces, either with a single addition or with cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of this provision. 





 
 
3.1.2.2 A major addition constitutes any single or cumulative modification or replacement of legally installed outdoor lighting fixtures totaling 25 percent or more of the actual lumens for the property.  Where existing outdoor lighting is modified or replaced and the resulting lighting fixture has less lumen capacity than the previously existing fixture, the lumen capacity of the modified or replaced fixture shall not be included in the lumen calculations for determining a major addition.  The total of non-conforming lighting shall not be increased. 





 

3.2  Minor Additions. Additions or modifications greater than 10% but less than 25 percent to existing uses shall require the submission of a complete inventory and site plan detailing all existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on the site shall meet the requirements of this Code with regard to shielding and lamp type; the total amount of lighting after the modifications are complete shall not exceed that on the site before the modification, or that permitted by this code, whichever is larger. 

 
3.3 Change of Use. Whenever the use of any existing building, structure, or premises is changed to a new use, all outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance with this Code before the new use commences. 



 
3.4 Resumption of Use after Abandonment. If a property or use with non-conforming lighting is vacant for more than 6 months as defined in Section 4.28, then all outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance with this Code before the use is resumed. 



 
3.5 One Year Exemption. Businesses operable on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from requirements set down in 14.1.2 for major and minor additions, for a period of one year. The exemption will end exactly one year from the effective date of the ordinance. Permits issued during this one year period will be valid until the additions are completed. This exemption applies only to new major or minor additions and does not include existing structures or existing outdoor light fixtures.  



 
Section 4.  Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain words and phrases used in this Code mean the following:  
 
      Abandonment of Use.  See Use, Abandonment of (4.28) 
 
4.1 Class 1 Lighting. Color Rendition/Lumen Cap Exemption  All outdoor lighting used for, but not limited to, outdoor sales or eating areas, entrance canopies on retail buildings, assembly (mechanical) or repair areas, advertising and other signs, recreational facilities, amphitheaters and other similar applications where color rendition is important to preserve the effectiveness of the activity. Designation of lighting as Class 1 requires a finding by the City of Benson of the essential function of color rendition for the application. Lumen Cap Exemptions apply to Outdoor Recreational Facilities and Display Lots.  



 
Examples of lighting that can be used to achieve color rendition, when used in combination with other lamp types, include:  Metal Halide, Fluorescent, and Quartz Halogen. 
 
4.2 Class 2 Lighting. General Illumination for Safety and Security. All outdoor lighting used for, but not limited to, illumination for walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking lots and outdoor security where general illumination for safety or security of the grounds is the primary concern. Twenty-Four (24) hour businesses fall into this class. Safety and Security lighting is exempt from all curfew requirements. 



 
4.3 Class 3 Lighting.  Decorative Lighting. Any outdoor lighting used for decorative effects including, but not limited to, architectural illumination, flag and monument lighting, and illumination of landscaping.  



 
4.4 General Lighting. Lighting used for general illumination that does not fall under Classes 1-3. 



 
4.5 Color Rendition.  The ability of a light source to faithfully reproduce the colors seen in an object. 



 
4.6 Development Project. Any residential, commercial, industrial or mixed use subdivision plan or development plan that is submitted to the City of Benson for approval or for permit.  



 
4.7 Direct Illumination. Illumination resulting from light emitted directly from a luminaire, not light diffused through translucent signs or reflected from other surfaces such as the ground or building faces.  



 
4.8 Display Lot or Area. Outdoor areas where active nighttime sales activity is the primary business function, and where accurate color perception by customers is required. To qualify as a display lot, one of the following specific uses must occur: automobile sales, assembly lots, swap meets, airport and automobile fueling areas. Uses not on this list must be approved as a display lot use by the City of Benson. 



 
4.9 High Intensity Discharge (HID).  In a discharge lamp, the emitted energy (light) is produced by the passage of an electric current through a gas. High-intensity discharge lamps include: mercury, metal halide, low pressure sodium, fluorescent and high pressure sodium. Some such lamps have internal coatings to convert some of the ultraviolet energy emitted by the gas discharge into visual output. 



 
4.10 Glare. The sensation produced by a bright light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adjusted, causing discomfort and/or loss in visual performance visibility. 



 
4.11  Illuminance. The amount of light falling onto a surface area, measured in footcandles (lumens per square foot) or lux (lumens per square meter). For conversion purposes, 1 footcandle (fc) is equal to 10.76 lux (lx). 



 
4.12  Installed.  The attachment, or assembly fixed in place, whether or not connected to a power source, of any outdoor light fixture. 



 
4.13 Fully Shielded, Full Cut Off (FCO) Light Fixture.  A light fixture constructed, installed and maintained in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the fixture, is projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest part of the fixture. 



 
 See examples of Acceptable and Unacceptable Lighting Fixtures, page 16. 
 
4.14 Light Trespass. Stray electric light falling where it is not wanted or needed. Direct light that has its source on one site, and directly illuminates areas beyond the property boundaries. Light trespass is typically produced by stray light from unshielded or misdirected outdoor lighting, and includes glare from direct viewing, as well as “off-site spill” light. 



   
4.15 Lighting Areas. All lighting areas discussed below shall be identified based on the City of Benson Zoning Map. Lighting Areas are primarily used to define advertising sign lighting curfews and lumen caps. 



 
 4.15.1  Lighting Area E3 is an urban area with primary land uses for commercial, business, industrial activity, apartments, surrounded by suburban residential and is defined as Benson Zoning Areas: Business (B1&B2), Industrial (I1&I2), Residential  (R1,R2, R3). 
 
4.15.2 Lighting Area E2 is defined, as the balance of the City of Benson not listed as Lighting Areas E3 or E1. 
 
 4.15.3  Lighting Area E1 is an intrinsically dark area used for astronomical observations at established professional facilities, e.g. Vega Bray.  Area E1 is defined as the area 1.5  mile radius from the center point of these facilities, these facilities shall be as established by the City of Benson.   
 
 4.15.4  A property located in more than one of the Lighting Areas described under the above Sections 4.15.1 to 4.15.3 shall be considered to be only in the more restrictive Lighting Area. 
 
4.16  Lumen. The unit used to measure the actual amount of light produced by a lamp. 



 
4.17 Luminaire. The complete lighting assembly, less the support assembly.  Multiple unshielded or full cutoff lamps on a single pole or standard, shall be considered as a single unit, for purposes of determining total light output from a luminaire lighting assembly. Two or more units with lamps less than 3 feet apart shall be considered a single luminaire. 



 
4.18 Multi-class Lighting.  Any outdoor lighting used for more than one purpose, such as security and decoration, such that its use falls under the definition of more than one class, as defined for Class 1,and 2 Lighting. 



 
4.19 Net Acreage. The remaining ground area after deleting all portions for proposed and existing public streets within a development, parcel, or subdivision. 



 
4.20 Off-Site Spill.  Any combination of glare, up-light (sky glow) and/or light trespass applicable, but not limited to, structure exterior lighting, roadway/street lighting, pedestrian malls, parks, recreational facilities, outdoor display lots, parking lots, service stations, convenience stores, billboards and signage. 



 
4.21 Opaque. Opaque means that the material shall not transmit visible light. 



 
4.22 Outdoor Light fixture. An outdoor illuminating device, outdoor lighting or reflective surface, lamp or similar device, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to:  



1.   street lighting;  
2.   parking lot lighting;  
3.   building and structural lighting; 
4.   landscape lighting;  
5. recreational lighting;  


6.   billboards and other signs (advertising or otherwise); 
7.   product display area lighting;  
8.   building overhangs and open canopies;  
9. security lighting;  

10. searchlight, spotlight, flood lights, and laser lights. 


 
4.23 Outdoor Light Output, Total. The total amount of light, measured in lumens, from all outdoor light fixture lamps, is calculated as follows: 



 
4.23.1 For lamp types that vary in light output as they age (such as fluorescent and high intensity discharge lamps), the mean lumen output, as defined by the lamp manufacturer, shall be the lumen value used. 
 
4.23.2  The total light output of each outdoor light fixture shall be based on the largest lamp that the outdoor light fixture is rated to accommodate.  For the purpose of compliance with this section, the largest lamp rating for fluorescent and high intensity discharge fixtures shall be based on the installed ballast rating. 
 
4.24 Outdoor Recreation Facility. An area designed for active recreation, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to: baseball, soccer, football, golf, tennis, swimming pools, and race tracks of any sort. 



 
4.25 Person. Any individual, tenant, lessee, owner, or any commercial entity including but not limited to: firm, business, partnership, joint venture or corporation. 



 
4.26 Sky Glow. The undesirable and unnecessary emission of light ray, directly or indirectly, into the night sky. 



 
4.27 Temporary Lighting. Lighting which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance and which will not be used for more than one thirty (30) day period within a calendar year, with one thirty (30) day extension. Temporary lighting is intended for uses that by their nature are of limited duration, for example: holiday decorations, civic events, or construction projects. 



 
4.28 Use, Abandonment of. The relinquishment of a property, or the cessation of a use or activity by the owner or tenant for a period of six months, excluding temporary or short term interruptions for the purpose of remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility. A use shall be deemed abandoned when such use is suspended as evidenced by the cessation of activities or conditions that constitute the principal use of the property. 



 
4.29 Curfew.  A time established for listed lighting systems to be automatically extinguished.  



 
Section 5.  Total Outdoor Light Output and Shielding Requirements. The table in this section gives requirements of the total light output permitted per acre for the different lighting areas and the fixture shielding requirements. These requirements shall be met for all lighting installations subject to this code. 
 
  SEE TABLE   5.1, page 7, ( Maximum Total Outdoor Light Output Requirements) 
 
5.1 Total Outdoor Light Output. Total outdoor light output shall not exceed the lumen limits given in Table 5. 1. In the table, Total means the sum of shielded and unshielded light. 



 
5.1.1 For determining compliance with Section 5.1, the total lumens is the sum of the following: 




 
   5.1.1.1 One hundred percent of the lumens from outdoor light fixtures installed on grade, on poles, and installed on the top or sides of buildings or other structures.  
 
  5.1.1.2 Fifty percent of the lumens from underwater light fixtures unless the fixture is aimed at an angle of less than 45 degrees above the horizontal, in which case the calculated lumens is calculated at 10 percent of the rated lumens.           
 
 5.1.2 Outdoor lighting fixtures shall not be counted in determining the total light output when they are full cut-off light fixtures installed under canopies, building overhangs, or roof eaves. 
  
5.2 All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described in Section 4. Definitions, number 4.13 -  Fully Shielded, Full Cut Off (FCO).  
 
5.3 In the shielding requirements of Section 5.1, all light fixtures on the residential side of commercial property adjacent to residential property shall be full cutoff and shall be a maximum of 10 feet above grade at the property line and no higher than a line rising 20 degrees above the 10 feet until 100 feet from the property line. All outdoor lighting within one mounting height, (mounting height = the distance from grade to the top of the lighting fixture), of residential areas shall have internal house-side shields. In addition, all residential and commercial luminaries shall be full cutoff within 25 feet of adjacent residential property lines. 
 
5.4 Multi-class lighting must conform to the shielding and timing restrictions, if any, which apply to the most restrictive class. 
 
5.5 If the unshielded lumens requirements of Table 5.1 cannot be met, due to a lack of available appropriately shielded lighting fixtures, applicants may apply for a wavier for a maximum of one 60-watt lighting fixture and four 40-watt lighting fixtures per residence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5.1  Maximum Total Outdoor Light Output Requirements 
LUMEN CAPS:  MEAN LUMENS PER NET ACRE (SECTION: 4.18) 
 NOTE:  1,700 LUMENS IS THE APPROXIMATE EQUIVALENT OF A 100 WATT INCANDESCENT BULB 
(Exact Lumen equivalency depends on type of lamp and manufacturer) 
 

 
 
  
Lighting Area  (Defined in Section 4) 
 

 
 
 
 
  
E3 
Primary land use: commercial, business, industrial, new residential & apartment surrounded by suburban residential 
Benson Zoning 
Business (B1&B2) 
Industrial (I1&I2) 
Residential  (R1,R2, R3) 
  
E2 
Rural residential, 
Agricultural & Rural Transitional 
 
Benson Zoning 
Rural Transitional (RT) 
  
E1 
Intrinsically dark areas used for astronomical observation 
 
1.5 mile radius around Vega Bray observatory 
 
 
Commercial and Industrial - Option   11, 2 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
All lighting must be Full Cut Off 
  
300,000 
  
65,000 
  
 25,000 
 
 
Commercial and Industrial - Option 2 1, 2  Full Cut Off for most Lighting 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Total   (Full Cut Off plus unshielded) 
  
200,000 
  
50,000 
  
 12,500 
 
 
Limit on unshielded component 
  
12,000 
  
 6,000 
  
 3,000 
 
 
All Residential Zoning 3 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Total  (Full Cut Off plus unshielded) 
  
55,000 
  
 24,000 
  
 12,000 
 
 
Limit on unshielded component 
  
12,000 
  
 6,000 
  
 3,000 
 

 
Notes to Table 5.1:   
1.  Commercial and Industrial Use – choose Option 1 or 2 for the entire project. 
2.  This refers to all land-use zoning classifications for multiple family uses, commercial, and industrial sites. 
3.   This refers to all residential land-use zoning, including all densities and types of housing, such as single family detached and duplexes. 
4.  In addition to the lumen caps given in the table above, the maximum illumination level under any canopy in Lighting Area E3 shall not exceed 110 lumens per square foot, in Area E2 shall not exceed 55 lumens per square foot and in Area E1 shall not exceed 30 lumens per square foot. 
5.  FCO flood or spot lamps shall be aimed no higher than 45 degrees to the horizontal (half-way between straight down and straight to the side) when the source is visible from any adjacent residential property or roadway.  
6. Seasonal decorations using unshielded low-wattage incandescent lamps (not exceeding 7 watts) shall be allowed from Thanksgiving to January 15th. 

7. All Class 1 &3  lighting shall be extinguished between 11:00 p.m. (or when the business closes, whichever is later) and sunrise.  

8. Commercial use unshielded fixtures (not FCO) shall not exceed 1,700 lumens each (equivalent to a 100 watt incandescent lamp).   

9. For residential uses, any lamp type with output of 1,000 lumens or more shall be fully shielded.  

10. Mean lumens- after 40% of the rated hours of a light fixture has burned out. 


Section 6.  Outdoor Advertising Signs. 
 
6.1   External illumination for on-site signs shall conform to all provisions of this Code. In  
 particular, such lighting shall be treated as Class 1 lighting and shall conform to the lamp  
 source, shielding restrictions, and lumen caps of Section 5. 
 
6.2  Electrical illumination of outdoor advertising off-site signs (billboards) is prohibited, except that the use of lighting fixtures legally installed in Areas E2 and E3 prior to the effective date of this code may continue, provided such fixtures are mounted on the top of the sign structure, shall not be illuminated between the hours 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, and comply with all other provisions of the code. 
 
6.3 Internally illuminated signs:  Outdoor internally illuminated signs must be constructed with an opaque or dark-colored background and translucent text and symbols. (Neon signs shall be treated as internally illuminated signs for the purpose of this Code. Neon lighting extending beyond the area considered to be the sign area, shall be considered Class 3 decorative lighting). Internally illuminated signs with an opaque or dark-colored background and lighter text and symbols are not subject to the curfew.  



 
 Outdoor internally-illuminated advertising signs shall not be counted towards the lumen  cap and shielding requirements described in Sections 5.1 and 5.2  
 
 
Section 7. Illuminated Advertising Sign Curfews 
 
7.1  Illumination for all advertising signs, both externally-illuminated and internally- illuminated, shall be turned off at the curfew times listed in Table 7.1, or when the business activities cease, whichever is later. The means of controlling the specific “off” curfew shall be by a 24 hour timing devices that includes stand-by power to maintain the time and program for a minimum of 6 (six) hours.  
 
 
Table 7.1  Illuminated Advertising Sign Curfews 
 

 
Lighting Area 
 
  
E3 
Primary land use: commercial, business, industrial, new residential & apartment surrounded by suburban residential 
Benson Zoning 
Business (B1&B2) 
Industrial (I1&I2) 
Residential  (R1,R2, R3) 
  
E2 
Rural residential, 
Agricultural & Rural Transitional 
 
Benson Zoning 
Rural Transitional (RT) 
  
E1 
Intrinsically dark areas used for astronomical observation 
 
1.5 mile radius around Vega Bray observatory 
 
 
 Commercial and Industrial Zoning or   *Land Use   
  
12 a.m. 
  
11 p.m. 
  
not allowed 
 
 
All Residential Zoning or  
*Land Use  
  
11 p.m. 
  
10 p.m. 
  
not allowed 
 

 
Note to Table 7.1:   *Land Use refers to the predominant use of land within 300 meters (or 1000 feet) of the parcel on which the sign is located. 
Section 8.  Special Uses - Sports Facility and Display Lot Curfews 
 
8.1 Recreational Facilities. 



 
 8.1.1 All site lighting not directly associated with the athletic playing areas shall conform to the lighting standards described in this ordinance including, but not limited to, the lamp type and shielding requirements of Section 5.2 and the lumens per acre limits of Table 5. 1. 
 
 8.1.2 Lighting for athletic fields, courts or tracks shall be considered Class 1 (Color Rendition), and shall be exempt from the lumens per acre limits of Table 5. 1. All such lighting shall utilize full cutoff luminaries that are installed in a fashion that maintains the full cutoff characteristics unless certified by a registered engineer that such shielding is impractical. Every such lighting system design shall be certified by a registered engineer as conforming to all applicable restrictions of this ordinance. Where full cutoff fixtures are not utilized, acceptable luminaries shall include those which: 
 
 8.1.2.1 Are provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers and installed so as to limit direct upward light to less than 5 percent of the total lumens exiting from the installed fixtures and minimize offsite light trespass, and; 
 
  8.1.2.2 Are installed and maintained with minimum aiming angles of 25 degrees downward from the horizontal. Said aiming angle shall be measured from the axis of the luminaries maximum beam candlepower as certified by independent testing agency. 
 
 8.1.3 All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity before the curfew listed in Section 8.1. Illumination of the playing field, court or track shall be permitted after the curfew only to conclude a scheduled event that was unable to be completed before the curfew due to unusual circumstances. No recreational lighting is permitted in area E1. The means of controlling the specific “off” curfew shall be by a 24 hour timing device that includes stand-by power to maintain the time and program for a minimum of 6 (six) hours.  Timing devices for Recreational Facilities may include a manual override setting which returns to the established program within 2 (two) hours.  
 
 
 
Table 8.1 Sports Facility and Display Lot Curfews 
 

 
Lighting Area 
 

 
E3 
Primary land use: commercial, business, industrial, new residential & apartment surrounded by suburban residential 
Benson Zoning 
Business (B1&B2) 
Industrial (I1&I2) 
Residential  (R1,R2, R3) 
  
E2 
Rural residential, 
Agricultural & Rural Transitional 
 
Benson Zoning 
Rural Transitional (RT) 
  
E1 
Intrinsically dark areas used for astronomical observation 
 
1.5 mile radius around Vega Bray observatory 
 
 
12 a.m. 
  
11 p.m. 
  
not allowed. 
 

 
8.2  Outdoor Display Lots. Businesses where the primary function is: automobile sales, assembly lots, swap meets, airport and automobile fueling areas. Uses not on this list must be approved as a display lot use by the City of Benson.  
 
 8.2.1 All site lighting not directly associated with the display areas shall conform to the lighting standards described in this ordinance, including, but not limited to, the lamp type and shielding requirements of Section 5.2 and the lumens per acre limits of Table 5. 1. 
  
8.2.2 Lighting for display lots shall be considered Class 1 (Color Rendition) and is exempt from the lumens per acre limits of Table 5. 1.  All such lighting shall utilize full cutoff luminaries that are installed in a fashion that maintains the full cutoff characteristics. A registered lighting or electrical engineer shall certify that every lighting system design conforms to all applicable restrictions of this ordinance.  
 
 8.2.3  Class 2 display lot security and safety lighting is exempt from the turn-off requirements of Table 8.1. 
 
Section 9. General Requirements. 
 
9.1 Light Trespass and Glare. 



  
9.1.1 All fixtures and lamps shall be located, installed, directed, shielded, and maintained to avoid light trespass and to minimize direct light and /or glare on neighboring properties and roadways. 
 
9.1.2  For a receiving residential site, the level of light trespass, shall not exceed 0.2 footcandles as measured with the meter’s sensor perpendicular to the light source at a height of five feet above the ground and located five feet inside the receiving property line.  For a receiving non-residential site, the level of light trespass shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles under the same parameters. 
 
9.2 Height. 



9.2.1 Residential Sites:  The overall height of lighting fixtures (including the base) shall not exceed 20 feet above ground level. 
 
 9.2.2 Non-Residential Sites: Except as provided herein for specific uses, the overall height of lighting fixtures (including the base) on all non-residential sites shall not exceed 35 feet above ground level. 
 
9.3 Lighting Types and General Shielding Requirements. 



 
 9.3.1 All light fixtures required to be full cut off (FCO) shall be installed and maintained in a fashion that maintains the full cut off characteristics. 
 
 9.3.2 Low Pressure Sodium lamps are the preferred lamp type for minimizing adverse effects on astronomical observations. 
 
 9.3.3 All wall-pack type lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded. 
 
 9.3.4 Twenty-four (24) hour commercial properties must be Full Cut Off. 
 
9.4 Flagpole/Flag Illumination. 



 
 9.4.1 All upward-directed lighting is prohibited, except lighting of one flagpole. The light shall be focused on the flag and shall not exceed 2000 lumens. Off-site glare and light trespass shall be eliminated by the use of proper shielding.  
 
 9.4.2. Flags that include advertising, business trademarks or symbols, or other forms of commercial communication may not be illuminated at any time. 
 
 9.5 Shielding Requirements for Residential Uses.   Lighting for multiple household dwellings (other than a duplex) is not considered residential and must use standards for Class 1 or Class 2 lighting.  
 
9.5.1 For residential uses, any lamp type with output of 1,000 lumens or more shall be fully shielded. 
 
Section 10. Submission of Plans and Evidence of Compliance with this Code. 
 
10.1 Submission Contents. The applicant for any permit required by any provision of the laws of this jurisdiction in connection with proposed work involving outdoor lighting fixtures shall  
 submit  (as part of the application for permit) evidence that the proposed work will comply with this Code. Upon application for the required permit, the submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of which may be part of, or in addition to, the information required elsewhere in the laws of this jurisdiction.  
 
 10.1.1  All submission packets must specify which Outdoor Lighting Option (Table 5.1) will be adhered to for the entire project. 
 
10.1.2 plans indicating the location on the premises, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices; 




 
10.1.3  description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and drawings (including sections where required); 




 
 10.1.4 photometric data, furnished by the manufacturer, or similar data showing the angle of cutoff or light emissions. Photometric data need not be submitted when the full cutoff performance of the fixture is obvious to the reviewing official. 
 
 10.1.5 When a submittal includes a statement by a registered design professional where the existing site lighting is being modified less than 10%, it shall not be necessary to comply with paragraph 7 below in this Section. 
 
 10.1.6 When submittal includes a statement by a registered design professional that the design is in accordance with this code, the requirements of sub-paragraphs  10.1.3 and 3  10.1.4 above shall not apply. 
 
 10.1.7 A schedule on the plans to confirm compliance with the Lumen Cap per Table 5.1, which includes the following information: 
 
  10.1.7.1 Each exterior luminaries type with the mean lumens for that type, the quantity of each type and whether the luminaries are FCO or unshielded. 
 
  10.1.7.2 The total of FCO and unshielded mean lumens for the parcel. 
 
   10.1.7.3 A statement of the Lighting Area, the size of the permitted parcel, and the maximum allowed FCO and unshielded mean lumens (Table 5.1). 
 
10.2 Additional Submission. The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be  
 sufficiently complete to enable the plans examiner to readily determine whether compliance  
 with the requirements of this Code will be secured. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, by reason of the nature or configuration of the devices, 
 fixtures, or lamps proposed, the applicant must submit any additional certified reports of tests necessary to prove compliance. These tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory. 
 
10.3 Subdivision Plat Certification. If any subdivision proposes to have installed street or  
 other common or public area outdoor lighting, the final plat shall contain a statement certifying that the applicable provisions of this Code will be adhered to. 
 
10.4 Lamp or Fixture Substitution. Should any outdoor light fixture or the type of light source therein be changed after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the building official for his/her approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this code, and the change request must be received prior to substitution. 
 
Section 11.  Approved Materials and Methods of Construction or Installation/Operation. The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material, or method of installation or operation prescribed by this Code. 
 
Sections 12 Prohibitions 
 
12.1  Mercury Vapor Lamps. The installation, sale, offer for sale, lease or purchase of any mercury vapor lamp for use as outdoor lighting is prohibited. The use of legal, non-conforming mercury vapor light fixtures (installed prior to 1983) is prohibited after January 1, 2011, as per ARS 49-1104. 



 
12.2. Certain Other Fixtures and Lamps. The installation, sale, offering for sale, lease or purchase of any low pressure sodium, high pressure sodium, metal halide, fluorescent, quartz or incandescent outdoor lighting fixture or lamp the use of which does not comply with Table 5.1 is prohibited. 
 
12.3 Laser Source Light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when projected above the horizontal is prohibited. 
 
12.4 Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited. 
 
Section   13. Temporary Exemption. 
 
13.1  Request; Renewal; Information Required. Any person may submit a written request for a temporary exemption. A temporary exemption shall contain the following information:  
 
     1.  specific exemption or exemptions requested;  
    2.  type and use of outdoor light fixture involved; 
3. duration of time of the requested exemption; 


    4.  type of lamp and lamp lumens;  
    5.  total wattage of lamp or lamps and number of lamps to be used;  
   6.  proposed location on premises of the outdoor light fixture(s);  
    7.  previous temporary exemptions, if any, and addresses of premises there under;  
   8.  physical size of outdoor light fixture(s) and type of shielding provided;  
     9.  such other data and information as may be required by the building official. 
 
13.2 Approval; Duration. The City of Benson shall have five business days from the date of submission of the request for temporary exemption to act, in writing, on the request. If  
 approved, the exemption shall be valid for not more than thirty days from the date of issuance of the approval. The approval shall be renewable at the discretion of the building official upon a consideration of all the circumstances. Each such renewed exemption shall be valid for not more than thirty additional days.  
 
13.3 Disapproval; Appeal. If the request for temporary exemption is disapproved, the person making the request will have the appeal rights provided in Section 15.2 (Appeals). 
 
Section 14. Other Exemptions. 
 
14.1 Nonconformance: 
 
  14.1.1 Bottom-mounted outdoor advertising sign lighting is prohibited.  
 
 14.1.2 All other outdoor light fixtures lawfully installed prior to and operable on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from all requirements until one or more of the following triggering mechanisms occur: 
Triggering Mechanism   Code Requirement 
 
 
New Use 
  
Complete compliance with Code for entire structure or property and a site plan showing existing and proposed lighting. 
 
 
Addition of more than 25 percent of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or parking spaces. 
  
Complete compliance with Code for entire structure or property and a site plan showing existing and proposed lighting. 
 
 
Addition of more than 10 percent, but less than 25 percent additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or parking spaces. 
  
Complete lighting plan submission to City showing existing and proposed lighting with all new construction to be built in compliance with this Code. 
 
 
 
Addition of less than 10 percent additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or parking spaces. 
 
  
Site plan showing proposing lighting and compliance with this Code for proposed changes. 
 

 
 There shall be no change in use or lamp type, or any replacement or structural alteration made, without conforming to all applicable requirements of this Code. Further, if the property is abandoned for more than six months, or if there is a change in use of the property, the provisions of this code will apply when the abandonment ceases. 
 
14.1.3  Outdoor internally and externally illuminated signs lawfully installed prior to and operable on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from all requirements until one of the following triggering mechanisms occurs: sign replacement, sign relocation, structural alteration or restoration after abandonment.  
 
14.2 Neon lighting is exempt from the requirements of Section 5.1 and 5.2 when used for sign lighting, but not for other uses.  Natural gas lighting is exempt from all requirements of this code. 
 
Section 15.  Alternate Materials and Methods of Construction, Installation/Operation and Appeals. 
 
15.1 The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the use of any design, materials or method of installation or operation not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided any such alternate has been approved. The building official may approve any such proposed alternate provided he finds that it: 
 
 15.1.1 provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this Code; and 
 
 15.1.2 is otherwise satisfactory or complies with the intent of this Code; and 
 
 15.1.3 has been designed or approved by a registered lighting or electrical engineer and is supported by calculations showing that the design submitted meets the intent of the code. This section shall not have the effect of waiving the lumen caps and shielding requirements of Sections 5.1 and 5.2. 
 
15.2 Appeals. Any person substantially aggrieved by any decision of the building official/planning director made in administration of this Code has the right and responsibilities of appeal to the City of Benson of this jurisdiction. 
 
Section  16. Law Governing Conflicts.  Where any provision of federal, state, county, or city statutes, codes, or laws conflicts with any provision of this code, the most restrictive shall govern unless otherwise regulated by law. 
 
Section  17.  Enforcement and Penalty.  
17.1   Violations not exclusive; each day a separate violation 
  
17.1.1 Violations of this article are in addition to any other violation enumerated within the City ordinances or this code and in no way limit the penalties, actions, or abatement procedures which may be taken by the City for any violation of this article which is also a violation of any other ordinance or code provision of the City or Arizona Revised Statues. 
  
17.1.2 Each day any violation of any provision of this article or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this article continues may constitute a separate offense. 




 
17.2  Enforcement jurisdiction of city.  
  
17.2.1 Jurisdiction of all proceedings to enforce the provisions of this article, whether civil or criminal, shall be in the City of Benson Magistrate Court. 
 
17.3 Civil violations; citation and enforcement procedure 
  
17.3.1 Civil Citation - Authority to Issue:  The Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee may issue a civil citation pursuant to this article.  
  
17.3.2 Civil Violation - Commencement of Action: 
  
17.3.2.1 A civil violation may be commenced by issuance of a citation in the City of Benson Magistrate Court by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee Appearance by Defendant:  
  
17.3.2.2  The defendant shall, within ten (10) days of the issuance of the complaint, appear in person or through his or her attorney before the City Magistrate and shall either admit or deny the allegations contained in the complaint. If the defendant admits the allegation, the City Magistrate may enter judgment against the defendant and impose a civil sanction for the violation.  If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation, the City Magistrate shall set the matter for hearing.  
  
17.3.3 Default Judgment: If a person served with a citation fails to appear on or before the time directed to appear or at the time set for hearing by the City Magistrate, the allegations in the citation shall be deemed admitted and the City Magistrate may enter judgment for the City and impose a civil sanction. 
 
 17.3.4  Civil/criminal penalties; restitution. 
  
17.3.4.1 Civil penalties. Upon finding a person responsible for a civil violation of this article, the City Magistrate may impose a civil sanction of not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00. The City Magistrate may suspend the imposition of the civil sanction if at the time of sentencing, he or she finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the violation the defendant was found responsible for has now been corrected, and that the defendant is now in compliance with this article. In that event, the City Magistrate may suspend all or part of the fine. 
 
Section  18. Severability. If any of the provisions of this Chapter or the application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Chapter that can be given effect, and to this end, the provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable. 
 SECTION EIGHTEEN - NON-CONFORMING USE 
  
INTENT 
  
 If, at the time of enactment of these regulations, or any amendment thereto, or any amendment resulting from an annexation of territory to the incorporated limits of the City of Benson, any lot, structure, or use of a lot or structure existed in a lawful manner but does not conform to the requirements or restrictions of these regulations applicable to the zoning district in which such lot, or structure is situated, then such lot, structure, or uses shall be deemed to be a non-conforming use and may continue in the manner and to the extent that it existed or was being used at the time of enactment of these regulations, or subsequent amendments thereto, and to such changes in the non-conforming status as further provided by this section. 
  
Substitution 
  
 A non-conforming use of a building or lot shall not be changed to another non-conforming use whatsoever.  Changes in use shall be made only to a conforming use. 
  
Discontinuance 
  
 In the event that any non-conforming use of property or building or portion thereof is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, any future use of the property or building shall be in conformity with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations. 
  
Damage 
  
 In the event that a non-conforming use or building is damaged by fire, flood, or other calamity or act of nature, to an extent less than fifty (50%) percent of its appraised value at the time of damage, said use or building may be resumed or restored, provided that such resumption or restoration is completed within a period of six (6) months from the date of destruction.  Such resumption or restoration shall not increase the floor space devoted to the non-conforming use over that which existed at the time damage occurred.  If such resumption or restoration does not take place in the manner and time period specified above, further use or building shall therefore conform to all provisions of these Zoning Regulations. 
  
 Should any such structure be destroyed to an extent greater than (50%) percent of its appraised value, it shall not be re-constructed except in conforming with the provisions of these regulations. 
SECTION NINETEEN - AMENDMENTS 
  
Failure to Act 
  
 In the event the Commission fails to take action within sixty (60) days of the proper filing of the formal request, such failure to act shall be deemed as approval or as affirmative recommendation and the Council may proceed to act upon the matter.  (amended by Ordinance No. 267, passed 7/18/84). 
  
Amendments 
  
 The Council may from time to time, upon the recommendation of the Commission, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and zoning district boundaries herein established.  Request to amend these regulations may be initiated by the Council or the Commission on their own motion, or be petitioned as hereinafter set forth.  In every case of adverse action of the Commission in connection with a matter which the Council submits to the Commission for approval, disapproval, or recommendation, the Commission shall communicate its reasons to the Council which shall have the power to overrule the adverse action of the Commission. 
  
Applications for Amendment 
  
 Applications for amendment of theses regulations shall be made to the Commission on a standard form provided for the purpose and shall be signed by a real property owner in the area for which amendment is applied for.  In the event that the application includes other property in addition to that owned by the applicant, there shall be filed by the applicant on a form provided therefore, a petition in favor of the request signed by the real property owners representing at least seventy-five (75%) percent of the land area to be included in the application.  Such petition shall be filed and checked for authenticity of ownership before the application is accepted by the Commission.  In the event that the application includes properties owned by more than one owner, the Clerk shall notify, by certified mail, all property owners included in the area proposed for change.  Such notice shall be postmarked not later than fifteen (15) days prior to any Commission hearing of the application. 
  
Public Hearing of Applications 
  
 Every application for amendment of these regulations shall be considered by the Commission at a public hearing.  A second public hearing shall be held before the Council if there is an objection, a request for a public hearing or other protest.  Notice of the time, date and place of the hearing(s), including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and including a general description of the area affected, shall be given at least fifteen (15) days before each hearing.  Each notice of public hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published or circulated in Benson, and posted at City Hall, the Public Library, and at such other locations in the municipality, that the Clerk may deem necessary or advisable.  (amended by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
 In proceedings involving rezoning of land which abuts other municipalities or unincorporated areas of the county or a combination thereof, copies of the notice of public hearing shall be transmitted to the planning agency of such governmental unit abutting such land. 
  
 After public hearing, the Commission shall render its decision in the form of written recommendation to the Council.  The recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation and be transmitted to the Council in such form and manner as may be specified by the Council. 
  
 Notice of the time, date and place of hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided for the giving of notice of the hearing by the Commission as specified in applications for Amendment” and “Public Hearing of Applications”, if applicable above. 
  
Appeal From Denial of Amendment 
  
 In the event that the request for amendment is denied by the Commission, the applicant may, within seven (7) days from the date of the Commission hearing, file an appeal to the Council.  Upon receipt of such an appeal, the Council shall arrange to hold a public hearing upon due notice and posting as heretofore specified. 
  
Protest Against Amendments 
  
 If the owners of twenty (20%) percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in a proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear of any side thereof extending one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the street frontage of the opposite lots, file a protest in writing against a proposed amendment, it shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the Council.  If any members of the Council are unable to vote on such a question because of a conflict of interest, then the required number of votes for passage of the question shall be three-fourths (3/4) of the remaining membership of the Council, provided that such required number of votes shall in no event be less than a majority of the full membership of the Council. 
  
Reconsideration of Denied Amendments 
  
 In the event that an application for amendment is denied by the Council, or is withdrawn after the Commission hearing, the Commission shall not reconsider the application not consider another application for the same amendment of these regulations as it applies to the same property described in the original application of any part thereof, for a period of not less than one (1) year from the date of such denial action. 
  
  
  
  
Fees 
  
 A filing fee of fifty (50) dollars shall accompany each application for amendment of these regulations, and no part of such fee shall be returnable.  All advertising costs will be paid by the applicant, including legal notices of public hearing before the Commission and Council and publication of the amending ordinance, if any. 
  
 The Zoning Administrator shall approve format and content prior to publication. 
  
 The petitioner(s) shall at or before the time of hearing present a publisher’s Certificate of Publication. 
  
 The petitioner(s) is also responsible for the costs of notifying by certified mail the necessary property owners as specified herein and furnishing verification. 
  
 Payment of the filing fee shall be waived when the application is initiated by the Council or the Commission and when the applicant is acting as an official or an agent of the City, the County, the State, or the Federal Governments. 
  
Exceptions 
  
 In the event that a request for amendment concerns only the amendment of general requirements of permitted uses; no petitions or posting shall be required; provided, however, that all other provisions of these regulations shall be complied with. 
  
Significance of Approval 
  
 Approval of rezoning constitutes authorization for the development of property under granted zoning.  Rezoning approval is valid for a period of twelve (12) months from date, and may be extended one for six (6) months at the discretion of the Commission.  If approval expired prior to substantial development upon rezoned property, the Commission may, at their discretion, recommend reverse zoning by the Council to zoning classification before rezoning was granted. 
  
Zoning Reversion 
  
 The Council may approve a change of zone conditioned upon a schedule for development of the specific use or uses for which rezoning is requested.  If at the expiration of this period, the property has not been improved for the use for which it was conditionally approved, it shall revert to its former zoning classification without Council action. 
SECTION TWENTY - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
  
Administrative Official 
  
 The provisions of these regulations shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator, who may employ the assistance of such other persons as the Council may approve or direct. 
  
 (a) Duties of the Zoning Administrator - The Zoning Administrator shall: 
  
(1) Receive and examine applications for and issue building permits, Zoning Compliance Certificates, and Occupancy Permits. 
  
(2) Coordinate inspections of buildings, structures and premises as are necessary to enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
  
  (3) Carry out the orders authorized by these regulations. 
  
 (b) Limitations of the Zoning Administrator - Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Administrator: 
  
(1) Grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order, or regulation contained in these regulations. 
  
  (2) Make changes in or vary the terms of these regulations. 
  
(3) Refuse to issue a building permit, Zoning Compliance Certificate or Occupancy Permit when the applicant has complied with all provisions of this and other applicable ordinances and codes, despite any violations of contracts, covenants, or private agreements which may result therefrom. 
  
Zoning Compliance Certificates Required 
  
 It shall be unlawful to commence any excavation for, or erection, alteration, enlargement, extension, or moving, of any building or structure, or part thereof, or to change or extend the use of any lot, or to change the use or type of occupancy of any building or structure, except as may be provided elsewhere in these regulations, until a Zoning Compliance Certificate for such work has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.  Accessory buildings or structures, when proposed for erection at the same time as a main building and included on the application therefore shall not require a separate certificate.  No Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, except after written order by the Board. 
  
 (a) Applications for Zoning Compliance Certificates - All applications for Zoning Compliance Certificates shall be filed on standard forms provided for the purpose, and shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following such other information as the Building Inspector may require to ensure conformity of the proposed building or structure with the provisions of these regulations. 
  
(1) Dimensions area and shape of the property to be built upon, and the boundaries of all lots or parcels under separate ownership contained therein. 
  
(2) Dimensions, size, height and use of any buildings or structures already existing on the property, and their exact location thereon. 
  
(3) Width and alignment of all streets, alleys, and easements for public access, in or abutting the property. 
  
(4) Size and height of all buildings and structures proposed to be erected or altered, and there exact position on the property. 
  
(5) Proposed uses of buildings, structures and land, including the number of families or dwelling units, if any, the building is designed to accommodate. 
  
 (b) Issuance of Zoning Compliance Certificate - Within ten (10) days after the filing of an application for a Zoning Compliance Certificate, according to the provisions of these regulations, the Zoning Administrator shall either issue or refuse to issue same; when such permit is refused, the Zoning Administrator shall state in writing his reasons for such refusal, so informing the applicant of same and retaining a file copy of the action.  One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant marked either “APPROVED” or “DISAPPROVED’ by the Zoning Administrator and attested to by his signature.  The second copy of plans, similarly marked and signed, shall be retained in the files of the Building Inspector. 
  
Occupancy Permits 
  
 It shall be unlawful to use or occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of, any building or structure, or any change or extension of a use of land for which a Zoning Compliance Certificate has not been issued therefore by the Zoning Administrator. 
  
 (a) Issuance of Occupancy Permits - Within ten (10) days after having received notice that the building, structure or premises, or part thereof, has been completed and is ready for use or occupancy, the Building Inspector shall make a final inspection thereof to determine whether construction has been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.  If he finds construction in conformity, he shall issue an Occupancy Permit therefore. 
  
 (b) Temporary Occupancy Permits - The Building Inspector may issue a Temporary Occupancy Permit for a part of a building, structure, or use of prior to completion of the entire building, structure or use, provided that such part has been completed in conformity with all provisions of these regulations and is considered safe and suitable for use or occupancy.  A Temporary Occupancy Permit shall remain in force until the entire building, structure or use has been completed and inspected, and an Occupancy Permit has been issued therefor. 
  
Inspection Fees 
  
 Before a Zoning Compliance Certificate or Occupancy Permit shall be issued, the inspection fee therefore shall have been paid to the Clerk.  Inspection fees shall be determined according to a schedule established by the Council, and posted in the office of the Building Inspector.  
  
SECTION TWENTY A-VIOLATIONS OF THESE REGULATIONS   
(added by Ordinance 537  9/14/2009) 
 
In additional to all other remedies available at law, the Zoning Administrator is authorized and directed to enforce these regulations by issuing and prosecuting civil and/or criminal citations for violations of these regulations pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 9-2-11 through 9-2-18 and 9-2-23 and 9-2-24 of the City Code, which sections are hereby made applicable to the Zoning Regulations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION TWENTY-ONE - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
  
  
Creation, Membership, Terms of Office, and Vacancies 
  
 Creation - The Board of Adjustment of Benson is hereby established. 
  
 Membership - The Board shall consist of five (5) members, at least three of whom shall be residents of Benson and shall be appointed by the Council. (amended by Ordinance 549 9/27/2010)  
  
 Terms of Office - The normal term of office of members of the Board shall be three (3) years.  The initial appointments of members shall be: one (1) member for one (1) year, two (2) members for two (2) years, and two (2) members for three (3) years. 
  
 Vacancies and Removal for Cause - Vacancies shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term of the member affected.  Members of the Board may be removed from office by the Council for cause upon written charges and public hearing. 
  
 A member of the Board shall not be absent from the regular meetings for more than three (3) consecutive times without an acceptable excuse.  After the absence from three (3) consecutive meetings, the remaining members of the Board shall vote to retain or recommend to the Council that the absentee member be released from his duties on the Board. 
  
Officers, Meetings, Rules and Records 
  
 Officers - The Board shall annually elect its own chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary.  The chairman, or in his absence, the vice-chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
  
 Rules of Procedure - The Board shall adopt rules as necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of these regulations. 
  
 Meetings - Regular meetings shall be held once a month on the third Monday, if needed.  If it is a holiday; then the date will be determined by the Board, and such other times, at the call of the Chairman.  A quorum shall consist of three members for the transaction of any business.  The concurring vote of not less than three members shall be necessary for all business including reversal of an order or decision of an administrative official or to decide an issue in favor of an applicant. 
  
 Records  - The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be of public record and be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
  
 
Appeals, Hearings, and Notices 
  
 Appeals - Appeals to the Board concerning interpretation or administration of these regulations may be taken by any person aggrieved, by any officer of the municipality, or by any federal, state or county agency, or school board, affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator.  Such appeals shall be filed within thirty (30) days with the Board through the Zoning Administrator and shall specify the grounds thereof.  The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board, all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
  
 Hearings - The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and reach its decision within a reasonable time.  At the hearing, the chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths and take evidence. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.  Parties to an appeal shall have the right to present their case by oral or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct such cross-examination of witnesses as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts; provided that: 
  
 (a) The submission of documentary evidence shall not, by reason of its written form, prejudice the interest of any party. 
  
 (b) The Board shall, as a matter of policy, provide for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence, and in furtherance of this policy, may limit cross-examination. 
 (amended by Ordinance 549 9/27/2010) 
Stay of Proceedings 
  
 An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in his certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property.  In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator, and on due cause shown. 
  
Powers and Duties of the Board 
  
 It shall be the duty of the Board to interpret the provisions of the Planning and Zoning Regulations and to grant special exceptions to and variances from the provisions of the Planning and Zoning Regulations, as hereinafter specified. 
  
 Interpretation - The Board shall: 
  
 (a) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of these regulations. 
  
 (b) Hear and decide all matters referred to it by the Zoning Administrator on which it is authorized to pass as prescribed by the Planning and Zoning Regulations. 
  
 (c) Render an advisory decision or opinion on any matter referred to it by the Zoning Administrator, when in his judgment, such action is necessary or desirable in carrying out the spirit and intent of these regulations. 
  
Special Exceptions - The Board shall: 
  
 (a) Hear and decide only such special exceptions on which it is specifically authorized to pass, as prescribed by these regulations. 
  
 (b) Decide those questions which are involved in determining whether a special exception should be granted. 
  
 (c) Grant special exceptions under such conditions and safeguards as are deemed appropriate under these regulations, or deny same when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of the Planning and Zoning Regulations. 
  
 (d) In granting a special exception, impose such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate to insure that the purpose and intent of these regulations will be carried out.  Failure to fulfill such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which a special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable under the penalties section of these regulations.  In determining the conditions and safeguards under which a special exception will be granted, the Board shall insure that: 
  
(1) All proposed buildings, structures, and uses will be readily accessible for fire and police protection. 
  
(2) The proposed use will not cause traffic congestion or movement which will seriously affect the character of the district in which it is proposed. 
  
(3) Sufficient space, in conformance with provisions of these regulations, will be provided for the off-street parking of all vehicles attracted to the premises. 
  
(4) A proposed building will not, by reason of its size, character, location or intended use, be essentially out of harmony with the predominant type of building or use permitted in the district. 
  
 (e) Prescribe a time limit within which the action for which a special exception is granted shall be begun, or completed, or both.  Failure to begin or complete or both, such action within the time limit prescribed, shall void the special exception. 
 
  
 (f) Grant a special exception only when and after: 
  
(1) A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of these regulations under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested. 
  
  (2) A public hearing has been held. 
  
(3) Notice of public hearing has been posted on the property in question and at the City Hall, and the owner and applicant or his agent shall have been notified by certified mail, at least fifteen (15) days in advance. 
  
(4) The Board specifically finds that it is empowered under the section of these regulations described in the application to grant the special exception, and that granting the special exception will not adversely affect the public interest. 
  
 Variances - Upon appeal in specific cases, the Board shall authorize such variances from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.  A variance shall not be granted by the Board unless and until: 
  
 (a) A written application for variance is submitted demonstrating: 
  
(1) That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved, and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
  
(2) That literal interpretation of the provisions of these regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of these regulations.   
  
(3) That the alleged hardships caused by literal interpretation of the provisions of these regulations do not result from the actions of the applicant. (amended by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
(4) That granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by these regulations to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
  
(5) That granting the variance requested will not interfere or injure the rights of other properties in the same district. 
  
 (b) A public hearing has been held. 
  
 (c) Notice of public hearing has been given in accordance with requirements set forth under “special Exceptions” (f) (3). 
  
 (d) The Board finds that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of land, building, or structure. 
  
 (e) The Board finds that granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these regulations, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
  
 In granting any variance, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with these regulations.  Failure to fulfill such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which a variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of these regulations. 
  
 No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings, in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts, shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variance. 
  
 Under no circumstances shall the board grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of these regulations in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of these regulations in said district. 
  
Decisions of the Board 
  
 In exercising its powers and duties, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Building Inspector, or grant a variance or a special exception.  The concurring vote of three (3) members shall be required in all decisions of the Board. 
  
Limitations of the Powers of the Board 
  
 Nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the Board to change the terms of these regulations, to affect changes in the Zoning map, or to add to the uses permitted in any district. 
  
 Every decision of the Board shall be based upon findings of fact, and every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of its proceedings.  The enumerated conditions required to exist on any regulations shall be construed as limitations on the power of the Board to act.  A mere finding or recitation of the enumerated conditions, unaccompanied by the findings of specific fact shall not be deemed findings of fact, and shall not be deemed in compliance with these regulations. 
  
  
  
Appeals from the Board 
  
 A person aggrieved by a decision of the Board, or a taxpayer, or municipal officer, may, at any time within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board, petition a writ of certiorari for review of the Board’s decision.  Allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the Board and for good cause shown, grant a restraining order, and on final hearing may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision reviewed. 
  
Fees and Notice of Publication 
  
 Upon filing an application or appeal, the applicant shall pay a filing fee to the City Clerk in accordance with a schedule established, and posed in the office of the Zoning Administrator.  No part of any such fee shall be returnable after an application is filed and such fee paid. 
  
 In the case of an application for a variance or special exception to more than one provision of these regulations, the filing fee shall be the total for all provisions. 
  
 The petitioner(s) shall publish a legal notice of the hearing which shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
  
  (a) Time, date and place of hearing. 
  
  (b) Legal description of property. 
  
  (c) Nature of request (variance, special exception). 
  
 The Zoning Administrator will approve format and content prior to publication. 
  
 The petitioner(s) shall at or before the time of hearing, present a Publisher’s Certificate of Publication. 
  
Deliberations of the Board 
  
 Inasmuch as the deliberations, opinions and findings of the Board in all matters which may come before it for action are similar to that of a court, the minds of its several members should remain unbiased and free to act upon the evidence and arguments submitted at the hearing, no member of this Board shall hold conversation with any person concerning the merits of any matter pending before it at any time until final action thereon, except at an open hearing of said Board and shall so advise any person unbiased and free to act upon the evidence and arguments submitted at the hearing, no member of this Board shall hold conversation with any person concerning the merits of any matter pending before it at any time until final action thereon, except at an open hearing of said Board and shall so advise any person attempting to engage in such conversation.  
  
  
SECTION TWENTY-TWO - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE 
  
 Should a section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
  
SECTION TWENTY-THREE - REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES 
  
All ordinances or part of ordinances and all resolution in conflict with these zoning regulations, or inconsistent with the provisions of these regulations, are hereby repealed. 
  
SECTION TWENTY-FOUR - HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE 
  
Definitions 
  
Alteration - Any construction or change of the exterior of a building, object, site, or structure or of an interior space designated a landmark.  For buildings, objects, or structures, alternation shall include but is not limited to, the changing of roofing or siding materials; changing, eliminating, or adding doors, door frames, windows, window frames, shutters, fences, railings, porches, balconies, swings, or other ornamentation and the changing of paint color.  Alteration shall not include general repair and maintenance. (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Building A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure.  Building may refer to a historically related complex, such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Cemetery - Any site which contains at least one burial, marked or previously marked, considered a dedicated cemetery under Arizona State Statutes, even though suffering neglect or abuse.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Construction - The act of adding an addition to a structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property, that requires a building permit.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Contributing Significance - A classification applied to a site, structure or object within a Historic District signifying that it contributes generally to the qualities that give the Historic District cultural, historic, architectural or archaeological significance as embodied in the criteria for designating a Historic District, but without being either a premier or notable representation of those qualities.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Demolition - Any act or process that partially or totally destroys a Landmark or structure within a Historic District.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Design Guideline - A specific type of design criteria approved by the Commission at the time of designation of a Landmark, Historic District, Historic Landscape District, or Urban Conservation District and to be used in conjunction with other design criteria in the ordinance in reviewing alteration, construction, removal, or demolition.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Exceptionally Significant Interior  - An interior of a structure that is a unique or exceptional representation of the qualities that give a Landmark, Historic District, or Historic Landscape District cultural, historic, architectural or archaeological significance as embodied in the criteria for designating a Landmark, Historic District, or Historic Landscape District, and which has an exceptionally high degree of integrity in interior architectural design.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Exterior Architectural Appearance - The architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to the kind, color, and texture of the building material and the type, design and character of all architectural details and elements, including, but not limited to, windows, doors, walls, roofs, overhangs, signs and yards and/or open spaces.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Historic District - An area with definable boundaries designated as a “Historic District” by the City council and in which a substantial number of the properties, sites, structures or objects have a high degree of cultural, historic, architectural, or archaeological significance and integrity, many of which may qualify as Landmarks, and which may also have within it boundaries other properties, sites, structures or objects which, while not of such cultural, historic, architectural or archaeological significance to qualify as Landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics or the significant properties, sites, structures or objects located within it.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Interior Architectural Design - The architectural character and general composition of the interior of a structure, including but not limited to room design and configuration, materials and the type, pattern and character of all architectural details and elements, including, but not limited to staircases, doors, hardware, moldings, trim, plaster work, light fixtures and wall coverings.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Landmark  - A property, site, structure, or object designated as a “Landmark” by the City Council that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its historic, cultural, architectural or archaeological significance to the City of Benson.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Non-contributing - A designation applied to a site, structure or object within a Historic District indicating that it is not a representation of the qualities that give the Historic District cultural, historic, architectural or archaeological significance as embodied in the criteria for the designating a Historic District. (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Notable significance - A classification applied to a site, structure or object within a Historic District signifying that it is notable but not necessarily an outstanding representation of the qualities that give the Historic District cultural, historic, architectural or archaeological significance as embodied in the criteria for designating a Historic District. (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Ordinary Maintenance and Repair - Regular, customary or usual care, reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building, structure of object, for the purposes of preserving said property and maintaining it in safe and sanitary condition.  (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Premier Significance - A classification applied to a site, structure or object within a Historic District signifying that it is an outstanding representation of the equalities that give the Historic District cultural, historic, architectural significance as embodied in the criteria for designating a Historic District. (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Property - Land and improvements identified as a separate lot for purposes of the subdivision and zoning regulations of the City of Benson. (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Repair - Any change that is not alteration, construction, removal or demolition. (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Structure - Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires a permanent or semi-permanent location on or in the ground, including without limitation, buildings, garages, fences, gazebos, advertising signs, billboards, antennas, satellite sending or receiving dishes, and swimming pools. (added by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90) 
  
Purpose 
  
 It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic districts is necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational, and general welfare of the public.  Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded on its past and inasmuch as Benson has many significant historic, architectural and cultural resources which constitute its heritage, this act is intended to: 
  
 (a) protect and enhance the landmarks and historic districts which represent distinctive elements of Benson’s historic, architectural, and cultural heritage; 
  
 (b) foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; 
  
 (c) protect and enhance Benson’s attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided, and 
  
 (d) ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the City. 
  
Historic Preservation Commission 
  
 There is hereby created a commission to be known as the City of Benson Historic Preservation Commission. 
  
 (a) The commission shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed, to the extent available in the community, by the City Council as follows:   
  
  Preferably at least one shall be an historian; 
  Preferably at least one shall be a licensed real estate broker; 
  Preferably at least one shall be a resident of an historic district; 
  Preferably at least one shall have demonstrated significant interest 
in and commitment to the field of historic preservation evidenced either by involvement in a local historic preservation group, employment or volunteer activity in the field of historic preservation, or other serious interest in the field; and all members, including at large members, shall have a known interest in historic preservation and architectural development within the City of Benson.  (amended by Ordinance No. 441 12/3/01) 
  
  
 (b) Commission members shall serve a term of three (3) years, and the terms shall be staggered so that at least three seats are up for reappointment each year. (amended by Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90 and Ordinance No. 441 12/3/01) 
  
 (c) The Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Commission shall be elected by and from among the members of the Commission. 
  
 (d) The responsibilities of the Commission shall include: 
  
(1) Promulgation of rules and regulations as necessary for the conduct of its business. 
  
(2) Adoption of criteria for the identification of significant historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and for the delineation of historic districts. 
  
(3) Conduct of surveys of significant historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and historic districts within the City. 
  
(4) Recommendation to the City Council of Benson the designation of identified structures or resources as landmarks and historic districts. 
  
(5) Acceptance on behalf of the City government of the donation if facade easements and development rights; the making of recommendations to the City Council Concerning the acquisition of facade easement or other interests in real property as necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance. 
  
(6) Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and architectural preservation by developing and participating in public education programs. 
  
(7) Making recommendations to the City Council concerning the utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote the preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the city. 
  
(8) Recommending acquisition of a landmark structure by the City where its preservation is essential to the purposes of this ordinance and where private preservation is not feasible. 
  
(9) Approval or disapproval of applications for certificates of appropriateness pursuant to this act. 
  
 (e) The Commission shall meet at least monthly, but meetings may be held at any time on the written request of any two of the commission members or on the call of the Chairman or the Mayor. 
  
            (f) A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of five (5) of the Commission’s members, but no less than two-thirds (2/3) of the membership may grant or deny a Certificate of Appropriateness. (amended Ordinance No. 336, 12/17/90 and Ordinance No. 441 12/3/01)  
  
Designation of Landmarks or Historic Districts 
  
 (a) The Commission may recommend to the City Council that an individual property be designated as a landmark if it: 
  
(1) Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social history of the locality, region, state or nation; or 
  
        (2) Is identified with historic personages; or 
  
                   (3) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style; or 
  
                   (4) Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly influenced an age; or 
  
(5) Because of a unique location or singular physical characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, 
  
                    (6) and the owner(s) of the property concur with the designation. 
  
 (b) The Commission may recommend to the City Council that a group of properties be designated as an historic district if it: 
  
(1) contains several properties which meet one or more of the criteria for designation of a landmark; and 
  
(2) by reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a distinct section of the City, and 
  
                    (3) the owner(s) of the properties concur with the designation. 
  
 The boundaries of each historic district designated henceforth shall be specified in detail and shall be filed, in writing, in the City Clerk’s Office for public inspection. 
  
 (c) Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by registered mail to the owner(s) of the property proposed for designation, either by the Commission or by the owner, describing the property proposed and announcing a public hearing by the Commission to consider the designation.  Where the proposed designation involves so many owners that individual notice is infeasible, notice may instead be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing.  Once the Commission has issued notice of a proposed designation, no building permits shall be issued by the building inspector until the Commission has made its decision. 
  
 (d) The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to designation of any landmark or historic district.  The Commission, owners and any interested parties may present testimony or documentary evidence at the hearing which will become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed landmark or historic district.  The record may also contain staff reports, public comments, or other evidence offered outside of the hearing. 
  
 (e) The Commission shall forward notice of each proposed property designated as a landmark and of the boundaries of each designated historic district to the City Council for final designation, and subsequently to the office of the Cochise County Clerk for recording, as appropriate. 
  
Certificate of Appropriateness for Alteration, Demolition or New Construction Affecting Landmarks or Historic Districts. 
  
 No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration, reconstruction, demolition, new construction or moving of a landmark or property within a historic district, nor shall any person make any material change in the appearance of such a property, its light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other exterior elements visible from a public street or alley which affect the appearance and cohesiveness of the historic district, without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission. 
  
Criteria for Approval of Certificate of Appropriateness 
  
 (a) In passing upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission shall not consider changes to interior spaces, unless they are open to the public, or to architectural features that are not visible from a public street or alley. 
  
        The Commission’s decision shall be based upon the following principles: 
  
(1) properties which contribute to the character of the historic district shall be retained, with their historic features altered as little as possible; 
  
       
(2) any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with its historic character, as well as with the surrounding district; and 
  
       (3) new construction shall be compatible with the district in which it is located. 
  
 (b) In applying the principle of compatibility, the Commission shall consider the following factors: 
  
(1) the general design, character and appropriateness to the property of the proposed alteration or new construction. 
  
(2) the scale of proposed alteration or new construction in relation to the property itself, surrounding properties, and the neighborhood. 
  
(3) texture materials, and color and their relation to similar features of other properties in the neighborhood. 
  
(4) visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including proportion of the property’s front facade, proportion and arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade, roof shape, and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets, including setback. 
  
(5) the importance of historic architectural or other features to the significance of the property. 
  
Certificate of Appropriateness Application Procedure 
  
 (a) Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of appropriateness the owner shall file an application for such a certificate with the Historic Preservation Commission.  The application shall contain: 
  
        (1) name, address and telephone number of applicant. 
  
                   (2) location and photographs of property. 
  
                   (3) elevation drawings of proposed changes, if available. 
  
                   (4) perspective drawings, including relationship to adjacent properties, if available. 
  
                   (5) samples of color or materials to be used. 
  
(6) where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors, a description of materials to be used, method of illumination and a plan showing the sign’s location on the property. 
  
(7) Any other information which the Commission may deem necessary in order to visualize the proposed work. 
  
 (b) No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the Historic Preservation Commission.  The certificate of appropriateness required by this act shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit that may be required by any other ordinance or the City of Benson. 
  
 (c) The Commission shall approve, deny or approve the permit with modifications within twenty-one (21) days from receipt of the completed application.  The Commission may hold a public hearing on the application at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the application to present their views. 
  
 (d) All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing.  A copy shall be sent to the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the City Clerk’s Office for public inspection.  The Commission’s decision shall state the reasons for denying or modifying any application. 
  
Hardship Criteria 
  
 (a) An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed demolition has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of hardship.  In order to prove the existence of hardship; the applicant shall establish that: 
  
(1) the property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible; 
  
(2) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; and 
         
(3) efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.   
 
(b)  An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed alteration has been denied may apply for relief on the grounds of hardship.  In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant shall establish that the property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible. 
  
Hardship Application Procedure 
  
 (a) After receiving written notification from the Commission of the denial of a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may commence the hardship process.  No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued unless the Commission makes a finding that a hardship exists. 
  
 (b) The Commission may hold a public hearing on the hardship application at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the application to present their views. 
  
 (c) The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Commission, local preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property. 
  
 (d) All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing.  A copy shall be sent to the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the City Clerk’s Office for public inspection.  The Commission’s decision shall state the reasons for granting or denying the hardship application. 
  
Enforcement 
  
 All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this ordinance shall conform to any requirements included therein.  It shall be the duty of the City Building Inspector to inspect periodically any such work to assure compliance.  In the event work is found that is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, or upon notification of such fact by the Historic Preservation Commission, the Building Inspector shall issue a stop work order and all work shall immediately cease.  No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop work order is in effect. 
  
Maintenance and Repair Required 
  
 (a) Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district which does not involve a change in design, material, color or outward appearance. 
  
 (b) No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within a historic district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the Historic Preservation Commission, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself. 
  
 (c) Examples of such deterioration include: 
  
  (1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports. 
  
  (2) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members. 
  
  (3) Deterioration of exterior chimneys. 
  
  (4) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar. 
  
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations, including broken windows or doors. 
  
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the public safety. 
  
Violations 
  
 (a) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the City Code, Ordinance No 261. 
  
 (b) Any person who demolishes, alters, constructs or permits a designated property to fall into a serious state of disrepair in violation of this ordinance shall be required to restore the property and its site to its appearance prior to the violation.  Any action to enforce this subsection shall be brought by the City Attorney.  This civil remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty. 
  
Appeals 
  
 Any person approved by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission relating to hardship or a certificate or appropriateness may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision, file a written application with the City Council for review of the decision. 
SECTION TWENTY FIVE – CITIZEN REVIEW PROCESS:  
(Section added by Ordinance No. 484, passed 2/7/05) 
 
Prior to a public hearing on any application for a rezoning of property, general plan amendment, creation of a specific plan or planned development, issuance of a conditional use permit or any zoning application the substance of which is requesting the imposition, removal or modification any zoning regulation not previously imposed, a Citizen Review Process complying with this subsection shall be conducted.  The purpose of the Citizen Review Process is to provide an opportunity for citizen involvement and public awareness regarding applications requesting rezoning of property, amendment to the general plan, adoption of specific plans or planned developments, approval of conditional use permits, applications requesting a variance and adoption of zoning code text amendments. 
 
A. Applications for rezoning, specific plans or planned developments, variances, amendments to the general plan or issuance of a conditional use permit. 


 
1. The applicant, in coordination with the Planning Department, shall establish a time, date, and place for a Citizen Review Session to provide a reasonable opportunity for the applicant, adjacent landowners, and other potentially affected citizens to discuss issues or concerns they may have with the application proposed by the applicant.  A planning staff member shall attend the meeting as an observer and shall not conduct the meeting.  The applicant shall supply the Planning Department with minutes of the Citizen Review Session and a list of all individuals in attendance.  If the staff member in attendance is not the Community Development Director, the staff member in attendance shall report the results of the Citizen Review Session and a list of all individuals in attendance to the Community Development Director.  The Community Development Director shall report the results of the Citizen Review Session to the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council at such time as they take action on the submitted application, if any. 



 
2. Written notice of the Citizen Review Session shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting and shall include the time, date and location of the Citizen Review Session and sufficient details regarding the substance of the proposed  application so as to allow citizens and other affected persons to determine how they might be affected by the proposed application. 



 
3. The applicant shall provide to the City for mailing such notice by first class mail to:   



 
a. Each property owner within 300 feet of all boundaries of the property subject to the application;  

b. All other interested parties who have requested that they be placed on a notification list maintained by the Planning Department;  

c. Adjoining municipalities sharing borders with the property subject to the application; and,  





d.   All affected school districts. 
e.  Fort Huachuca for Electronic Range Testing (SB 1387)  
 
4. In addition to the above required notification, notice of the Citizen Review Process stating the date, time and place of the Citizen Review Session and  including a general explanation of the substance of the proposed application 



shall be: 
 
(a) Published in a local newspaper distributed to residents living within the City;  

(b) Posted at the official posting locations for the City; and, 

(c) Posted on the subject property. 




 
5. Applicants shall provide a written report to the Planning Department stating the results of their Citizen Review Session at least (5) days prior to the public hearing.  The report will be provided to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council at the time their respective public hearings on the application are held.  At a minimum, the Citizens Review Session final report shall include details of the techniques the applicant used to involve the public, including but not limited to: 



 
a. Dates and locations of all Citizen Review Sessions held to discuss the application; 

b. Dates mailed and the number of mailings, to include examples of the notification letters, meeting notices, newsletter or other publications. 

c. The location of residents, property owners, and other interested parties receiving notices, newsletters or other written materials; 

d. The number of people that participate in the process; and, 

e. A summary of the concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process including the substance of the concerns, issues and problems; and, 





f.    How the concerns, issues and problems have been addressed or resolved after the Citizens Review Session. 
 
6. The Community Development Director may establish additional procedures for the Citizen Review Process as is deemed necessary to enhance public participation. 



 
B. Text Amendments to the Zoning Regulations. 


 
1. A Citizen Review Session shall be held at a work-study session of the Planning and Zoning Commission scheduled at least five (5) days prior to the public hearing for the consideration of the proposed zoning text amendment.  Landowners and other citizens potentially affected by the proposed text amendments will be invited to gather further information regarding the proposed text amendments at the Citizen Review Session and to express any issues or concerns they may have with the proposed text amendment. 



 
2. Notice of the Citizen Review Session shall be given to landowners and other citizens potentially affected by the proposed zoning text amendments at least ten (10) days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission work-study session scheduled for the Citizen Review Session regarding the proposed text amendments.  This notice shall state the date, time and place of the Citizen Review Session and shall include a general explanation of the substance of the proposed text amendment to the zoning ordinance.  The form of notice to be used will vary according to the type of text amendment proposed, and any means deemed by the City to provide the appropriate method of notice for the proposed text amendment shall be considered sufficient.  The following forms of notice shall be considered sufficient at the discretion of the Community Development Director: 



 
(a) Publication in a local newspaper distributed to residents living within the City;  

(b) Posting at the official posting locations for the City;  

(c) Posting on the City’s Web site; or 

(d) Publication on a local radio station. 




 
3. After the Citizen Review Session, the Planning and Zoning Commission may take all issues and concerns raised by landowners and other citizens potentially affected by the proposed text amendments at such session into account when it considers its recommendation to the City Council on the proposed text amendment and shall, prior to the Council’s public hearing on the proposed text amendment, report to the Council the issues and concerns raised during the Citizen Review Input and Discussion Session. 


CITY CODE
OF THE
CITY OF BENSON, ARIZONA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL ...................................................................................................... 1.1 - 1.6
1-1 How Code Designated and Cited ........................................................................ 1.1
1-2 Construction of Ordinances ................................................................................. 1.1
1-3 Definitions ............................................................................................................ 1.1
1-4 Reference to Chapters, Articles or Section: Conflicting Provisions .................... 1.3
1-5 Section Headings ................................................................................................. 1.4
1-6 Effect of Repeal ................................................................................................... 1.4
1-7 Severability of Parts of Code ............................................................................... 1.4
1-8 Penalty ................................................................................................................. 1.5
1-9 Repeal of Existing Ordinances ............................................................................ 1.5
1-10 Effective Date of Code ......................................................................................... 1.6
CHAPTER 2 MAYOR AND COUNCIL .............................................................................. 2.1 - 2.11
2-1 Council ................................................................................................................. 2.1
2-2 Mayor and Vice Mayor ......................................................................................... 2.3
2-3 Council Election ................................................................................................... 2.4
2-4 Council Procedure ............................................................................................... 2.6
2-5 Ordinances, Resolutions and Contracts .............................................................. 2.9
2-6 Legal Advice from the City Attorney ................................................................... 2.10
CHAPTER 3 ADMINISTRATION ....................................................................................... 3.1 - 3.12
3-1 Officers in General ............................................................................................... 3.1
3-2 Officers ................................................................................................................. 3.2
3-3 Council and Administration Relationships ........................................................... 3.8
3-4 Downtown Business Revitalization District Program ........................................... 3.9
3-5 Employment Background Investigation ............................................................. 3.12
CHAPTER 4 PUBLIC SAFETY ......................................................................................... 4.1 - 4.12
4-1 Police Department ............................................................................................... 4.1
4-2 Police Reserve ..................................................................................................... 4.2
4-3 Fire Department ................................................................................................... 4.3
4-4 Emergency Services .......................................................................................... 4.12
CHAPTER 5 MAGISTRATE ................................................................................................ 5.1 - 5.2
5-1 Magistrate Court Established; Jurisdiction .......................................................... 5.1
5-2 Presiding Officer .................................................................................................. 5.1
CHAPTER 6 ANIMALS ...................................................................................................... 6.1 - 6.10
6-1 General Rules and Regulations ........................................................................... 6.1
6-2 Vaccination, Licensing and Control of Dogs ........................................................ 6.4
CHAPTER 7 BUILDING ...................................................................................................... 7.1 - 7.6
7-1 Uniform Codes ..................................................................................................... 7.1
7-2 Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction ........................ 7.2
7-3 Mobile Homes/Manufactured Housing ................................................................ 7.4
7-4 Fire Prevention ................................................................................................... 7.10
CHAPTER 8 BUSINESS REGULATIONS .......................................................................... 8.1 - 8.7
8-1 Business Licenses ............................................................................................... 8.1
8-2 Liquor License Fees ............................................................................................. 8.4
8-3 Miscellaneous Business Regulations .................................................................. 8.5
8-4 Intent .................................................................................................................... 8.5
8-5 Solicitors ............................................................................................................... 8.5
CHAPTER 8A TAX CODE ......................................................................................................... 8.A1
8A-1 Adoption of Tax Code ........................................................................................ 8.A1
CHAPTER 9 HEALTH AND SANITATION ....................................................................... 9.1 - 9.25
9-1 Solid Waste Collection and Disposal ................................................................... 9.1
9-2 Public Nuisances and Property Maintenance ...................................................... 9.6
9-3 Smoking and Public Health ................................................................................ 9.20
9-4 Sale of Products Containing Ephedrine or Pseudoephedrine ........................... 9.23
CHAPTER 10 OFFENSES .............................................................................................. 10.1 - 10.6
10-1 Offenses ............................................................................................................. 10.1
CHAPTER 11 PARKS AND RECREATION ................................................................. 11.1 - 11.10
11-1 General.................................................................................................................... 1
11-2 Administration; Liability ........................................................................................... 1
11-3 Regulations Regarding Park Use ........................................................................... 2
11-4 Permits, Licenses and Reservations ...................................................................... 5
11-5 Spirituous Liquor on Park Premises ....................................................................... 8
11-6 Rental of Park Facilities and Equipment ................................................................. 8
11-7 Enforcement ............................................................................................................ 9
CHAPTER 12 TRAFFIC AND PARKING ........................................................................ 12.1 - 12.7
12-1 Traffic ................................................................................................................. 12.1
12-2 Speed Limits ...................................................................................................... 12.1
12-3 Sidewalks ........................................................................................................... 12.2
12-4 Parking ............................................................................................................... 12.3
CHAPTER 13 UTILITIES ............................................................................................... 13.1 - 13.52
13-1 Utilities Department ............................................................................................ 13.1
13-2 Gas Service ........................................................................................................ 13.3
13-3 Sewer Service .................................................................................................. 13.18
13-4 Water Service .................................................................................................. 13.37
13-5 Water and Sewer Service Availability Charges ............................................... 13.54
CHAPTER 14 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ............................................................. 14.1 - 14.20
14-1 Definitions .......................................................................................................... 14.1
14-2 General............................................................................................................... 14.2
14-3 Public Land ........................................................................................................ 14.2
14-4 Requirements ..................................................................................................... 14.3
14-5 Plats ................................................................................................................... 14.3
14-6 Drainage Planning ............................................................................................. 14.5
14-7 Street Planning ................................................................................................... 14.6
14-8 Easement Planning ............................................................................................ 14.9
14-9 Lot Planning ..................................................................................................... 14.10
14-10 Improvements .................................................................................................. 14.10
14-11 Variances ......................................................................................................... 14.19
14-12 Issuance of Building Permits ........................................................................... 14.19
CHAPTER 15 CEMETERY .............................................................................................. 15.1 - 15.3
15-1 Cemetery ............................................................................................................ 15.1
CHAPTER 16 FEES ...................................................................................................... 16.1 - 16.29
16-1 Development Impact Fees ................................................................................. 16.1
16-2 Additional Fees ................................................................................................ 16.16
CHAPTER 17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ......................................................... 17.1 - 17.16
17-1 Introduction ........................................................................................................ 17.1
17-2 Definitions .......................................................................................................... 17.2
17-3 General Provisions ............................................................................................. 17.6
17-4 Administration .................................................................................................. 17.10
17-5 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction ........................................................... 17.12
17-6 Variance Procedure ......................................................................................... 17.16
CHAPTER 18 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES .................................. 18.1 - 18.11
18-1 Reserved for Future Use.................................................................................... 18.1
18-2 Senior Citizen Advisory Board ........................................................................... 18.1
18-3 Historic Preservation Commission ..................................................................... 18.2
18-4 Parks and Recreation Commission ................................................................... 18.5
CHAPTER 19 AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS .............................................. 19.1 - 19.19
19-1 General Provisions and Definitions ................................................................... 19.1
19-2 Motor Vehicles at Airport .................................................................................... 19.7
19-3 Aircraft on Ground .............................................................................................. 19.9
19-4 Aircraft Taxiing, Landing and Takeoff .............................................................. 19.10
19-5 Aircraft Traffic Patterns .................................................................................... 19.11
19-6 Aircraft Fueling and Defueling ......................................................................... 19.12
19-7 Compliance with Applicable Fire Safety Rules ................................................ 19.13
19-8 Ultra-Light Aircraft ............................................................................................ 19.16
19-9 Violations and Penalties................................................................................... 19.17
19-10 Site Plans, Leases and Building Permits ......................................................... 19.19
CHAPTER 20 PROCUREMENT CODE .................................................................................. 1 - 26
20-1 General Provisions .................................................................................................. 5
20-2 Procurement Director Authority ............................................................................... 8
20-3 Materials Source Selection and Contract Formation .............................................. 9
20-4 Specifications ........................................................................................................ 20
20-5 Procurement of Professional Design Services and Capital Improvements ......... 21
20-6 Contract Clauses .................................................................................................. 24
CHAPTER 21 BENSON PUBLIC LIBRARY .................................................................. 21.1 – 21.4
21-1 Establishment ..................................................................................................... 21.1
21-2 Powers and Duties ............................................................................................. 21.1
21-3 Regulation of Library Use .................................................................................. 21.2
1.1
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL
ARTICLE 1-1 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Benson, Arizona,” and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the "Benson City Code”.
ARTICLE 1-2 CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES
The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the city unless such construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the council, the context of this code or the ordinances of the city.
ARTICLE 1-3 DEFINITIONS
1-3-1 General Rule Regarding Definitions
1-3-2 Specific Definitions
Section 1-3-1 General Rule Regarding Definitions
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved use of the language. Technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
Section 1-3-2 Specific Definitions
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply:
A. Acts by Agents. When an act is required to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirements shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
B. And, Or. "And" may be read "or," and "or" may be read "and," if the sense requires it.
C. City. Whenever the word "city" is used, it shall mean the City of Benson, Arizona.
D. Code. The City Code of the City of Benson, unless the context indicates otherwise.
E. Council. The city council of the City of Benson.
F. County. Cochise County, Arizona unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
G. Day. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
GENERAL
1.2
H. Daytime, Nighttime. "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
I. Department, Board, Commission, Office, Officer or Employee. Whenever any "department, board, commission, office, officer or employee" is referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the city unless the context requires otherwise.
J. Gender: Singular and Plural. Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular.
K. Joint Authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be expressly otherwise declared in the law giving the authority.
L. Keeper, Proprietor. Includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through an agent, servant or employee.
M. Manager. The word "manager" shall mean the city manager of the City of Benson, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
N. Month. A calendar month.
O. Oath. "Oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed”.
P. Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of part of such building or land.
Q. Person. Includes a corporation, company, partnership, association or society as well as a natural person.
R. Personal Property. Every species of property, except real property as defined in this section.
S. Preceding, Following. Next before and next after, respectively.
T. Property. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and personal property.
U. Public Place. Any thoroughfare, park, open space or building not privately owned or controlled.
V. Real Property. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
W. Shall, May. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
X. Shall Have Been. Includes past and future tenses.
Y. Sidewalk. “Sidewalk” means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
GENERAL
1.3
Z. Signature or Subscription by Mark. "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.
AA. State. The State of Arizona unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
BB. Street. “Street” means any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city.
CC. Tenant or Occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or part of, such building or land, either alone or with others.
DD. Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.
EE. Time: Computation. The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be excluded. When such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
FF. Time: Reasonable. In all cases where any section of this code shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.
GG. Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days.
HH. Writing. Any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless expressly provided otherwise.
II. Year. A calendar year unless otherwise provided.
ARTICLE 1-4 REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS, ARTICLES OR SECTIONS: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
1-4-1 Additional Rules of Construction
1-4-2 References to this Code
1-4-3 Conflicting Provisions
GENERAL
1.4
Section 1-4-1 Additional Rules of Construction
In addition to the rules of construction specified in Articles 1-2 and 1-3, the rules set forth in this article shall be observed in the construction of this code.
Section 1-4-2 References to this Code
All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this code unless otherwise specified.
Section 1-4-3 Conflicting Provisions
A. If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.
B. If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section that is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction is inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter.
ARTICLE 1-5 SECTION HEADINGS
Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a convenience to indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute part of the law.
ARTICLE 1-6 EFFECT OF REPEAL
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
ARTICLE 1-7 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code shall be severable, and if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.
GENERAL
1.5
ARTICLE 1-8 PENALTY
A. Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this code, except as otherwise provided in this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.
B. Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by Chapter 12 of this code constitutes a civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 4 and amendments thereto.
ARTICLE 1-9 REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES
1-9-1 Effective Date of Repeal
1-9-2 Ordinances Exempt from Repeal
Section 1-9-1 Effective Date of Repeal
All ordinances of the City of Benson except those specially exempted in this article, now in force and effect are hereby repealed effective at twelve o'clock noon on the 18th day of December, 2002, but all rights, duties and obligations created by said ordinances shall continue and exist in all respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.
Section 1-9-2 Ordinances Exempt from Repeal
The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or in any way to affect or modify:
A. Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations, dedications or zoning.
B. Any ordinance making an appropriation.
C. Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may have been authorized.
D. The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time this code becomes effective.
E. The continued existence and operation of any department, agency, commission or office heretofore legally established or held.
F. Any bond of any public officer.
G. Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed.
GENERAL
1.6
H. Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the State of Arizona, or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
ARTICLE 1-10 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE
Each section of this code as herein contained and hereby enacted shall take effect and be in force on and after twelve o'clock noon on the 18th day of December, 2002, except that where a later effective date is provided it shall prevail.
2.1
CHAPTER 2 MAYOR AND COUNCIL
ARTICLE 2-1 COUNCIL 1
2-1-1 Elected Officers
2-1-2 Corporate Powers
2-1-3 Duties of Mayor, Vice Mayor and Council
2-1-4 Vacancies in Council
2-1-5 Compensation
2-1-6 Oath of Office
2-1-7 Bond
2-1-8 Financial Disclosure Statements
Section 2-1-1 Elected Officers
The elected officers of the city shall be a Mayor, directly elected by the people pursuant to Article 2-3 of this code, and six councilmembers, one of whom shall be designated as the vice mayor in accordance with Section 2-2-1. The mayor, vice mayor and the other five councilmembers shall constitute the council and shall continue in office until assumption of duties of office by their duly elected successors. The regular term of office for the Mayor shall be two (2) years and the regular term of office for the other six councilmembers shall be four (4) years.
Section 2-1-2 Corporate Powers
The corporate powers of the city shall be vested in the council and shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order or motion.
Section 2-1-3 Duties of Mayor, Vice Mayor and Council
The mayor, vice mayor and council shall meet regularly to carry on the business of the city including but not limited to:
A. Passage of ordinances, resolutions and motions.
B. Preparing and overseeing the city's budget.
C. Appointing officers of the City and members of commissions and committees.
D. Hearing of reports and recommendations of city employees and officers.
E. Such other activities concerning the general welfare of the citizens of the city.
1 Modified by Ordinance 541
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.2
Section 2-1-4 Vacancies in Council 1, 2, 3
A. The Council shall fill any vacancy that may occur, by appointment until the next regularly scheduled Council election if the vacancy occurs more than thirty days before the nomination petition deadline, otherwise the appointment is for the unexpired term. The appointment shall be made within sixty days of the date the vacancy occurs.
B. City residence, for the purpose of qualification to serve on the city council, shall consist of maintaining, by the councilmember, a principal place of abode for the councilmember and the councilmember's family within the city. In the event that a councilmember removes their principal place of abode to a location outside the city limits for a period of more than fifty consecutive days, the council seat to which such councilmember was elected shall be deemed vacant by operation of law. In the event that a councilmember resides outside the city temporarily, the remaining members of the council, upon finding such residence to be temporary may, by a majority vote thereof, authorize such temporary residence and not declare the council seat vacant for up to an additional fifty days.
Section 2-1-5 Compensation 4
The mayor and members of the council shall be paid four hundred dollars ($400.00), and two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month respectively. If the mayor or members of the council miss two consecutive meetings, the pay shall be withheld for those meetings, based upon a monthly schedule of two regular meetings, unless the absence is excused by the council.
Section 2-1-6 Oath of Office
Prior to the assumption of the duties of office, and at or prior to the commencement of the term of office, the Mayor and each Councilmember shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office after receiving the officer’s certificate of election.
Section 2-1-7 Bond
Prior to taking office, every councilmember shall execute and file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and his sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the city or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default of such officer in his official capacity. A person so injured or aggrieved may bring suit on such bond under provisions identical to those contained in A.R.S. §38-260. Bonds shall be in such sum as shall be provided by resolution and the premium for such bonds shall be paid by the city. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from obtaining a blanket bond pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. §9-302.
Section 2-1-8 Financial Disclosure Statements
The mayor and each member of the council shall file by January 31 of each year, on a form prescribed by the clerk, a financial disclosure statement, setting forth such information as determined by resolution of the council.
1 Modified by Ordinance No. 265
2 Modified by Ordinance 572
3 Modified by Ordinance 595
4 Modified by Resolution 2-2007
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.3
Section 2-1-9 Attendance 1
The Mayor and Councilmembers, to discharge their duties of office, shall be physically present at regular and special meetings. The Mayor and Councilmembers can, however, cumulatively attend up to and no more than 8 of these meetings, whether regular or special, by phone or other available electronic means in a calendar year. The Mayor and Councilmembers can consecutively attend up to and no more than 4 of these meetings, whether regular or special, by phone or other available electronic means in a calendar year. The number of times the Mayor and any Councilmember can consecutively and/or cumulatively attend meetings, whether regular or special, by telephone or other available electronic means in a calendar year can only be increased by a majority vote of a quorum of the Mayor and Council, in their full discretion, so long as this vote occurs before any above restrictions are violated. The individual about whom a vote is taken to increase the number of times that he or she can consecutively and/or cumulatively attend meetings, whether regular or special, by telephone or other available electronic means in a calendar year cannot vote on that matter.
ARTICLE 2-2 MAYOR AND VICE MAYOR
2-2-1 Selection of Mayor and Vice Mayor
2-2-2 Acting Mayor
2-2-3 Powers and Duties of the Mayor
2-2-4 Failure to Sign Documents
Section 2-2-1 Selection of Mayor and Vice Mayor
The Mayor shall be directly elected by the people by a majority vote of the qualified electors pursuant to Article 2-3 of this code. Each year in which an election to Council is held, the councilmembers shall at the first regular meeting after taking the oath of office, choose a vice mayor from among their number. The council may, at any regularly scheduled meeting at which all seven councilmembers are present, upon proper motion, second and majority vote, reselect the position of vice mayor.
Section 2-2-2 Acting Mayor
In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor will serve as the Acting Mayor. In the absence or disability of the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Council may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor. The Acting Mayor shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Mayor during such absence or disability.
Section 2-2-3 Powers and Duties of the Mayor
The powers and duties of the mayor shall include the following:
A. Shall be the chief executive officer of the city.
B. Shall be the chairman of the council and preside over its meetings. May make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings.
1 Created by Ordinance 576
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.4
C. Shall enforce the provisions of this code.
D. Shall execute and authenticate by his signature such instruments as the council, or any statutes, ordinances, resolutions, or this code shall require.
E. Shall make such recommendations and suggestions to the council as may be considered proper.
F. May, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due to fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing, or any other natural or man-made calamity or disaster or in the event of the threat or occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of civil disobedience which endanger life or property within the city. After declaration of such emergency, the mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the city, including but not limited to:
1. Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the city.
2. Ordering the closing of any business.
3. Closing to public access any public building, street or other public place.
4. Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the political subdivision for assistance.
G. Shall perform such other duties required by state statute and this code as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of the city.
Section 2-2-4 Failure to Sign Documents 1
If the mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring a signature for two business days consecutively, then the Vice Mayor shall be authorized to sign such ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument which when so signed shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the mayor.
ARTICLE 2-3 COUNCIL ELECTION
2-3-1 Candidate Financial Disclosure
2-3-2 Non-Partisan Elections
2-3-3 Optional Municipal Election Procedure
2-3-4 Direct Election of the Mayor
Section 2-3-1 Candidate Financial Disclosure
Each candidate for the office of councilmember shall file a financial disclosure statement on a form prescribed by the clerk when such candidate files a nomination paper. The statement shall contain such information as required by resolution of the council.
1 Modified by Ord. No. 548
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.5
Section 2-3-2 Non-Partisan Elections
No paper or document, including the ballot, used in the procedures for the election of members of the council shall identify any candidate by partisan party affiliation.
Section 2-3-3 Optional Municipal Election Procedure 1, 2
A. Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a majority of all the votes cast shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he is a candidate effective as of the date of the general election, and no further election shall be held as to said candidate; provided that if more candidates receive a majority than there are offices to be filled, those candidates equal in number of the offices to be filled with the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.
B. Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the support of the candidate.
C. If at any primary election held as above provided, there be any office for which no candidate is elected, then as to such office, the primary election shall be considered to be a primary election for nomination of candidates for such office, and the general municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill such office. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the general municipal election shall be those not elected at the primary election and shall be equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given office or less than that number if there be less than that number of candidates running for that office during the primary election. Candidates, to include any candidate who qualified and ran during the primary election as a write-in candidate pursuant to A.R.S. §16-312 as amended, who receive the highest number of votes for the respective offices at such first election shall be the only candidates nominated to run at such second election, provided that if there be any person who, under the provisions of this section, would have been entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number of votes therefore, then all such persons receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become nominated candidates for such office.
D. At the general election, the candidates equal in number to the offices to be filled who receive the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.
Section 2-3-4 Direct Election of the Mayor 3
A. Commencing with the next regularly scheduled Primary and/or General Election after approval by a majority vote of qualified electors voting at the next regularly scheduled election, the Mayor shall be directly elected by the people by a majority vote of the qualified electors.
B. The term of the Mayor shall be for two (2) years.
C. Any candidate who shall receive at the Primary Election held by the City of Benson, a majority of all votes cast for Mayor at such Primary Election shall be declared to be elected to the
1 Added by Ordinance No. 272
2 Modified by Ordinance No. 556
3 Added by Ordinance No. 444, 445
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.6
office of Mayor effective as of the date of the General Election for the City of Benson and, said candidate shall not be required to run for Mayor at the General Election.
D. The provisions of sections 2-3-1, 2-3-2 and 2-3-3 are applicable under this section.
E. A candidate cannot run for both Mayor and Councilmember at the same election.
F. Councilmembers who desire to run for Mayor must resign their position on the Council as of the day they submit their nomination papers, unless they are in the last year of their term.
G. All other provisions of the Code of the City of Benson and Arizona State Statutes dealing with municipal elections are hereby declared to be applicable to the direct election of the Mayor for the City of Benson.
ARTICLE 2-4 COUNCIL PROCEDURE 1
2-4-1 Regular Meetings
2-4-2 Special Meetings
2-4-3 Meetings to be Public
2-4-4 Quorum
2-4-5 Agenda
2-4-6 Order of Business
2-4-7 Committees and Commissions
2-4-8 Voting
2-4-9 Suspension of Rules
Section 2-4-1 Regular Meetings 2, 3
1 Modified by Ordinance 585
2 Modified by Ordinance 325
3 Modified by Ordinance 494
The Council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Monday of each month at seven o’clock p.m., provided that when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal holiday, such meeting may be held at the same hour of the next succeeding day not a holiday if the Council so elects upon motion at a prior meeting. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held at the city hall. Council may, upon motion at any regular meeting, elect to cancel the succeeding meeting if it appears in its sole discretion that the items to be considered at the succeeding meeting may properly be postponed to the next regular meeting.
Section 2-4-2 Special Meetings
The Mayor or a quorum of the Council may convene the Council at any time after giving at least twenty-four hours notice of such meeting to members of the Council and the general public. The notice shall include the date, hour and purpose of such special meeting. In the case of an actual emergency, a meeting may be held upon such notice as is appropriate to the circumstances.
Section 2-4-3 Meetings to be Public
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.7
A. All official meetings of the Council at which any legal action is taken shall be open to the public. Notice of meetings shall be given in a manner consistent with state statutes. Upon approval by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet in a closed executive session as provided by state law.
B. Minutes of executive sessions shall be kept confidential in accordance with Arizona law.
C. No executive session may be held for the purpose of taking any final action or making any final decision.
Section 2-4-4 Quorum
A majority of the Councilmembers shall constitute a quorum for transacting business but a lesser number shall adjourn and may attempt to compel the attendance of absent members in order to reconvene the meeting with a quorum.
Section 2-4-5 Agenda
Prior to each Council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the Council for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier, the clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the Council, and prepare an agenda according to the order of business and shall furnish each Council member, the Mayor and the attorney with a copy of the agenda and any material pertinent thereto.
Section 2-4-6 Order of Business1
1Modified by Ordinance No. 470
The business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in an order determined by the person chairing the meeting. That order will typically be as follows:
A. Call to Order. In the absence of the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the clerk shall call the Counil to order and an Acting Mayor shall be selected to chair the meeting. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Vice Mayor, the Acting Mayor shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council. The Chair shall begin at or about the hour appointed for the meeting and shall call the Council to order. The Chair shall then lead those present in the pledge of allegiance. An invocation speaker may be called to offer an invocation. The Chair shall preserve order and decorum and conduct the proceedings of the meetings.
B. Roll Call. Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the clerk or deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a quorum is not present, the members present shall adjourn pursuant to Section 2-4-4 of this code.
C. Employee Recognition. The Chair may present employment awards to those City employees accumulating five (5) years of employment with the City and every five (5) years thereafter or to present recognition awards for specific acts regarding public service, if any.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.8
D. Proclamations. The Chair or his designee will read any proclamations that are on the agenda.
E. Public Hearings. The Chair will open the public hearing, if listed on the agenda, to receive comments from the public on the proposed subject of the public hearing. The Chair shall close this hearing after those comments are received. The Chair may impose reasonable time limits for each speaker with a presumptive limit of five (5) minutes per speaker and may apportion time between those speaking in favor and those speaking against the matter which is the subject of the public hearing.
F. Call to the Public. If on the agenda, comments from the public shall be heard by the Council in accordance with Arizona law. The Chair may impose reasonable time limits for each speaker, with a presumptive limit of five (5) minutes per speaker.
G. City Manager Report. The City Manager or his designee may update and inform the public of specific items of interest regarding City matters.
H. New Business. The Council may consider business not previously considered, including the introduction of ordinances and resolutions, and may provide for a consent agenda to collectively consider routine matter, not requiring Council discussion.
1. Consent Agenda. The consent agenda may be the first item under this category and shall list separately distinct items requiring action by the City Council that are generally routine items not requiring Council discussion. A vote on a single motion can approve or reject all items on the consent agenda. A Council Member may move to remove any item from the consent agenda, and if approved by a majority vote, that item will be discussed and voted upon separately, immediately following the consent agenda.
2. Action Items Listed for Discussion. New Business can include ordinances, resolutions, motions, contracts or other matters listed as separate action items. These items shall be addressed separately and in the order presented on the agenda unless the Chair decides to deviate from the listed order on the agenda. City staff, an applicant, or any person authorized by the Chair may address the Council about the action item, to include taking questions from Councilmembers. A motion to amend or motion to table, takes precedence over a motion to consider the item, and shall be voted upon as part of the discussion of the item if there is a second to the motion. At the end of the discussion, the Chair shall call for a motion and the Clerk shall record the results thereof in the official minutes.
3. Updates of On-Going Projects and City Activities. New Business may also include updates by Staff on current issues facing the City that have been or may be the subject of Council action.
I. Department Reports. Written Department Reports may be provided to Councilmembers as part of the Council packet.
J. Adjournment. The Council may, by a majority vote of the quorum, adjourn entirely or temporarily to a specific date and hour. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.9
Section 2-4-7 Committees and Commissions
The council may create such committees and commissions, standing or special, as it deems necessary. They shall consist of as many members and shall perform such duties as the council may require and shall exist at the pleasure of the council.
Section 2-4-8 Voting
A. The mayor may vote as a member of the council.
B. Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any question shall be taken and entered in the minutes.
Section 2-4-9 Suspension of Rules
Any of the provisions of this article may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of three-fourths of the members present, except that this section shall not be construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes.
ARTICLE 2-5 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS
2-5-1 Prior Approval
2-5-2 Introduction
2-5-3 Passage of Ordinances and Resolutions
2-5-4 Requirements for an Ordinance
2-5-5 Signatures Required
2-5-6 Publishing Required
2-5-7 Posting Required
Section 2-5-1 Prior Approval
All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council, have been reviewed as to form by the attorney. When there are substantive matters of administration involved, all ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall be referred to the person who will be charged with the administration of such ordinance, resolution or contract. Such person shall have an opportunity to present comments, suggestions and objections, if any, prior to the passage of the ordinance, resolution or acceptance of the contract.
Section 2-5-2 Introduction
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the attorney, the manager or the clerk may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council, and any councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance, resolution, matter or subject be adopted; otherwise they shall not be considered.
Section 2-5-3 Passage of Ordinances and Resolutions1
1Modified by Ordinance No. 278
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.10
A. All ordinances and resolutions shall be declared passed and in full force and effect from and after their passage by the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present at any legally convened city council meeting subject to the provisions of Section 2-5-5 and 2-5-7 of this code.
B. The reading and passage of all ordinances and resolutions may be made by title only, providing that each member of the council in attendance has in his or her possession, written copies of said ordinance or resolution at the time of consideration and voting thereon.
C. The clerk shall certify the minutes of any council meeting at which an ordinance, resolution or franchise, except an emergency ordinance, is passed.
Section 2-5-4 Requirements for an Ordinance
Each ordinance may have only one subject, the nature of which is clearly expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance and, in such case, the title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the ordinance.
Section 2-5-5 Signatures Required
Every ordinance passed by the council shall, before it becomes effective, be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk.
Section 2-5-6 Publishing Required
Only such orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of the council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly ordered by the council. All notices of election, invitation for bids, notices of letting contracts, laws and ordinances approved or issued by the council must be published pursuant to A.R.S. §9-812, as provided in A.R.S. §39-204, in a newspaper of general circulation printed in English. If published in a weekly newspaper, publication shall be for two consecutive weeks; if a daily publication is used, publication shall be for four consecutive times unless otherwise required by law.
Section 2-5-7 Posting Required 1
Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment shall after passage be posted by the clerk in three or more public places within the city, and shall be in force from and after the date of posting. Posting shall be established by an affidavit of the person who posted the ordinance, and said affidavit shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as proof of posting.
ARTICLE 2-6 LEGAL ADVICE FROM THE CITY ATTORNEY2
Not withstanding the provisions of Article 3-3, the Mayor and members of the City Council may individually make inquiries requesting legal advice from the City Attorney in matters of law pertaining to their offices.
1 Modified by Ordinance No. 278
2 Modified by Ordinance No. 522
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
2.11
3.1
CHAPTER 3 ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 3-1 OFFICERS IN GENERAL
3-1-1 Officers
3-1-2 Appointment of Officers and Employees
3-1-3 Bond
3-1-4 Vacancies; Holding More Than One Office
3-1-5 Additional Powers and Duties
3-1-6 Compensation
Section 3-1-1 Officers1, 2. 3
There are hereby created the offices of city manager, city clerk, finance director, city magistrate, police chief, fire chief, city engineer and city attorney.
Section 3-1-2 Appointment of Officers and Employees1, 2
The city manager and the city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor and council. The city clerk, finance director, city magistrate, city engineer, police chief and fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager with the consent and approval of mayor and council. All employees other than the officers named in the foregoing section shall be appointed solely by the city manager.
Section 3-1-3 Bond
The council may require any officer of the city to give bond for the due discharge of his duties in such sums and with such security as it may direct and approve, and the city shall pay the costs of such bond, if so authorized by city resolution.
Section 3-1-4 Vacancies; Holding More Than One Office1
One person may hold more than one office, and the functions of any city officer may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or another city official or by an otherwise qualified person appointed by the city manager.
1Modified by Ordinance No. 283
2Modified by Ordinance 542
3Modified by Ordinance 591
ADMINISTRATION
3.2
Section 3-1-5 Additional Powers and Duties
In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer shall have such further powers, perform such further duties and hold such other office as may be provided by the council through ordinance, resolution or order.
Section 3-1-6 Compensation
The officers of the city shall be paid a salary in accordance with the wishes of the mayor and council.
ARTICLE 3-2 OFFICERS1
3-2-1 Manager
3-2-2 City Clerk
3-2-3 Finance Director
3-2-4 Chief of Police
3-2-5 Attorney
3-2-6 Magistrate
3-2-7 Deputy Magistrate
3-2-8 Zoning Administrator
3-2-9 Building Inspector
3-2-10 Emergency Services Director
Section 3-2-1 Manager 2
A. There shall be created and established the office of the city manager for the city.
B. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and at the pleasure of the city council. However, the city manager shall reside within two (2) miles of the city. The term ‘residence’ shall include the maintenance of the principal place of abode for the manager and the manager’s family, within two (2) miles of the city limits. The city council may, from time to time, by a majority vote thereof, extend the period for establishment of such residence for such additional periods as it sees fit.
C. The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall fix from time to time.
1 Modified by Ordinance 591
2 Modified by Ordinances No. 283, 266,535, 564 and 594
ADMINISTRATION
3.3
D. The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city.
E. The city manager may be removed from office by a vote of four members of the city council at a regularly scheduled meeting of the council.
F. The city manager shall have the following powers and duties:
1. The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this section. The manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. In addition to the general powers as administrative head and not as a limitation thereon, the manager shall have the following additional powers and duties:
a. The city manager shall prepare the city budget annually and submit it to the council together with a message describing the important features contained therein. The manager shall also be responsible for its administration after adoption.
b. The city manager shall prepare and submit to the council at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city during the preceding year.
c. The city manager shall keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may be deemed desirable.
d. The city manager shall recommend to the council a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the city service, including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates. The manager shall also authorize the payment of overtime pay for such employees as may work in excess of a normal work period. All rates of pay and periods of work shall be in conformance with wages and salaries enacted by the council.
e. The city manager shall recommend to the council from time to time the adoption of such measures which may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement and safeguard of administrative services and functions.
f. The city manager shall consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his jurisdiction with the approval of the council. The manager may be the head of one or more departments.
g. The city manager shall attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council. The manager shall be entitled to receive notice of all regular and special meetings of the council.
h. The city manager shall supervise and safeguard the purchase and use of all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget; let
ADMINISTRATION
3.4
contracts necessary for operation or maintenance of city services for amounts up to and including twenty thousand dollars ($20,000); receive bids for purchases or contracts in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) and present them to the council for approval, and advise the council on the advantages or disadvantages of contract and bid proposals. No contract in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) and no contract for new construction shall be let except by the council. The manager may issue such rules governing purchasing procedures within the administrative organization as the council shall approve. 1
i. In case of accident, disaster or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the city manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency; but the manager shall file promptly with the council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such actions, together with an itemized account of all expenditures.
j. The city manager shall see that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced.
k. The city manager shall investigate the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof; investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed.
l. The council shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, and neither the council nor any members thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. It shall be the responsibility of the council and its members to aid and assist in any advisory capacity any department head, individually or collectively, on any phase of policy or public relations, such association not to conflict with the administrative duties of the city manager.
m. The city manager shall not exercise any legislative function whatsoever, nor shall the manager engage in policy making or institute programs which require official action of the council. The policy making power of the city manager shall be implementative only. It is not intended by this article to grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon the city manager which is vested in or imposed by general law or city ordinances on any other city commission, board, officer or employee except as herein specifically set forth.
n. In the discharge of the duties as city manager, the person holding such position shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience and courtesy in contacts with the public and with all city boards, departments and employees and shall use best efforts to establish and maintain a harmonious relationship between all personnel employed in the government of the city to the end that the highest possible standards of public service shall be continuously maintained.
1Modified by Ordinance No. 471
o. The city manager shall appoint and when necessary for the good of the city, suspend and remove all officers and employees of the city not appointed by the
ADMINISTRATION
3.5
Council. The manager may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in such office or department.
2. The city manager shall perform such other duties as may be required by the council which are not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances.
Section 3-2-2 City Clerk1
A. Records. The city clerk must keep in proper fashion and make available to the public upon request, copies of all ordinances passed by the mayor and council and shall file copies of all correspondence, reports or other documents pertinent to the general operations of the city in addition to the minute book pertaining to the meetings of the mayor and council. The city clerk shall maintain other books or records as shall be deemed necessary for the fulfillment of the duties and shall report to the mayor and council quarterly, in writing, by means of a detailed statement.
B. Public Inspection of Records. The city clerk shall keep convenient for public inspection all public records and public documents under the city clerk's control, as provided by state statute.
C. Reports. The city clerk shall prepare and collect from city officers and employees such reports prepared in such manner and to include such information as may be directed by the council.
D. Minutes. The city clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes of council proceedings and shall be responsible for distribution of the minutes to members of the council and for making the minutes available to the public.
E. Ordinances, Resolutions, Budgets and Notices. The city clerk shall process, record, file, publish and, if required by state statute, post all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices that may be passed by the council.
1 Modified by Ordinance 591
F. Attendance at Council Meetings. The city clerk shall attend all regular and special meetings of the council for the purpose of recording the official minutes, providing information as requested and other duties as directed by the council.
G. Supervision. The city clerk shall be present during normal working hours to supervise the routine operations of the clerk’s office.
H. Election Official. The city clerk shall be the city election official and perform those duties required by state statute.
I. Administrative Duties. The city clerk shall perform those administrative responsibilities and duties that are conferred upon the office of the city clerk by the council in addition to those specified in this code.
J. There is hereby created the office of deputy clerk for the city. The deputy clerk shall be appointed by the city manager and shall receive such salary as the mayor and council shall from time to time set.
ADMINISTRATION
3.6
K. The deputy clerk shall work with the city clerk doing the work of the office that is assigned and, in the absence of the city clerk, fulfilling the duties of the city clerk.
Section 3-2-3 Finance Director
A. Duties of Finance Director. The finance director shall hold the office of city treasurer and receive and safely keep all monies that shall come to the city and shall give receipts therefor. The treasurer shall keep a separate record and account of each different fund provided by the council, apportion the monies received among the different funds as prescribed by the council and keep a complete set of books showing: every money transaction of the city, the state of each fund, from what source the money in each fund was derived and for what purpose expended and shall make quarterly reports to the council of all receipts and disbursements and the balance in each fund. At the end of the fiscal year, the treasurer shall make a full and detailed statement of the receipts and expenditures of the city during the year, specifying the different sources or revenue and the amount received from each, all appropriations made by the mayor and council, and the object for which they were made, and the amount of money expended under each, the evidences of indebtedness issued, and what portion remains thereof outstanding, with the rate and amount of interest due thereon, and the amount of cash on hand.
B. Duties as Tax Collector. The finance director or the finance director's appointee shall be the collector of all taxes, licenses and assessments of the city.
C. Licenses. The finance director shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses, receipts and forms that may be prescribed by this code.
D. Supervision. The finance director shall be present during normal working hours to supervise the routine operations of the finance office.
E. Administrative Duties. The finance director shall perform those administrative responsibilities and duties that are conferred upon the finance office by the council in addition to those specified in this code.
Section 3-2-4 Chief of Police
The chief of police shall perform such duties as may be required of him by state law, this code and as the council and city manager may deem necessary.
Section 3-2-5 Attorney
The attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the council and other city officials, and as such shall give an opinion in writing when requested. The city attorney shall draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when required by the council and shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance thereof by the council. The city attorney shall return all ordinances and resolutions submitted for consideration by the council, with approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with reasons therefore. The city attorney shall be responsible for prosecuting and defending all suits, actions or causes where the city is a party, including those matters actually being handled by outside counsel, and as to such matters, shall periodically report to the council the status of each matter.
ADMINISTRATION
3.7
Section 3-2-6 Magistrate1
A. The city magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the magistrate's court and shall perform those functions necessary to maintenance of the magistrate's court as provided by state statute.
B. The city magistrate shall serve a two year term of office.
C. Upon appointment, the city council shall set the magistrate’s salary for the two year term of office.
Section 3-2-7 Deputy Magistrate
A. There is hereby created the office of deputy magistrate for the city. The deputy magistrate shall be appointed by the city manager and shall receive such salary as the mayor and council shall from time to time set.
B. The deputy magistrate shall work with the city magistrate doing the work of the office that is assigned and, in the absence of the magistrate, fulfilling the duties of the magistrate.
Section 3-2-8 Zoning Administrator
A. There is hereby created the office of zoning administrator for the city. The zoning administrator shall be appointed by the city manager and shall receive such salary as the mayor and council shall from time to time set.
B. The zoning administrator shall be charged with the enforcement of the city zoning ordinance, subdivision control ordinance and other duties as may be assigned.
Section 3-2-9 Building Inspector
1Modified by Ordinances No. 283 and 291
A. There is hereby created the office of building inspector for the city. The building inspector shall be appointed by the city manager and shall receive such salary as the mayor and council shall from time to time set.
ADMINISTRATION
3.8
B. The building inspector shall be charged with the enforcement of the city building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and fire life safety codes and shall perform other duties as may be assigned.
Section 3-2-10 Emergency Services Director
There is hereby created the office of emergency services director. The emergency services director shall be the city manager or designee.
ARTICLE 3-3 COUNCIL AND ADMINISTRATION RELATIONSHIPS 1, 2
A. Council - City Manager - Staff Relations. The council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the council, nor any member thereof, shall give orders or instructions to any employee or officer other than the city manager. The city manager shall take orders and instructions from the council only when expressed at a duly convened meeting of the council, either a work session, special meeting or a regular meeting, and no individual councilmember may otherwise give any orders or instructions to the city manager, except for purposes of inquiry. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the council members from fully and freely discussing with or suggesting to the City Manager anything pertaining to city affairs or the interests of the City.
B. For the purposes of this Section, "administrative services of the city" shall mean those employees under the authority of the city manager in the performance of their day-to-day duties, and shall not include the city attorney, city clerk/treasurer or the city magistrate.
1 Modified by Ordinance No. 519
2 Modified by Ordinance 542
ADMINISTRATION
3.9
Article 3-4 DOWNTOWN BUSINESS REVITALIZATION DISTRICT PROGRAM1
3-4-1 Revitalization Program Designation
3-4-2 District Defined
3-4-3 Funding for the Program
3-4-4 Program Purpose
3-4-5 District Committee Established; Duties
3-4-6 Program Participation for Property Owners
3-4-7 Downtown Business Revitalization District Designation Supersedes Other District Designations
Section 3-4-1 Revitalization Program Designation
The proper designation of the revitalization program authorized under this Article shall be the "Downtown Business Revitalization District Program".
Section 3-4-2 District Defined
The Downtown Business Revitalization District shall encompass the following:
A. That area which bounds both the North and South sides of Fourth Street from Interstate 10, Exit 303 to the San Pedro River; and,
B. That area which bounds both the North and South sides of Fifth Street from Land Avenue to State Route 80.
C. All commercially zoned properties adjacent to State Route 80 lying South of Fourth Street and North of the currently existing City limit.2
Section 3-4-3 Funding for the Program
The Mayor and City Council shall designate a portion of the City's General Fund to be used solely for the purposes of the program.
Section 3-4-4 Program Purpose
The purpose of the revitalization program is to promote the social, economic, educational, cultural and general welfare of the Downtown Business Revitalization District by:
1Modified by Ordinance No. 415
2Modified by Ordinance No. 443
ADMINISTRATION
3.10
A. Providing a mechanism to restore the cultural, political and architectural elements of the Downtown Business Revitalization District;
B. Fostering civic pride in the cultural heritage of the Downtown Business Revitalization District;
C. Conserving and improving the value of not only those properties designated as landmarks or significant buildings but all properties located within the Downtown Business Revitalization District;
D. Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the Downtown Business Revitalization District to property investors, business entrepreneurs, tourists, visitors and shoppers, and thereby supporting and promoting business, commerce, industry and providing a stable, long-range economic benefit to the City;
E. Fostering and encouraging, through funding, the preservation, restoration and rehabilitation of the structures and areas located within the Downtown Business Revitalization District, and thereby preventing future deterioration and blight of the City;
F. Maximizing and protecting for future generations the area’s attractive and unique character and perceived authenticity for visitors of the Downtown Business Revitalization District;
G. Reflecting the early fame and reputation of the City and its place in the development of the Southwest and of the United States.
Section 3-4-5 District Committee Established; Duties
A. A Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee shall be established by the Mayor and City Council as follows:
1. The committee shall consist of seven members;
2. Said members shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council;
3. Each member shall serve on the committee for a term of two years; and,
4. In the first year of the Committee's appointment, the Mayor and City shall designate three of the seven to serve initial one year terms which shall thereafter allow for the staggered appointment of successive Committee members.
B. The duties of the Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee are as follows:
1. The Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee shall review, consider and recommend to the Mayor and the City Council the creation of additional revitalization areas within the City Limits.
2. The Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee shall publish Design Guidelines and Sign Guidelines which shall be approved by the Mayor and City.
a. Any changes made to these Guidelines by the Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council.
ADMINISTRATION
3.11
b. The most recent version approved by Council will be kept on file in the City Clerk's office.
3. The Design Guidelines and Sign Guidelines published by the Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee shall be drafted according to the following criteria:
a. Associated with events that have made significant contribution to the development and/or national or international image of the City; and/or
b. Embody the distinctive characteristics found in commercial districts in rural railroad towns during the time period of 1880 to 1920; and/or
c. Yield information important in the understanding of the early culture and economy of the City.
4. The Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee shall evaluate any owner's proposed exterior restoration and/or improvement plans for any real property located within the District, as well as, each parcel's demonstrated quality of significance in local or regional development, based upon the guideline criteria set forth above.
5. Following its determinations, the Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee shall transmit to the Mayor and City Council its report and recommendations based on its consideration of a District property owner's submitted exterior restoration and/or improvement plans.
Section 3-4-6 Program Participation for Property Owners1
A. Any Downtown Business Revitalization District commercial property owner wishing to receive funding to participate in the Downtown Business Revitalization District Program shall submit to the Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee and the Building Inspector all exterior restoration and/or property improvement plans, based upon the Committee's published guidelines, for the Building Inspector’s approval and the Committee's evaluation and recommendations to the Mayor and City Council.
B. Funding may be obtained to assist the property owner with proposed construction, building renovation, refurbish, repair, remodeling, additions, etc., to be done to the property involving any change to the exterior of any structure or building, or other structural appurtenance, or to any open space or yard or sign, now in existence or to be built hereafter within the Downtown Business Revitalization District.
1Modified by Ordinance No. 469
C. Any Downtown Business Revitalization District commercial property owner receiving funding must contribute, at a minimum, twenty-five percent (25%) of the total cost of the project and said contribution shall be specifically set forth in the program application. Program participation shall be limited to one project for a single individual every five (5) years.
ADMINISTRATION
3.12
D. All projects must be completed within ninety (90) days of notification of Council approval or funding for the project will be withdrawn. In the event of extenuating circumstances, owners may submit a request for an extension of time for project completion and, in that event, each request will be individually evaluated. All project construction must be closely monitored by the Building Inspector.
Section 3-4-7 Downtown Business Revitalization District Designation Supersedes Other District Designations
The area designated as the Downtown Business Revitalization District shall be under the exclusive control and jurisdiction of the Downtown Business Revitalization District Committee and the Mayor and City Council, all in accordance with the provisions of this Article, and any property owner or organization desiring to modify the exterior of any building located within the District using City funding, in whole or in part, shall submit the proposed modification or refurbishing plans to the Committee, and obtain the Committee’s approval and recommendation prior to seeking consideration for any other public funding.
Article 3-5 EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION
Section 3-5-1 Employees Involved with Minors1
As a condition of employment, all current and prospective employees whose duties involve
working with minors shall be required to submit a full set of fingerprints to the City for the purpose of conducting a background check on the employee. The fingerprints will only be used for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes §41-1750 and Public Law 92-544. The Arizona Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and all information communicated to the City of Benson will remain confidential.
1Modified by Ordinance No. 468
4.1
CHAPTER 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
ARTICLE 4-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT
4-1-1 Created; Composition
4-1-2 Appointment of Chief of Police
4-1-3 Compensation of Officers
4-1-4 Duties of Chief of Police
4-1-5 Maintenance, Upkeep and Extension of Department
Section 4-1-1 Created; Composition
There is hereby created a police department for the city which shall consist of the chief of police and such lieutenants, sergeants and other police officers as shall be deemed necessary in order to enforce the laws and maintain the order within the city. The chief of police, acting chief of police and any officer holding the rank of sergeant or higher shall be deemed to be an executive or administrative officer within the police department and whenever possible all overtime shall be handled by these officers.
Section 4-1-2 Appointment of Chief of Police
The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager with the consent and approval of the council. The chief shall not accept any gifts or compensation for services in any capacity except such as the mayor and council shall, by resolution, prescribe.
Section 4-1-3 Compensation of Officers
Monthly salaries shall be paid to the officers of the police department as approved by the council as recommended from time to time by the chief of police and the city manager.
Section 4-1-4 Duties of Chief of Police
The chief of police shall have the following duties:
A. Exercise entire charge of the police department and all apparatus and property used by said department and full and complete charge of all police officers and other employees of the police department.
B. Be responsible for the enforcement of all the laws of the State of Arizona and the ordinances and code of the city within the city limits and shall arrest any person for the violation of such laws and deliver such person to the magistrate for trial.
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.2
C. Recommend to the council in conjunction with the city manager the number of police officers and other employees necessary to fulfill the above duties and provide the names of all candidates for those positions along with recommendations as to their acceptance or rejection.
D. Cooperate with the city manager regarding the purchase of any and all police equipment or apparatus utilized by the police department and assist in the preparation of the annual budget for consideration of the council.
E. Assist the council at its request in other city business appropriately handled by the police department.
F. Undertake to protect the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the city and all others within its limits to the best of the chief’s ability.
Section 4-1-5 Maintenance, Upkeep and Extension of Department
The council shall make such allowances for the maintenance, upkeep and extension of the police department as it deems necessary.
ARTICLE 4-2 POLICE RESERVE
4-2-1 Established
4-2-2 Definitions
4-2-3 Purpose
4-2-4 Appointment of Reserve Officers
4-2-5 Powers of Reserve Officers
4-2-6 Oath of Office
4-2-7 Relationship of Reserve Officers to Other Police Officers
Section 4-2-1 Established
A police reserve system for the city is hereby established.
Section 4-2-2 Definitions
In this article unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Chief of police" means the chief of police of the city.
B. "Reserve police officer" means an adult person appointed by the chief of police as a reserve police officer, who is certified by the Arizona Law Enforcement Officer Advisory Council (ALEOAC) or enrolled in an ALEOAC certified training program.
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.3
Section 4-2-3 Purpose
The purpose of the reserve police system is to preserve the public peace and promote the general welfare of the city by giving authority to certain qualified persons to assist regular police officers in enforcing state law, city ordinances and this code, as well as performing other duties as may be assigned to reserve officers by the chief of police from time to time.
Section 4-2-4 Appointment of Reserve Officers
A. The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish a police reserve system within the structure of the police department. The chief is further authorized to appoint reserve police officers who will serve under the rules, regulations and conditions established by the chief of police.
B. The chief of police shall determine the qualifications necessary for appointment as a reserve police officer and shall approve all applications prior to appointment.
Section 4-2-5 Powers of Reserve Officers
Reserve police officers shall have general police powers when performing in an active duty capacity under the supervision of the chief of police. At all other times, the reserve police officer shall possess only those powers granted to private citizens.
Section 4-2-6 Oath of Office
Every person appointed by the chief of police as a reserve officer shall be sworn to faithful performance of required duties as established by the chief of police.
Section 4-2-7 Relationship of Reserve Officers to Other Police Officers
The provisions of this article shall not be construed as altering, limiting or expanding the powers, duties and authority of either regular police officers or special police officers of the city.
ARTICLE 4-3 FIRE DEPARTMENT
4-3-1 Created; Composition
4-3-2 Departmental Rules and Regulations
4-3-3 Appointment, Powers and Duties of Chief
4-3-4 Appointment and Duties of Firefighters
4-3-5 Entry upon Adjacent Property
4-3-6 Equipment
4-3-7 Providing Fire Protection Outside City
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.4
4-3-8 Acknowledgment of Right of Way
4-3-9 Fire Alarms
4-3-10 Water Utility
4-3-11 Incorporation
4-3-12 Income Continuation for Volunteer Firefighters
Section 4-3-1 Created; Composition
There is hereby created a fire department for the city which shall consist of a chief, an assistant chief and as many officers and firefighters as may be deemed necessary from time to time upon recommendation of the fire chief and city manager to the council. The fire department shall remain volunteer unless a change to a partially or fully compensated fire department is deemed necessary.
Section 4-3-2 Departmental Rules and Regulations
The fire department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be adopted by the council.
Section 4-3-3 Appointment, Powers and Duties of Chief
A. The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the city manager and confirmed by the mayor and council.
B. It shall be the duty of the chief to:
1. Be accountable to the city manager and common council for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the department. The chief shall exercise entire charge of the fire department and all apparatus and property used by said department and shall have full and complete charge of all officers and firefighters.
2. Direct the operations of the fire department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof.
3. Be present at all fires, if possible, and plan the attack and direct subordinates. During the progress of a fire, the authority of the fire chief in all matters connected with the management or direction thereof, or the disposition of property endangered by it, shall be absolute. All orders issued by the chief on such occasions must be respected, and any firefighter or citizen refusing to obey the same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
4. Conduct suitable drills or instruction in the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings in the city, water supplies and all other matters generally considered essential to good firemanship and safety of life and property from fire.
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.5
5. Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires.
6. Inspect buildings and premises and serve written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire hazards that may be found. For the purpose of conducting such inspection, the chief is hereby empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises within the city at any reasonable hour. Any person served with a notice to abate any fire hazard or hazards shall comply therewith and promptly notify the chief. This duty, in its entirety or in part, may be transferred to the building inspection section or exercised concurrently with the building inspection section.
7. Keep complete records of all fires, inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the department. The fire chief shall furnish the city manager and council with such information as may be requested and such records shall be open to inspection by the city manager at any time.
8. If requested, make a complete annual report in writing to the city manager and council within one month after the close of the fiscal year, such report to include the information specified in this section, together with comparative data for previous years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the department.
9. Demote, dismiss or expel any officer or member of the department for neglect or refusal to perform departmental duties.
10. Enforce or cause to be enforced all ordinances, laws and regulations of the city and state insofar as they pertain to fire and safety. This duty, in its entirety or in part, may be transferred to the building inspection section.
11. Appoint assistant chief and other officers from the membership of the department.
12. Have a working knowledge of the public protection class rating procedure and maintain the best rating possible for the city.
13. Provide educational fire prevention services to the schools, service organizations, business community and private citizens of the city.
14. Provide mutual cooperation with other department heads and the city manager in expediting emergency services other than those activities common to firefighting.
Section 4-3-4 Appointment and Duties of Firefighters
Firefighters shall be appointed at such time and in such manner as the council and the fire chief may deem necessary. Such appointees shall be able-bodied citizens. The firefighters shall be subject to supervision by the fire chief, the assistant fire chief, officer or other firefighter in charge.
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.6
Section 4-3-5 Entry Upon Adjacent Property
It shall be lawful for any firefighter, acting under the direction of the chief or another officer in command, to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire, for the purpose of extinguishing such fire or preventing the spread of a fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of their duty as hereinbefore provided.
Section 4-3-6 Equipment
The department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire. Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the chief to the city manager and, after approval by the council, shall be purchased in such manner as may be designated by the council. All equipment of the department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such place as may be designated by the council. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person willfully take away or conceal any article used in any way by the department. No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless accompanied by, or having special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the department. No fire apparatus or equipment shall be hired out or permitted to leave the fire station, except in response to a call for aid at a fire or official fire department activities within the corporate limits of the city, or in response to a call for aid at a fire or official fire department activities in an area authorized for fire protection service or mutual aid under provisions of Section 4-3-7.
Section 4-3-7 Providing Fire Protection Outside City
A. The city is hereby authorized to enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire protection outside the city in accordance with mutual aid agreements or intergovernmental agreements approved by the council. The members of the fire department are authorized and directed to render firefighting service to communities, organizations, owners or occupants of premises outside the corporate limits of the city as herein provided. Such service shall only be rendered subject to the terms of the agreement or contract entered into by the city.
B. The members of the fire department are authorized and directed to render firefighting services near the close proximity of the corporate limits when human life is endangered or a public nuisance hazard may be created. Such a service may be rendered without an agreement or contract, providing that the municipal limits of the city are fire protected with firefighters and apparatus.
C. The members of the fire department are authorized to render emergency assistance and firefighting services outside the corporate limits when the request for assistance is provided by another public body or agency. The city shall not be liable for any civil or other damages as a result of any act or omission by the fire department or its members in rendering emergency firefighting services, unless the fire department is guilty of gross negligence. Such a service may be rendered, providing the response area is near the close proximity of the corporate limits and providing the municipal limits of the city are fire protected with firefighters and apparatus.
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.7
D. Members of the fire department are authorized to provide assistance and use city equipment to accomplish extrication of vehicular accident victims outside the city limits in accordance with policies established by the fire chief and city manager.
Section 4-3-8 Acknowledgment of Right of Way
A. Each member of the fire department driving a vehicle shall be issued suitable insignias to be attached to the front and rear of the vehicle.
B. All motor equipment of the fire department shall have right of way over all other persons when responding to an alarm. Upon the approach of the fire department vehicles, the driver of any other vehicle shall immediately stop such vehicle as far as possible to the right hand side of the road, and it is unlawful for any such driver to cause or permit the vehicle to be moved until the fire department vehicles have safely passed the driver's own vehicle.
C. It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle of any kind across the hose of the fire department while the hose is being used for the purpose of fire suppression, unless a firefighter has granted permission to cross the hose.
D. It is unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with any firefighter while said firefighter is engaged in suppression of any fire.
E. All provisions within the city relating to the regulation of speed of moving vehicles shall not apply to fire department vehicles when actually being operated in a fire suppression capacity.
F. It is unlawful for any vehicle to stand or remain standing or for any vehicle to park within one block of any fire or fire fighting equipment being utilized to suppress a fire.
G. It is unlawful for any vehicle to be parked or otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed within twenty feet of the entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus is stored, or within fifteen feet of any fire hydrant.
H. It is unlawful for a driver of an unauthorized vehicle to follow within five hundred feet of any fire apparatus responding to a fire.
I. It is unlawful for any person to congregate within two hundred feet of any fire or Natural Gas leak. It shall be the duty of the police to act as guards and prevent any and all persons, except owners and occupants and employees of buildings threatened by the existing fire, from entering the limits as designated by the police. It is unlawful for any person to enter those limits and refuse to leave when directed by officers or members of the fire department.
Section 4-3-9 Fire Alarms
Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to turn in an alarm at any time, and for notifying all members of the department so that they may promptly respond. Telephone alarms reporting to the Police Department or 9-1-1 (the emergency telephone number) shall constitute the primary fire alarm reporting system. It is unlawful for any person to maliciously turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm.
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.8
Section 4-3-10 Water Utility
A. An adequate water utility with properly maintained fire hydrants shall be available.
B. Water companies not owned by the city, but operating within the corporate limits, shall provide the fire department adequate volumes of water without cost for use during fire suppression or fire training activities.
Section 4-3-11 Incorporation
The council may cause to have created a nonprofit corporation should it be necessary to contract a part or all of the functions of the fire department and the city may elect to contract with other firefighting organizations, including fire districts and corporations, whether organized for profit or not.
Section 4-3-12 Income Continuation for Volunteer Firefighters1
1Established by Ordinance No. 378
A. Any city firefighter physically injured in the course of performance of official duties as a city firefighter shall be entitled to be compensated for all lost income and wages in the same manner as if said injured firefighter were a regular full-time city employee injured in the course of non-firefighting city employment, and in the event an injured firefighter's employment is terminated as a direct result of an injury covered by this section, the city council may elect to continue lost income compensation in the same manner as could occur if the injury caused the loss.
B. The city manager shall develop appropriate policies and procedures for the filing of lost wage claims and timely payment of compensation due an injured firefighter and there shall be established an appeals board to review and determine disputed lost wage claims and decisions of the appeals board shall be subject to timely review by the mayor and council whose determination shall be conclusive.
C. There shall be established in each of the city's fiscal years, a reserve account for payment of injured firefighter wage claims, and said account shall receive appropriate annual funding: however, said reserve account shall not limit the city's liability for payment of amounts due an injured firefighter.
D. The policy for administration of Income Continuation to Firefighters Injured in the Course of Official Duties on Behalf of the City of Benson is adopted by reference.
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.9
Section 4-3-13 Fire Department Response Guidelines 1, 2 (Enacted by Ordinance No. 486)
4-3-13-1 Purpose
4-3-13-2 Definitions
4-3-13-3 Extrication
4-3-13-4 Roadside Emergencies
4-3-13-5 Building Fires
4-3-13-6 Natural Gas Leaks
4-3-13-7 Calls for Other Types of Service
4-3-13-8 Mutual Aid Calls
4-3-13-9 Joint Training Operations
4-3-13-10 Call outside of City Limits
Section 4-3-13-1 PURPOSE
To better serve the citizens of the City of Benson and the residents of the San Pedro Valley the following are the response guidelines for the Benson Fire Department.
Sections 4-3-13-2 DEFINITIONS
A. “Golden Hour” is the one (1) hour time period occurring from the moment of injury until such time as the patient receives definitive care. If a patient does not receive definitive care within one (1) hour after sustaining a life threatening injury, the patient’s odds of survival diminish extensively.
B. “Jaws of Life” means equipment used for extrication.
C. “Life Safety Issue” means anything that involves imminent physical injury or death.
D, “All-Weather Access Roadway” means a road with, at a minimum, a compacted
aggregate base that is properly graded, crowned to allow drainage and maintained on a regular basis to permit City of Benson emergency equipment access without causing damage to the emergency equipment.
E. “Emergency Medical Services” means providing medical services through the practice of Basic and Advanced Life Support to preserve life, prevent further injury and promote recovery to patients with out-of-hospital medical illnesses and injuries.
Section 4-3-13-3 EXTRICATION
Due to the time limit of the “Golden Hour,” it is imperative that the use of the “Jaws of Life” and medical treatment not be delayed. With this in mind, dispatching and response for vehicle accidents will be as follows:
A. The Fire Department will be dispatched to all unknown injury, injury and fatal accidents within the City limits. This will also apply to any accident where there is a possible Life Safety concern or the well being of the community.
1 Enacted by Ordinance No. 486
2 Modified by Ordinance No. 531
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.10
B. Outside of the City Limits, the Fire Department shall be dispatched simultaneously with any Emergency Medical Service dispatch for vehicle accidents occurring within the designated sections of the following roads/highways:
1. On Interstate 10 from the Benson City Limits to Milepost 322 (Johnson Rd).
2. On Highway 90 from Interstate 10 to Milepost 300.
3. On Highway 80 from the City Limits to Milepost 298.
4. On Ocotillo Road from the City Limits to Alamo Lane.
5. On Cascabel Road from the City Limits to mile post 7.
6. On Dragoon Road from Interstate 10 to the Community of Dragoon to include Johnson Road.
C. In the event there is a question regarding whether or not to dispatch the Fire Department, THE FIRE DEPARTMENT SHALL BE DISPATCHED.
Section 4-3-13-4 ROADSIDE EMERGENCIES
Because of the immediate threat of a life safety issue during a roadside emergency (vehicle fires, trapped subjects, etc.) the response guidelines shall be as follows:
1. Any incident within the Benson City Limits.
2. All roadside emergencies on Interstate 10 from the Benson City Limits to Milepost 322 (Johnson Rd.) not to include brush fires unless a Life Safety issue exists.
3. All roadside emergencies on Highway 80 to Milepost 298.
4. All roadside emergencies on Ocotillo Road from the City Limits to Willow Lakes.
5. All roadside emergencies on Highway 90 to Milepost 300.
Section 4-3-13-5 BUILDING FIRES (STRUCTURE ASSIGNMENTS)
A. Calls for structure assignments are minimal for the Benson Fire Department however; these types of calls have the greatest potential for loss of life or property. The response guideline shall be as follows:
1. Any structure assignment within the Benson City Limits.
2. Any structure assignment that the City of Benson provides utilities.
3. Any structure assignment on Jenella Drive not receiving City utilities. (The area South and East of the upper water tank on Ridge Drive.)
4. Any structure assignment on both Interstate 10 Frontage Roads (North and South side) traveling East from Pomerene Road.
5. Any structure assignment on Airport Road to and including Astronomer Road.
6. Any structure assignment directly adjacent to the Interstate 10 Frontage Roads (North and South sides) West of Highway 90.
7. Any structure assignment on Ocotillo Road to Milepost 2.
8. Any structure assignment on Highway 80 to A.P. Polston Road.
B. If a structure is not accessible for an Engine Company by means of an all-weather access roadway, the Fire Department will not respond.
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.11
4-3-13-6 NATURAL GAS LEAKS
The presence of natural gas, even an odor is a very serious matter. This is due to the small amount needed for the gas to become a dangerous hazard. For that reason the following response guidelines will be implemented:
1. Any reported gas leak in a commercial or residential area within the City limits at any time. The City Utilities Department can cancel the Fire Department if the situation is determined to be safe.
2. Any reported gas leak West of Easy Street and on Highway 90 with the City Limits (Southwest Gas Service Area).
Section 4-3-13-7 CALLS FOR OTHER TYPES OF SERVICE
A. The Fire Department is called out for many types of non-fire related incidents. These include bee calls, trapped victims and many more. The Fire Department will also be dispatched to any situation where there may be a Life Safety concern or the well being of the community. If an emergency situation arises and a question is raised regarding whether or not to dispatch the Fire Department, the Fire Department should respond. A non-emergency response question can be handled by paging a Senior Officer utilizing Pager 51.
B. The Fire Department will be dispatched to all requests for Emergency Medical Services (EMS) within the City Limits of Benson. This is to include public assists and any other call for service where there may be a medical need.
C. The Fire Department will be dispatched as soon as the call is received by dispatch for any reported fire, smell of smoke, any type of fire alarm (including Carbon Monoxide CO) detectors, sprinkler alarm, smoke alarm or any other alarm (i.e. panic alarm, medical assistance alarm or residential fire alarm) called in by a Citizen or Alarm Company, water rescue, structural hazards (building collapse, roof blown off structures, etc.) or any other Life Safety issue.
Section 4-3-13-8 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
A. Once a Mutual Aid Agreement is executed, Mutual Aid will be given only if there is enough fire personnel remaining within the City Limits to man an Engine Company Mutual Aid will only be given when another agency is on scene or it is a dual dispatch.
B. When a structure assignment for Benson Fire Department is paged out, the Pomerene Fire Department shall be automatically dispatched. The need for other fire departments shall be determined by the situation and location.
C. Mutual Aid will be given as long as the assistance is required.
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.12
Section 4-3-13-9 JOINT TRAINING OPERATIONS
When conducting joint training operations with surrounding fire departments, the Benson Fire Department shall have available an Engine Company and personnel to answer any calls for service during said training.
Section 4-3-13-10 CALLS OUTSIDE OF CITY LIMITS
A. When responding outside of the Benson City Limits for mutual aid, roadside emergencies, structure assignments and other calls for service, excluding extrication calls, the responding apparatus shall wait at the station until there are enough personnel to man an engine company and standby at the station while the call is ongoing.
B. Any apparatus responding to an extrication assignment will respond as soon as there are
enough personnel to man the responding apparatus.
ARTICLE 4-4 EMERGENCY SERVICES
A. The Fire Chief shall serve as the Emergency Services Director.
B. The major responsibility of the emergency services director will be to assure coordination among the operating departments of the city with non-governmental agencies, with county, state and federal levels of government and adjacent governmental agencies to preserve life, prevent injuries and protect property.
C. The emergency services director shall report directly to the City Manager and shall take all actions necessary to return the community to a state of normalcy.
D. The emergency services director shall develop a local disaster plan and conduct such training exercises as may be deemed necessary.
E. Upon approval of the mayor and city council, the emergency services director shall enter into grants, mutual aid and training agreements with other governmental and non-governmental agencies.
5.1
CHAPTER 5 MAGISTRATE
ARTICLE 5-1 MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION
There is hereby established in the city a magistrate's court which shall have jurisdiction of all violations of this code, and jurisdiction concurrently with justices of the peace of precincts in which the city is located of violation of laws of the state committed within the limits of the city. The city council may enter into an intergovernmental agreement with Cochise County to consolidate the magistrate’s duties with the Office of the Justice of the Peace, and said intergovernmental agreement may provide for issuance of criminal and civil citations for violations of state law to the Justice of the Peace Court and may also provide for payment of rent for facilities and/or equipment furnished by the County as agreed upon by the parties to the intergovernmental agreement.
ARTICLE 5-2 PRESIDING OFFICER
5-2-1 Powers and Duties of City Magistrate
5-2-2 Deputy Magistrate
Section 5-2-1 Powers and Duties of City Magistrate and Deputy Magistrate
The powers and duties of the magistrate and deputy magistrate shall include:
A. The powers and duties set forth under the provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this code and the ordinances and resolutions of the city.
B. The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and the proceedings of the court therein.
C. The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and receiving all fines, penalties, fees and other monies as provided by law.
D. Payment of all fees, fines, penalties and other monies collected by the court to the treasurer.
E. Submission of recommendations to the city manager and council regarding all personnel and equipment necessary to carry out judicial responsibilities.
F. Maintenance of all court records regarding the filing of complaints and the judicial or other disposition of all said complaints or claims involving the city.
G. Becoming familiar with the city ordinances, state criminal statutes and other laws coming within the court's jurisdiction.
H. Conduct of court in a manner designed to protect the rights of the accused, safeguard the public and maintain the respect and decorum expected in a court of law.
I. Assisting the city manager in preparing and presenting the annual budget to the council specifically regarding all allocations designed for the judicial department within the city.
MAGISTRATE
5.2
Section 5-2-2 Deputy Magistrate
A. There is hereby created the office of deputy magistrate for the city. The deputy magistrate shall be appointed by the city manager and shall receive such salary as the mayor and council shall from time to time set.
B. The deputy magistrate shall work with the city magistrate doing the work of the office that is assigned and, in the absence of the magistrate, fulfilling the duties of the magistrate.
6.1
CHAPTER 6 ANIMALS
ARTICLE 6-1 GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS1
6-1-1 Dangerous Animals
6-1-2 Noises
6-1-3 Animals Running Loose; Housing; Impoundment
6-1-4 Cruelty to Animals Prohibited
6-1-5 Neglect of Animals Prohibited
6-1-6 Keeping of Livestock
6-1-7 Citations and Penalties
Section 6-1-1 Dangerous Animals
A. It is unlawful to permit any dangerous, vicious animal of any kind, including livestock, to run at large within the city, and such animals shall be immediately impounded by the humane officer. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the chief of police.
B. Members of the police department are authorized to kill any dangerous animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property.
Section 6-1-2 Noises
It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animals which disturb the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.
Section 6-1-3 Animals Running Loose; Housing; Impoundment
A. Regardless of any zoning or other regulations, provisions of this code or ordinances permitting the owning or possessing of animals within the city limits, it is unlawful for anyone to allow any animals of whatsoever kind to run loose and uncontrolled within the city.
B. Any person who keeps or causes to be kept any horses or poultry shall keep such livestock or poultry in a pen or similar enclosure to prevent their roaming at large within the corporate limits of the city. It is unlawful to cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or a health hazard.
1Amended by Ordinance No. 311
C. In the event any animals shall be found running loose and uncontrolled within the city limits, the city, acting through any of its authorized representatives such as the police, humane officer, enforcement agent or any other city employee, shall have the authority to seize and impound such animal and all costs and expenses incurred by the city as a result shall be assessed against the owner of the animal and shall be paid in full before the animal is released.
ANIMALS
6.2
D. In the event that it is impossible to identify the true owner of an impounded animal, or should the owner, after proper notification, refuse or fail within a reasonable time to retrieve his animal, the city may take appropriate steps to auction at public auction any animal determined to be of sufficient value to warrant such auction, or may dispose of the animal in the most humane manner possible, or may deal with the animal as with any other stray animal acquired by the city. In the event of an auction, the city shall subtract from the proceeds all costs and expenses incurred in the seizure, impoundment, care and upkeep of the animal and the costs of the auction and shall return any remainder to the owner of the animal.
Section 6-1-4 Cruelty to Animals Prohibited
It is unlawful as is herein provided, except as otherwise authorized by law, for any person to recklessly, intentionally or by neglect:
A. Subject any animal or poultry under human custody or control to cruel mistreatment by maiming, wounding, torturing, mutilating or inflicting or causing needless suffering; or,
B. Subjecting any animal or poultry under his custody or control to cruel neglect or abandonment; or,
C. Killing any animal or poultry under the custody or control of another without either legal privilege or consent of the owner.
Section 6-1-5 Neglect of Animals Prohibited
It is unlawful as herein provided for any person owning or having the care, custody or control of any animal to fail to insure or arrange for by agreement with another:
A. That the animal receives daily food that is free from contamination and is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain the animal in good health; and,
B. That potable water is reasonably accessible to the animal at all times, either free-flowing or in a clean receptacle; and,
C. That, except for livestock, all animals have convenient access to natural or artificial shelter throughout the year. Any such artificial shelter shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal from injury and from suffering or injury inflicted by the elements, and of sufficient size to permit the animal to enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural manner. Any shelter, or the lack thereof, which does not reasonably protect the animal from the usual temperature extremes or precipitation, or which does not provide adequate ventilation or drainage, is in violation of this section. Any shelter, all bedding and any spaces intended to be accessible to the animal shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the risk of the animal contracting disease, being injured or becoming infested with parasites; and,
D. That the animal receives care and medical treatment for debilitating injuries, parasites and diseases, sufficient to maintain the animal in good health and minimize suffering; and,
ANIMALS
6.3
E. That an animal, other than livestock, be given adequate exercise space by either:
1. Providing an enclosure that shall be constructed of material, and constructed in a manner, to minimize the risk of injury to the animal and the enclosure shall encompass sufficient usable space to keep the animal in good physical condition; or,
2. On a tieout consisting of a chain, leash, wire cable or similar restraint attached to a swivel or pulley. A tieout shall be so located as to keep the animal exclusively on the secured premises. Tieouts shall be so located that they cannot become unreasonably or dangerously entangled with other objects. Collars used to attach an animal to a tieout shall not be of a choke type. No tieout shall employ a restraint which is less than ten feet in length; and,
F. That the animal has adequate ventilation and is protected from temperature extremes at all times. In this connection, it is unlawful for any person to keep any animal in a vehicle or other enclosed space in which the temperature is either so high or so low, or the ventilation is so inadequate, as to clearly endanger the animal's life or health. The city enforcement agent and all state certified police officers are authorized to use whatever force is reasonable and necessary to remove any animal from a vehicle or other enclosed space whenever it appears that the animal's life or health is endangered by extreme temperatures or lack of ventilation within the vehicle or other enclosed space.
G. No city enforcement agent or police officer shall be liable for damages to property caused by the use of reasonable force to remove an animal from such a vehicle or other enclosed space under such circumstances.
Section 6-1-6 Keeping of Livestock
In those areas where the city’s zoning law permits the keeping of any livestock, the owner of said livestock shall be liable for any damage caused to another, or to the property of another, as a result of the livestock entering upon property of another or upon any public property or roadway. It shall not be a defense to any claim or action for damages resulting from livestock when said livestock is on property not the property or lease hold of the livestock owner, to claim lack of negligence, that proper and adequate fencing was maintained by the owner, that gates to the owner’s livestock enclosure were opened by a third party or that the owner has a grandfathered right to allow livestock to run at large.
Section 6-1-7 Citations and Penalties
A. The certified city police officers and the city animal control enforcement agents are hereby authorized to issue written warnings or citations of a civil or criminal nature to any animal owner or person having possession, custody or control of an animal within the city for any violation of this article.
B. A person who violates the provisions of this article shall be issued a warning for the first two such violations within a twenty-four month period provided that the conduct involved is not deliberate, intentional or willful, and the condition complained of is subject to reasonable
ANIMALS
6.4
corrective action. A third or subsequent violation of this article which is not deemed to be deliberate, intentional or willful, within a twenty-four consecutive month period, shall be a petty offense subject to a fine of up to $300.00, and all other violations shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500.00 or a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed thirty days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
C. City police officers and animal control enforcement officers are authorized to capture and impound livestock found upon the lands of another without permission, and all costs of collecting, capturing, keeping and treating any livestock shall constitute a lien therein which shall be paid by the owner as a condition of release of the livestock. Livestock which is not claimed within thirty days and all costs paid in full shall be deemed abandoned and thereafter offered at public sale and the proceeds realized from said sale shall be applied to the costs incurred by the city in conjunction with said livestock and any amount remaining after deducting said amounts shall be returned to the owner, if said ownership is known, and if not, shall become part of the city general fund.
ARTICLE 6-2 VACCINATION, LICENSING AND CONTROL OF DOGS1
6-2-1 Definitions
6-2-2 Licenses and Fees; Dog Tags
6-2-3 Anti-Rabies Vaccination
6-2-4 Rabies Control and Quarantine
6-2-5 Running at Large - Nuisance
6-2-6 Impoundment of Dogs
6-2-7 Interference with Enforcement Agent
6-2-8 Citations
6-2-9 Penalties
Section 6-2-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
1Amended by Ordinances No. 312 and 402
A. "At large" means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or other persons acting on behalf of the owner.
B. "City animal shelter or pound" means the facility maintained by the city for the confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of animals which come into the custody of the city animal enforcement officer during the course of official duties.
C. "City enforcement agent" means persons designated by the city who are responsible for the enforcement of this article and the regulations promulgated hereunder.
D. "Collar" means a band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the neck of a dog to which a license may be affixed.
E. "Dog" means a member of the canis familiaris family.
F. "Owner" means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining a dog.
ANIMALS
6.5
G. "Vaccination" means an anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccine approved by the state veterinarian.
H. "Veterinarian" means any person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in Arizona or any person employed within the State of Arizona by a governmental agency to practice veterinary medicine.
I. "Veterinary hospital" means any establishment operated by a veterinarian licensed to practice in Arizona which provides clinical facilities and houses animals or birds for dental, medical or surgical treatment including all pens, stalls, cages or kennels connected with it and used for quarantine, observation or boarding.
Section 6-2-2 Licenses and Fees; Dog Tags 1
A. 1. An annual license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid for each spayed or neutered dog older than four months of age kept, harbored or maintained within the boundaries of the City for at least sixty (60) days during any calendar year.
2. An annual license fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid for each dog which is not spayed or neutered and older than four months of age kept, harbored or maintained within the boundaries of the City for at least sixty (60) days during any calendar year.
3. Five dollars ($5.00) of each license for a spayed or neutered dog and ten dollars ($10.00) of each license fee for a non spayed or neutered dog shall be used for a fund to help cover the rising costs of having adoptable animals spayed or neutered.
B. License fees shall be due on January 1st of each year, and the license fee shall be paid on or before March 31st of each calendar year to the City of Benson enforcement agent or his or her authorized representative. Any person who fails to obtain a dog license prior to April 1st of each calendar year will be assessed a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the original licensing fee and said penalty shall be in addition to the original licensing fee. 2 This penalty shall not be assessed against applicants who furnish adequate proof that the dog to be licensed has been in their possession in the city for less than sixty (60) days.
1Amended by Ordinance No. 513
2Amended by Ordinance No. 462
C. A guide dog belonging to a blind person who is a resident of this state or any bona fide non-profit organization which is in the business of breeding, raising or training dogs that are to be used for guiding the blind shall, upon application by the owner or organization and presentation of proper proof, be vaccinated and licensed pursuant to this article without payment of a fee.
D. Each dog licensed under the terms of this article shall receive at the time of licensing a tag on which shall be inscribed the name of the city, the number of the license and the year in which it expires. The tag shall be attached to a collar or a harness which shall be worn by
ANIMALS
6.6
the dog at all times except as otherwise provided in this article. When a dog tag is lost, a duplicate tag shall be issued upon application by the owner and payment of a one dollar fee to the city enforcement agent or his authorized representative.
E. It is unlawful for any person to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit an official dog tag or remove such tag from any dog for the purpose of willful and malicious mischief or place a dog tag upon a dog other than the dog to which it was properly issued.
F. Whenever the ownership of a dog has been changed, the new owner of the dog must secure a transfer of license to such owner. A transfer fee of one dollar shall be charged to transfer any license.
G. Dogs while being used for hunting or dogs while being exhibited at bona fide pet shows, or dogs while engaged in racing approved by the Arizona Racing Commission and such dogs while being transported to and from such events need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached, provided that they are properly vaccinated and licensed.
H. The city enforcement agent shall apprehend and impound any dog found without a current valid license tag.
I. As an alternative to the individual licensing provisions set forth in subsection A of this section, a kennel license may be issued upon payment of the fees set forth herein above and said license shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. The applicant must be engaged in the business of breeding, buying and/or selling of dogs of a purebred nature and each such breed must be recognized by the American Kennel Club.
2. The applicant must maintain a current state and city sales tax license.
3. Prior to issuance of kennel license, the humane officer shall inspect the applicant's kennel facilities and shall find them to be safe, sanitary and secure.
4. An applicant for a kennel license, upon issuance of said license shall consent to random and unannounced inspections of the licensed kennel facilities by the city humane officer, officers of the health department and/or licensed city police officers and said inspection shall extend to the records maintained by the licensee who shall exhibit, upon request, any health certificates and/or breeding or show records compiled in connection with dogs housed in the licensed kennel.
The issuance of a kennel license shall in no manner affect the licensee's obligation to control a dog owned in accordance therewith, or to obtain and maintain required vaccinations and certificates or in any other manner fail to comply with the provisions of this article, except that the provisions of subsection D of this section requiring the issuance of individual numbered tags and attachment to a collar or harness worn by said dog shall not apply. A kennel license shall not be construed to authorize the keeping of mixed-breed dogs and any such dog over the age of seven months of age must be individually licensed and comply with the provisions herein above set forth in this section.
Section 6-2-3 Anti-Rabies Vaccination
ANIMALS
6.7
A. Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present a vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian stating the owner's name and address and giving the dog's description, date of vaccination and type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine and date revaccination is due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate issued shall be transmitted to the city enforcement agent on or before the tenth day of the month following the month during which the dog was vaccinated. No dog shall be licensed unless it is vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this article and regulations promulgated hereunder.
B. A dog vaccinated in any other place prior to entry into the city may be licensed in the city provided that, at the time of licensing, the owner of such dog presents a vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian licensed to practice in that place or a veterinarian employed by a governmental agency in that place, stating the owner's name and address, giving the dog's description, date of vaccination, and type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used. The vaccination must be in conformity with the provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated hereunder.
C. The city enforcement agent may make provisions for low cost vaccination clinics as deemed necessary. The vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian.
Section 6-2-4 Rabies Control and Quarantine
A. If a dog is impounded and found to be unvaccinated, the city animal enforcement agent is hereby authorized to cause the dog to be vaccinated at the city animal shelter at a cost to be borne by the owner. The vaccination shall be administered by an Arizona licensed veterinarian, or a person legally authorized to administer such vaccinations, and a certificate of vaccination shall be issued and delivered to the owner upon payment of the fees assessed in conjunction with the impoundment.
B. Whenever a dog bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the city enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge of the incident.
C. Any dog that bites any person shall be quarantined and impounded or, at the request and expense of the owner, placed in a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than ten days. The owner of any dog that has bitten a person may voluntarily deliver the dog to the city animal enforcement agent at the city animal shelter; otherwise a five dollar fee shall be charged if the city enforcement agent must pick up the dog for confinement. If a dog is impounded at the city animal shelter for observation under this provision, the owner shall be charged the then current daily boarding fee as set by the city council.
D. Any dog or other animal suspected of rabies or exhibiting any of the clinical symptoms of rabies, as determined by a licensed veterinarian, shall be placed under observation in the pound or other designated place for a period of fourteen days. It is unlawful for any person to destroy or dispose of an animal suspected of rabies or which shows any clinical symptoms of rabies without immediately delivering the carcass to the health department or city enforcement agent.
E. It is unlawful for a person to rescue or attempt to rescue an animal which has been impounded or which is in the possession of the city enforcement agent.
ANIMALS
6.8
Section 6-2-5 Running at Large - Nuisance
A. No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining a dog shall allow said dog to be at large. A dog is not deemed to be at large:
1. If said dog is restrained by a leash, chain, rope or cord of sufficient strength and length to control the actions of said dog.
2. While said dog is actively engaged in dog obedience training, accompanied by and under the control of his owner or trainer, provided that the person training said dog has in his possession a dog leash of sufficient strength and length to control said dog, and, further, that said dog is actually enrolled in or has graduated from a dog obedience training school.
3. While said dog is being used for hunting purposes.
4. While said dog is being exhibited at a bona fide dog show.
5. While said dog is engaged in racing approved by the Arizona Racing Commission.
B. No person shall maintain a dog, or any other animal or group of animals, in such a manner as to deprive others of the enjoyment of their lives or property due to noise, barking, inflicting damage or injury by jumping upon, biting or scratching, pollution of vegetation or air, including the owner's premises, or by permitting nauseous or foul odors offensive to another person's senses or constituting an actual or potential public health hazard.
C. The city enforcement agent shall apprehend and impound any dog running at large contrary to the provisions of this section.
D. When a dog is found running at large and the dog's owner is known to the enforcement agent, the dog need not be impounded if a citation can be immediately issued to the owner and the owner agrees to properly confine the dog.
Section 6-2-6 Impoundment of Dogs
A. Upon impounding any licensed dog, the owner shall be promptly notified. Each unlicenced dog impounded shall be kept and maintained at the pound for a minimum of three days. At the expiration of the impoundment period, anyone may claim the dog provided such person pays all established pound fees and complies with the licensing provisions of this chapter within seventy-two hours. If no person claims the dog, the city enforcement agent may dispose of the dog in a humane manner.
B. Any impounded licensed dog may be reclaimed provided that the person reclaiming the dog furnishes proof of right to do so and pays all established pound fees. If the dog is not reclaimed within six days, the city enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the dog for adoption or may dispose of the dog in a humane manner. Any person adopting such a dog shall pay all established pound fees.
C. Impoundment charges shall be as follows:
ANIMALS
6.9
1. First impoundment of an adult dog which has not been spayed or neutered, fifty dollars, plus the cost of boarding the dog at the daily rate, set by city council, for each day, or portion thereof, the dog is held at the city animal shelter. As an alternative to impoundment charge and the boarding fees, the owner may elect to have the dog spayed or neutered, by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense, and in the event of such election, owner shall provide the enforcement officer satisfactory evidence of non-refundable pre-payment of the veterinary charges to be incurred.
2. First impoundment of a spayed or neutered dog, twenty-five dollars, plus the costs of boarding as set forth in paragraph 1 of this subsection. Satisfactory evidence that a dog has been spayed or neutered shall be provided to the animal enforcement agent prior to the dog's release under this provision.
3. Second impoundment of a dog, which has not been spayed or neutered, within a single twelve consecutive month period, seventy-five dollars, plus the costs of boarding, as set forth above. As an alternative to impoundment charge and the boarding fees, the owner may elect to have the dog spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense, and in the event of such election, owner shall provide the animal enforcement agent satisfactory evidence of non-refundable pre-payment of the veterinary charges to be incurred.
4. Second impoundment of a spayed or neutered dog within a single twelve consecutive month period, fifty dollars, plus the cost of boarding as set forth above.
5. Third and all subsequent impoundments within a single twelve consecutive month period, one hundred dollars, plus the applicable daily boarding fee, regardless of whether or not the dog has been spayed or neutered.
D. Any licensed or unlicensed dog which apparently is suffering from serious injuries and is in great pain and probably would not recover, or which has evidence of any infectious disease which is a danger to other dogs or to man, may be destroyed by the city enforcement agent in as humane a manner as possible after reasonable efforts to notify the owner have failed.
E. The fee charged for boarding of dogs and other animals, for whatever reason, shall be set by the mayor and city council by resolution.
Section 6-2-7 Interference with Enforcement Agent
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the city enforcement agent in the performance of his duties.
Section 6-2-8 Citations
ANIMALS
6.10
The city enforcement agent is hereby authorized to issue written warnings or signed complaints to any dog owner for any violation of this article.
Section 6-2-9 Penalties
A. Any owner or other person who violates Section 6-2-5 by allowing his animal to run at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars.
B. Any owner or other person who fails to comply with any other of the requirements of this article or who violates any of its provisions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars.
7.1
CHAPTER 7 BUILDING
ARTICLE 7-1 UNIFORM CODES1
7-1-1 Adoption
7-1-2 Board of Appeals
7-1-3 Annual Review
Section 7-1-1 Adoption2
The documents listed in this Section are on file with the City Clerk's office and are adopted and made part of the Benson City Code so that they apply within the City of Benson, Arizona.
The International Building Code, The International Plumbing Code, The International Mechanical Code, The International Residential Code, The International Fuel Gas Code, The International Property Maintenance Code, The International Energy Conservation Code, The International Existing Building Code, The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, all of which are the 2015 editions, as amended by Exhibit A to Resolution 36-2017 ; and
The National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, as amended by Exhibit A amended by Exhibit A to Resolution 36-2017; and
The International Fire Code, 2015 edition, as amended by Exhibit B to Resolution 36-2017; and
The International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2015 edition; and
The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials hereto.
Section 7-1-2 Board of Appeals3
Section 7-1-3 Annual Review
The documents adopted pursuant to this article shall be reviewed annually by the building inspector and the board of appeals and any discrepancies noted or changes recommended shall be provided to the council by the building inspector.
1Amended by Ordinance No. 337, 375, 406, 489 and 532
2 Amended by Ordinance 588
3 Amended by Ordinance 588
BUILDING
7.2
ARTICLE 7-2 UNIFORM STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
7-2-1 Adoption
7-2-2 Amendments, Modifications, Deletions and Additions
7-2-3 Minimum Standards for Material and Construction for Work in Public Right-of-Way
7-2-4 Annual Review
7-2-5 Areas of Application
Section 7-2-1 Adoption
A. The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction as sponsored by the Maricopa Association of Governments, 1979 Edition with the consolidations of all subsequent supplements thereto, as well as the amendments to these specifications as set forth by the Cochise County engineer's office in their entirety, except that in those instances where said specifications conflict with the City of Benson=s Utility Construction Standards or the City of Benson Utility Department Material Specifications, said local utility construction standards and material specifications shall be applicable along with any other exceptions otherwise provided herein.
B. There shall be kept on file with the clerk or the building inspector or both, current copies of the "Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction", sponsored by the Maricopa Association of Governments and "Cochise County Standard Specifications for Public Improvements", along with modifications and amendments designated "Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Improvement, City of Benson". All the above documents shall be available to the public for study or examination whenever the city offices are open for business.
Section 7-2-2 Amendments, Modifications, Deletions and Additions
The city hereby adopts the following amendments, modifications, deletions and additions to the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction:
A. Definitions and Terms (101.2)
1. “Board of Supervisors”. Wherever the term "Board of Supervisors" appears it shall be interpreted to include the City of Benson acting under the laws of the State of Arizona. In addition, 'Maricopa County" or "Cochise County" shall be construed to mean the City of Benson.
2. “City”. This shall be construed to mean the City of Benson.
3. “Engineer or city engineer”. This shall be construed to mean that person or persons duly authorized by the city to act as the city's representative in the engineering field.
B. Bidding Requirements and Contracts (Section 102)
BUILDING
7.3
Additional Requirements: This section is not applicable to projects other than those administered under the City of Benson construction contracts.
C. Award and Execution of Contracts (Section 103)
Additional Requirements: This section is not applicable to projects other than those administered under the City of Benson construction contracts.
D. Scope and Work (Section 104)
Cleanup and Dust Control (104.6)
The following provision shall supersede that presently found in the reference and entitled "Basis for Dust Control":
"Dust control requirements shall be those of the Arizona Health Department Rules and Regulations for Air Pollution as Applicable for Cochise County and the City of Benson, Arizona".
E. Control of Work (Section 105)
1. Authority of the Engineer (105.1)
Additional Requirements: On all projects other than city contract projects, a professional engineer shall be employed by the subdivider or permittee who, subject to the approval of the city, shall provide the plans, construction surveys and the inspection of work specified herein and shall give certification to the city that such services have been property performed. Final inspection and acceptance of the work shall be made by the city.
F. Control of Materials (Section 106)
1. Samples and Tests of Materials (106.2)
Additional Requirements: The sampling and testing of materials and work in all projects other than city contract projects shall be the responsibility of the subdivider or permittee who shall retain a professional engineer or recognized material testing laboratory, approved by the city, to perform such tests as specified herein and certify the results to the city.
G. Commencement, Prosecution and Progress (Section 108)
1. Failure to Complete on Time (108.9)
Additional Requirements: The foregoing provision for assessment of liquidated damages shall not be applicable to projects other than city contract projects. In the event of failure of a subdivider or permittee to satisfactorily complete the work within the time specified in the permit or construction authorization, then the city may proceed to obtain completion and/or corrections in accordance with the procedures set forth for forfeiture or default of contract.
H. Measurement and Payments (Section 109)
BUILDING
7.4
Additional Requirements: This section is not applicable to projects other than those administered under city construction contracts unless specifically provided for in the special provisions for the work.
Section 7-2-3 Minimum Standards for Materials and Construction for Work in Public Right-of-Way
The documents adopted pursuant to this article, all of which taken together shall comprise the "Uniform Standard Specifications for the Public Works Improvement, City of Benson", shall establish minimum standards for material and construction for work in any public right-of-way not a state highway and not a county road within the city limits of the city and compliance with the same shall be required on all new subdivision work or installation authorized on public right-of-way by permit in the city.
Section 7-2-4 Annual Review
The documents adopted pursuant to this article shall be reviewed annually by the general services supervisor and any discrepancies noted or changes recommended shall be provided to the council by the general services supervisor.
Section 7-2-5 Areas of Application
The standards and regulations contained within the documents adopted pursuant to this article shall be established for the improvements and construction of streets and utilities within the rights-of-way of public roads, streets, alleys and easements of the city.
ARTICLE 7-3 MOBILE HOMES/MANUFACTURED HOUSING
7-3-1 Inspection Fees
7-3-2 Installation Standards
Section 7-3-1 Inspection Fees
The inspection fee schedule shall be in accordance with paragraph (A)(5) of A.R.S. Section 41-2144 and shall be subject to an administrative fee of $20.00.
Section 7-3-2 Installation Standards
A. The following standards described in this article are the minimum standards to cover all mobile manufactured housing installations, not covered by contract #6 between the State of Arizona and the City of Benson.
BUILDING
7.5
B. All manufactured homes manufactured after July 31, 1977, shall be installed according to the manufacturer's instructions, but in all cases, they must meet these minimum standards.
1. Load bearing support: Prefabricated and permanent.
a. Supports shall be located under the main beams of the chassis at intervals no greater than six feet and no more than two feet from the ends of each main beam, except, where running gear is in conflict, then as close as possible to gear.
b. Supports shall bear no more than 8,000 pounds.
c. The supports shall have a minimum vertical concentrated load failure rating of 14,000 pounds.
2. Prefabricated support heights.
a. No more than twenty-five percent of the supports along the main beams, including footings, shall have a height in excess of 36 inches or less than 12 inches.
b. The minimum height of the bottom of the floor joist shall be 18 inches above the soil base unless otherwise specified by manufacturer of same.
3. Permanent support heights and design.
a. The maximum height shall be compatible with the construction of the support.
b. The minimum height shall be compatible with the requirements for clearance above soil in paragraph 2b of this subsection.
4. Footings.
a. Prefabricated footings:
(1) Each footing shall be of such design and construction to withstand the transferred load from the load bearing support to the earth.
(2) Footings shall be placed only on surfaces adequately prepared to distribute equalized transfer of applied loads and to minimize settling of the footings.
(3) The minimum size of each footing shall be compatible with local soil conditions.
b. Permanent footings per Uniform Building Code.
5. Wedges.
a. Wedges may be placed only between the load bearing supports and main beams.
b. Wedges shall be capable of transfer of applied load.
BUILDING
7.6
c. Wedges shall be limited to two on any one bearing support.
6. Utility hookups shall be pursuant to:
a. Uniform Plumbing Code, edition adopted by Council.
b. National Electrical Code in force.
c. The inspection of gas connections shall be as follows:
(1) With appliance gas valves removed from piping system and piping capped at those areas, piping systems shall stand a pressure of at least three P.S.I. gage for a period of not less than ten minutes without showing any drop in pressure.
(2) Remove caps and reinstall gas valves and appliance connectors. Retest connections at line pressure with soapy water.
ARTICLE 7-4 FIRE PREVENTION
7-4-1 Establishment and Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention
7-4-2 Duties of Building Inspector Related to Bureau of Fire Prevention
7-4-3 Amendments to Fire Prevention Codes and Standards
7-4-4 Storage of Hazardous Liquids, Gases or Materials
7-4-5 Modifications to Fire Prevention Codes and Standards
7-4-6 Appeals
7-4-7 Fire Hydrant Installation
Section 7-4-1 Establishment and Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention
A. The Bureau of Fire Prevention is hereby established within the building inspection division and shall be operated under the supervision of the building inspector. The fire chief or fire department designate shall be an active consultant in the bureau activities.
B. The duties of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be those set out in the codes and standards as adopted in Section 7-1-1.
Section 7-4-2 Duties of Building Inspector Related to Bureau of Fire Prevention
The building inspector shall have the following duties related to the bureau of fire prevention:
A. Detail employees of the building inspection section as inspectors as may be necessary.
B. Recommend to the city manager the employment of technical inspectors who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through a process as adopted by the city to determine their fitness for the position.
BUILDING
7.7
C. Make reports of the bureau of fire prevention upon request to the city manager.
D. Review all building and structure plans and specifications presented by permit applicants to determine whether the plans and specifications meet the requirements as specified in the adopted codes and standards of Section 7-1-1.
E. Allow the fire chief and utilities supervisor to review said plans and specifications to provide recommendations for fire hydrant placement and water main size.
Section 7-4-3 Amendments to Fire Prevention Codes and Standards
Recommendations for amendments to the fire prevention codes and standards may be made by the building inspector, the fire chief or any other interested person and shall be submitted to the mayor and council for approval through the city manager.
Section 7-4-4 Storage of Hazardous Liquids, Gases or Materials
A. Districts in Which the Storage of Flammable Liquids in Outside Aboveground Tanks Shall be Prohibited. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited within the areas zoned R1, R2, R3, B1, B2.
B. Districts in Which the Storage in Bulk of Liquefied Petroleum Gases is Restricted. The limits referred to in Section 82.105(a) of the Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby declared to be all areas zoned R1, R2, R3, B1, B2.
C. Districts in Which Storage of Explosives and Blasting Agents is Prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 77.106(b) of the Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby declared to be all areas zoned R1, R2, R3, B1, B2, 11, 12.
Section 7-4-5 Modifications to Fire Prevention Codes and Standards
The building inspector shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention codes or standards upon application in writing by the owner or lessee desiring the modification or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code or standard, provided that the spirit of the code or standard shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed, and the decision of the building inspector thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the bureau of fire prevention and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
Section 7-4-6 Appeals
BUILDING
7.8
Whenever an application for modification of a fire prevention code or standard is not approved, or application of a permit is refused, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code or standard do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code or standard have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from that decision to the Board of Appeals as described in Section 7-1-2 of the city code.
Section 7-4-7 Fire Hydrant Installation4
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this article:
1. “Commercial developer” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, association syndicate, trust or other legal entity filing an application for a building permit for any nonresidential development.
2. “Development” means construction of one or more new structures for nonresidential purposes or the construction of new residential structures requiring subdivision approval in accordance with Chapter 14 of the Code. Modification of an existing nonresidential structure by construction work and materials valued at more than $250,000 shall be considered a new structure for purposes of this section.
4Established by Ordinance No. 351
3. ” Fire hydrant” means a mechanical device approved by the Benson Fire Chief and the Benson City Manager and specifically manufactured for the purpose of supplying water from a water main to fire pumping apparatus along with the appropriately sized valve which shall be installed between the hydrant device and the water main line.
4. “Primary feeder” means the arterial mains that form the skeleton of the water distribution system.
5. “Secondary feeder” means the mainline that carries water from the primary feeders to other points in the system in order to provide normal service supply and fire suppression.
6. “Subdivider” shall be as defined in Section 14-1-2.
B. Application:
Fire protection facilities, including fire hydrants and water mains, installed after November 5, 1993 shall conform to the minimum standards hereinafter set forth.
C. Installation Standards:
1. Hydrant Spacing. The maximum lineal distance between hydrants along streets in congested area shall be 300 ft. and 500 ft. in all other districts or as otherwise specified by the fire chief and city manager taking into consideration the nature of the planned uses for the area, proximity to other hydrants and the sizing and the fire flow capability of the hydrant being considered.
BUILDING
7.9
2. Hydrant Locations. Hydrants shall be located at intersections and in the middle of long blocks and at the end of dead-end streets. Hydrants may be at locations designated by the fire chief or his representative within large properties so as to be accessible to fire apparatus.
3. Water Mains and Valves. Primary feeders shall form a loop of about 3,000 feet in length or two-thirds of distance from the center of a development to the outskirts of a development. Primary feeders shall be a minimum of twelve inches in diameter or larger when necessary to achieve required fire flow and maintain residual pressure specified. Valves on primary feeders shall not be over 1000 feet apart, and the mains connecting to them shall be valved where connected.
Secondary feeders shall form smaller loops within the loops of the primary mains by running from one primary feeder to another. Secondary feeders shall be spaced one block apart. Secondary feeders shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter. Valves on secondary feeders shall be installed in the following manner: Four at crosses, three at tees, and one on each hydrant branch.
Inline valve spacing shall not exceed 500 feet in long blocks.
All water pipe size, class and/or wall thickness or pressure rating, such as schedule or standard dimension ratio (SDR) shall be specified by the utilities manager and approved by the fire chief.
In newly platted subdivisions, the fire chief or the utility manager may require the installation of primary water feeder mains, i.e., water mains supplying eight inch mains of such larger size as is appropriate for adequate fire flow to the area being platted or future subdivisions deemed likely to occur within the subsequent thirty year term.
4. Hydrant Specification. Fire hydrants shall have two two and one-half inch outlets and one four and one-half inch outlet. The four and one-half inch outlet shall be installed so that the outlet faces the street and the bottom of the outlet shall be no less than one foot above the surface of existing or proposed streets or sidewalks. Threads on all outlets shall be National Standard Hose Threads. Hydrant type, size and brand shall be specified by Benson utility department.
5. In cases where it is infeasible to loop the water system, the water mains supplying water to fire hydrants shall be of an appropriate size pipe designated by the fire chief or his authorized representative, however, the size of pipe so designated shall not be less than eight inches in diameter.
D. Installation Responsibility:
The fire protection facilities required by this section shall be installed by, and at the expense of, the subdivider or commercial developer and upon completion of said installation, and the approval thereof by the fire chief and the utility department, the title to all such facilities shall pass to the city free of any liens and thereafter shall be maintained by the city.
E. Site Plan Approval:
BUILDING
7.10
Site plans will be approved by the planning and zoning commission only after the plans have been certified by the fire chief or his authorized representative as conforming to the foregoing standards or approved deviations and the design and specifications for the fire protection facilities and water mains approved by the utility department supervisor. In the event that plans have not been returned with required changes noted within ten days after submission to the fire chief or the utility department, the planning and zoning commission shall proceed to act upon the site plan as if the required certification and approval had been granted.
F. Limits on New Construction:
No new development, as defined herein above, involving combustible materials shall be undertaken until such time as the building site is in compliance with the minimum standard set forth hereinafter in Section 7-4-7 (G).
G. Minimum Standard:
In the event the council, the fire chief or his authorized representative determines it is infeasible to construct hydrants to meet the spacing requirements stated herein a minimum of one hydrant shall be installed no greater than five hundred feet from the furthest point of any proposed new building in all districts.
H. Waiver by Council Action:
Any provision of this article may be waived by a two-thirds vote of the mayor and council present at a duly noticed regular or special meeting attended by quorum.
8.1
CHAPTER 8 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 8-1 BUSINESS LICENSES1
8-1-1 Definitions
8-1-2 License Required
8-1-3 Fees
8-1-4 Multiple Businesses
8-1-5 Non-Assignability of Licenses
8-1-6 Information Required
8-1-7 Receipt for License
8-1-8 Display of License
8-1-9 Renewal of License
8-1-10 Violations and Evidence of Violations
Section 8-1-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Business” means all activities or acts, personal or corporate, engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of pecuniary gain, benefit or advantage, such as selling, trading or rendering services but shall not include:
1. Casual activities such as yard sales occurring not more than four (4) times during a single calendar year,
2. Consignments to a reseller or dealer holding a current city license issued for the consignee's resale business, or
3. Rental of a single residential unit by the owner.
B. "Business license application" means that application form provided by the office of the city clerk and completed as a prerequisite for obtaining a city business license.
C. "Home occupation" means a business conducted from a residential property or from a property in a residentially zoned district. A home occupation permit must be approved by the planning and zoning commission before a business license may be issued.
1Modified by Ordinances No. 359, 368 and 388
D. "Solicitor" means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling on foot or by any type of conveyance, from place to place, house to house, or street to street, selling, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods or services of any nature whatsoever, for either immediate or future delivery or performance, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether advance payment is collected on such sales or not. The term "solicitor" shall also include any person who might be referred to as a "peddler" and does not permit the described activities to occur at a fixed or stationary location without compliance with all appropriate requirements of the zoning ordinances applicable to business locations.
BUSINESS: LICENSES AND TAXES
8.2
E. "Yard sale" means the casual sale of excess personal property conducted from a residential property on an infrequent basis not to exceed four times per year. A single yard sale may begin on Friday and be continued through Sunday or a single yard sale may last up to four days if held in conjunction with a national holiday. In no event may a single yard sale continue for longer than four consecutive days. All signs, including temporary yard sale direction signs, shall be removed or collected immediately upon conclusion of the yard sale. Failure to collect or remove yard sale signs constitutes a violation.
Section 8-1-2 License Required
A city business license is required by all persons, partnerships, associations, companies, corporations or other entities conducting, operating or engaging in any business pursuit, enterprise, trade or profession within the city. This business license is required in addition to an Arizona Privilege Tax (sales tax) License.
Section 8-1-3 Fees
The city business license fee is established at $25.00 per year, however, the city council may periodically adjust the business license fee. The city clerk may prorate this fee for a one-half year license. This fee shall be collected from each and every type of business operating within the city. The business license fee shall be an annual fee due in July of each year.
Section 8-1-4 Multiple Businesses
In the event that any person or organization doing business within the city shall be engaged in more than one business, such person or organization shall obtain a separate business license for each non-contiguous business location. In the event a person conducts more than one business on a single property or on contiguous properties, only one business license fee shall be charged, unless a separate state sales tax license or federal identification number has been issued in conjunction therewith in which event a separate business license shall be issued and a fee collected for each business whether on single or contiguous properties.
Section 8-1-5 Non-Assignability of Licenses
No license granted or issued under any of the provisions of this article shall be in any manner assignable or transferable, nor shall it authorize any person other than is named therein to do business, or authorize the same to be done in any other place than is therein named or designated.
Section 8-1-6 Information Required
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to require and obtain from every applicant for a license under this article, a signed and completed business license application. The business license application shall specify the name of the person, firm, association or corporation to whom the license is to be issued,
BUSINESS: LICENSES AND TAXES
8.3
the location of the business, the nature of the business and other information about the business or the business owner determined to be necessary.
Section 8-1-7 Receipt for License
Upon payment of the appropriate license fee, the applicant shall receive a license receipt which shall affirm compliance with this article, shall set forth the amount paid and the date of expiration of the license and shall be signed by the clerk or a duly authorized agent thereof.
Section 8-1-8 Display of License
A. Any person having obtained a license pursuant to this article shall exhibit the same at all times while in force in some conspicuous part of the place of business and shall produce the same when required to do so by any officer of the police department or other duly authorized agent of the city.
B. Any peddler, solicitor or mobile merchant while engaged in peddling, shall carry their license and exhibit the same when requested to do so by any municipal officer or any citizen of the community. In the event a business licensee has more than one employee who is soliciting at different locations, such as a door to door solicitor, each such employee shall carry a copy of the business license and shall display the same upon request from any person, whether or not such person is a city employee.
Section 8-1-9 Renewal of License
Business licenses acquired pursuant to this article may be renewed at their expiration date by appearing in person at the office of the city clerk or by mailing the completed renewal application which shall be mailed to the licensee at the mailing address shown in the city records. The renewal shall provide for verification of the facts on file at the city clerk's office and payment of the appropriate fee. No application for renewal of a business license will be unreasonably denied. Failure to receive the renewal form by mail shall not excuse compliance with the renewal requirement after August 1st of the year due.
Section 8-1-10 Violations and Evidence of Violations
A. The fact that a person or organization is engaged in any business which, pursuant to this article, requires a license, or that such person or organization has exhibited a sign indicating such business is being pursued, shall be prima facie evidence of the liability of such person or organization to pay a license fee.
B. In any legal action initiated by the city for the violation of any of the provisions of this article, in the absence of proof by the defendant otherwise, it shall be presumed that no license has been issued and the burden of proof as to the issuance of the license shall be upon the defendant.
BUSINESS: LICENSES AND TAXES
8.4
C. Each day of failure to obtain a required business license or renew an expired business license shall constitute a single offense punishable as provided in the city code or by injunction or both.
D. Any person, partnership or other entity believed to be conducting a Abusiness@ as defined in Section 8-1-1, shall be mailed, or personally delivered, a copy of this chapter, including any subsequent amendments thereto, and not less than ten calendar days thereafter, may be found guilty of a violation of these requirements if not then in possession of a currently issued business license.
E. A violation of this article shall constitute a civil offense punishable by a penalty of up to twenty-five dollars for each offense or occurrence determined by the court to have occurred plus court and related enforcement costs.
ARTICLE 8-2 LIQUOR LICENSE FEES
A. All persons, organizations or other entities desirous of manufacturing or selling alcoholic beverages within the city shall obtain a license to do so from the State of Arizona and also from the city. Applications for said license shall be made with the clerk and shall be in accordance with those rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the council in regular session.
B. All licenses issued by the city shall be for the calendar year commencing January 1 and ending December 31. If application is made on or after July 1, only one-half of the annual fee shall be collected by the city and said license shall expire on the first day of the following year.
The following fees shall be charged by the clerk:
1. Wholesaler's license to sell all alcoholic beverages - two hundred fifty dollars.
2. Wholesaler's license to sell only wine and beer - one hundred dollars.
3. Hotel or on-sale retailer's license to sell all alcoholic beverages by individual portions and in the original containers - one hundred fifty dollars.
4. Hotel or on-sale retailer's license to sell only wine and beer by individual portions and in the original containers - seventy-five dollars.
5. On-sale retailer's license to sell only beer by individual portion and in the original container - twenty-five dollars.
6. Off-sale retailer's license to sell all alcoholic beverages - fifty dollars.
7. Off -sale retailer's license to sell wine and beer only - fifty dollars.
8. Off -sale retailer's license to sell beer only - twenty-five dollars.
BUSINESS: LICENSES AND TAXES
8.5
ARTICLE 8-3 MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
8-3-1 Billboards
8-3-2 Communication Services
Section 8-3-1 Billboards
The erection and maintenance of signs, billboards and similar structures on the streets, alleys and public thoroughfares of the city is prohibited.
Section 8-3-2 Communication Services
A. The mayor and council shall have the right to enter into negotiations and discussions resulting in agreements, franchises or other contractual relations with organizations or individuals pertaining to the installation of all types of communication services, including but not limited to fiber-optic systems, cable television, wired and/or wireless internet connections, satellite services and radio services. A public hearing shall be held prior to acceptance of any proposals for said services.
B. No individual or organization dealing in any communication service subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section shall be allowed to operate within the city limits without first obtaining a license, permit, franchise or other authorization from the council. Said license, permit, franchise or other authorization shall not be transferable to any other individual or organization or entity without the express consent of the council.
ARTICLE 8-4 INTENT
It is the purpose and intention of the council to encourage and, whenever possible, stimulate private enterprise within the city. Consequently, whenever the city must impose restrictions or limitations, those restrictions or limitations are to be construed narrowly in order to minimize the imposition upon the citizens. This statement must be read, however, in connection with this code and all the city ordinances and also in conjunction with the obligation of the council to safeguard the overall welfare of all the members of the community.
ARTICLE 8-5 SOLICITORS1
8-5-1 Application for License
8-5-2 Special License Required
8-5-3 Fees
8-5-4 Exemptions
8-5-5 Prohibited Activities
1Modified by Ordinances No. 359, 368 and 388
BUSINESS: LICENSES AND TAXES
8.6
Section 8-5-1 Application for License
Applications for licenses by solicitors shall be made to the office of the city clerk on a city license application that requires the following minimum information:
A. Arizona privilege tax license information.
B. Benson business license number.
C. Name of applicant.
D. Permanent and/or local address of applicant.
E. A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted and the goods to be sold and if the goods are farm or orchard products, a statement whether they are produced or grown by applicant.
F. If applicant is an employee and not the owner of the business, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing exact relationship.
G. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
H. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with Arizona state vehicle number or other means of identification.
I. The name of all individuals working with or for the applicant.
J. Such other information as the city clerk may deem necessary for the proper protection of the city.
Section 8-5-2 Special License Required
Licenses are required for all solicitors, except those exempted in Section 8-5-4 prior to conducting any business within the city limits. All applications shall be acted upon and a license issued, where appropriate, as soon as reasonably possible. Appeals from the denial of a soliciting license shall be brought before the mayor and council at the next regularly scheduled meeting by having the city clerk place the matter on the agenda for that meeting.
Section 8-5-3 Fees
The fee for solicitors shall be: $25 dollars per day; $50 dollars per quarter or $75 dollars per year, as the applicant elects at the time of purchasing said license.
Section 8-5-4 Exemptions
BUSINESS: LICENSES AND TAXES
8.7
All non-profit organizations represented by persons permanently residing within the local area, delivery vehicles making delivery for sales made elsewhere and out-of-town businesses supporting a special event approved by the city council, such as the Benson-San Pedro Valley Chamber of Commerce or the Benson Merchants Association, are not required to obtain a solicitor's license.
Section 8-5-5 Prohibited Activities
A solicitor shall not:
A. Shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device or musical instrument, including any loudspeaking radio or sound amplifying system, in excess, for the purposes of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
B. Conduct business from any city-owned or city-controlled property and shall not be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operation might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
C. Sell or offer for sale goods, wares or merchandise from vehicles on any of the public streets of the city provided, however, that the prohibition herein contained shall not include the peddling of fresh food products of farm or garden, nor bona fide deliveries of goods, wares, merchandise or food made on a regular route to regular customers.
D. Solicit or peddle from 8:00 o'clock p.m. to 8:00 o'clock a.m., or at any time when a sign has been posted on a building stating "No solicitors or peddlers", or words to that effect, except that a licensed solicitor may call upon the occupant of a residence at other times when the solicitor has received express prior permission from that occupant to do so.
E. A violation of this article shall constitute a civil offense punishable by a penalty of up to twenty-five dollars for each offense or occurrence determined by the court to have occurred.
8A.1
CHAPTER 8A TAX CODE 1
ARTICLE 8A-1 ADOPTION OF TAX CODE
That certain document known as "The Tax Code of the City of Benson, Arizona", three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Benson, Arizona is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.
1 Modified by Ordinance 453 – 2002 Amendments
Modified by Ordinance 463, 477, 482
Modified by Ordinance 501 – 2006 Amendments
Modified by Ordinance 508 – 2007 Amendments
Modified by Ordinance 526 – 2008 Amendments
Modified by Ordinance 538 – 2009 Amendments
Modified by Ordinance 560 – 2011 Amendments
9.1
CHAPTER 9 HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 9-1 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
9-1-1 Definitions
9-1-2 Rates
9-1-3 Garbage Containers
9-1-4 Responsible Authority
9-1-5 Authority to Classify and Assess
9-1-6 Enforcement and Administration
9-1-7 Solid Waste Collection System
9-1-8 Collection - Business Houses
9-1-9 Disposal Site; Rules and Regulations
9-1-10 Inspection
9-1-11 Prohibited Acts
9-1-12 Annual Review and Notification
Section 9-1-1 Definitions
In this article unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Collector" means the city or its authorized representative including a contract collection service, assigned the task of the collection of solid waste within the city.
B. "Commercial" means contributors who occupy a single business location and who could or do place their normal refuse in individual containers, so constructed that require the removal of the refuse from the container rather than the dumping of the container itself. Commercial is considered any customer who cannot be classified as residential or general business and comprises mobile home parks, apartments, hotels, motels and other multi-residential activities of more than one dwelling unit under a common roof and comprises all businesses, commercial, institutional, governmental and similar activities.
C. "Contributor" means all owners, agents or tenants of properties within the city who generate solid waste. Each contributor is considered a separate account and assessed all required charges.
D. "Dwelling unit" means any residential building structure or portion thereof, whether it be attached or under common roof, which serves the purpose of providing private living quarters for more than one person comprising a family. Each dwelling unit is considered a separate residential contributor for the purpose of assigning charges. Each dwelling unit shall be allowed three containers.
E. "General business" means contributors who occupy a single business location and who could or do place their solid waste in individual containers, weighing less than fifty pounds, providing, however, that their normal refuse can be placed in not more than three containers for pick up, not more than twice per week.
F. "Owner and occupant" means every person in possession, charge or in control of any dwelling, flat, rooming house or any eating place, shop, place of business or business establishment, where garbage or other refuse is created or accumulated.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.2
G. "Residential" means contributors who live in a dwelling unit and who could or do place their normal solid waste in individual containers, weighing less than fifty pounds. Buildings having more than one unit under a common roof are not considered residential.
H. "Solid waste" means all food putrescible waste, except sewage and body waste, including waste accumulated of animal or vegetable matter, and including meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetable and shall include all such waste, accumulations of vegetable matter of residents, restaurants, hotels and places where food is prepared for human consumption. It shall also include tin cans and bottles but shall not include recognized industrial by-products.
Section 9-1-2 Rates1
A. To assure the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, a refuse service disposal charge shall be assessed by the council and collected from all owners, agents or tenants of developed properties located within the city.
B. There shall be an assessment monthly or any portion of a month solid waste charge for each residential dwelling.
C. There shall be an assessment monthly or any portion of a month solid waste charge for each general business contributor.
D. There shall be a monthly or any portion of a month solid waste charge for each commercial contributor. The charge shall be based on the total direct and indirect cost of providing service, and charges to be assessed to defray such cost shall be computed by the staff and adopted by the council.
E. Rental rates for containers used by commercial customers shall be determined by the collection service company which owns the containers subject to approval by the mayor and city council.
Section 9-1-3 Garbage Containers
1Modified by Ordinance No. 296
A. City residents may only use refuse containers supplied by, or acceptable to, the city collection service company. Containers, which are not acceptable to the collector, shall be deemed unfit for use and may, at the collector=s option, be picked up and disposed of as refuse. Refusal to use the collector=s approved containers shall constitute a violation of this section and may subject the violator to a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day the violation continues in addition to any other costs incurred by the city or the collector as a result of said action.
B. Any garbage, in or on any building or premises within the city, shall be collected and disposed of by the individual property owner or by the tenant, if rented or leased, responsible for cleanliness of the area by placing the garbage or trash in the refuse containers provided for that purpose. The refuse containers shall at all times be kept covered so as to exclude
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.3
flies or other insects and so as to be in as nearly an airtight condition as possible. Refuse containers shall be washed as often as necessary to keep them clean, and a disinfectant shall be used in the containers during fly season.
Section 9-1-4 Responsible Authority
This article shall be enforced by the police department and any person who shall be specifically appointed for such purpose by the city manager. All persons enforcing this article shall work under the direction of the council and in coordination with the Arizona Department of Health Services or their authorized representative.
Section 9-1-5 Authority to Classify and Assess
The city manager shall have final authority to recommend, subject to appeal to the council, in all matters regarding the classification or re-evaluation of contributors or subscribers and the proper assignment of charges thereto. All contributors or subscribers shall be classified and assigned in accordance with the equitable distribution of costs as prescribed herein. Whenever a contributor cannot be properly placed in a prescribed standard classification category due to a special circumstance outside the bounds of the parameters used to establish the standard classification categories contained herein, they shall be considered a special classification and the general services supervisor shall calculate a special assessment based on the concepts used in distributing costs in an equitable manner, to all those who benefit from the solid waste services provided.
Section 9-1-6 Enforcement and Administration
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to knowingly or intentionally violate the terms and conditions set forth in this article or fail to pay all proper assessments, fees and charges prescribed herein.
B. No certification of occupancy shall be issued by the building official of the city in applicable cases, until he shall have ascertained that an application and contractual agreement for sanitary enterprise services has been duly executed by the owner, agent or applicant. The city building official shall, in applicable cases, advise all applicants for certification of occupancy in writing of appropriate form and content of the requirements for execution of said contractual agreement.
C. The city manager shall be responsible for the enforcement and administration of all provisions of this article unless otherwise designated herein.
Section 9-1-7 Solid Waste Collection System
A. There is hereby established a system of refuse collection, transportation and disposal. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, hauling or
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.4
conveying any refuse over the streets or alleys of the city or to dump or dispose of the same except the city or its authorized representatives.
B. Every owner and occupant of premises within the prescribed limits of this article shall use the refuse collection and disposal system herein provided, and shall deposit or cause to be deposited in accordance with this article, all rubbish and garbage that is of such nature, that is perishable or may decompose, or may be scattered by wind or otherwise, which is accumulated on such premises.
Section 9-1-8 Collection - Business Houses
A. To ensure the health of the inhabitants of the city, the council hereby ordains that premises and businesses, such as, but not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, hospitals, butcher shops and establishments, wherein large accumulations of garbage occur, are nuisances to the extent that the same should be and are hereby, in the manner and method hereinafter provided, designated as a separate class of premises for the collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish, and the same shall be deposited separately in suitable approved refuse containers.
B. The city may enter into a contract for the collection of such garbage or other refuse. It is unlawful for any person, except the collector, to collect or to haul or transport garbage or other refuse from any premises so designated under the provisions of this article.
C. All garbage or refuse shall be collected as deemed necessary by the council and at periods designated by the council.
Section 9-1-9 Disposal Site; Rules and Regulations
A. For the purpose of the protection and preservation of the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, it is hereby established that the place for the dumping and depositing of refuse and garbage shall be the Cochise County solid waste disposal transfer station located at 980 North Madison Avenue within the city and use of any other site within the city shall constitute unlawful dumping.
B. The rules and regulations governing use of the city disposal site shall be those established by the Cochise County solid waste disposal department.
Section 9-1-10 Inspection
No person shall deny the police officers or other inspection officer the right of ingress or egress to any premises for the purpose of inspecting all places and containers where rubbish or garbage is accumulated or kept.
Section 9-1-11 Prohibited Acts
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.5
A. It is unlawful for any person to permit or to suffer to accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place or premise, or upon any street, alley or sidewalk adjacent to such lot, yard, place or premise, owned or occupied by such person, any garbage or refuse so as to cause such yard, lot, premise or the street, alley or sidewalk adjacent thereto, to be or remain in such condition as to cause or create a nuisance of offensive odor or atmosphere, or thereby to become or cause or create a public nuisance.
B. No person shall burn, incinerate (except with special permit issued by the Arizona Department of Health Services and notification given to the police department), bury, dump, collect, remove or in any other manner, dispose of rubbish, garbage (except with special permit) within the limits of the city.
C. No person shall throw, discard or deposit any rubbish, garbage or refuse in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or vacant ground, or in or upon any canal, irrigation ditch, drainage ditch or other watercourse.
Section 9-1-12 Annual Review and Notification
A. A review of the solid waste collection and disposal costs and amounts charged users shall be made annually as part of the budgeting process.
B. Revision to the user class or user rate charges as may be approved by resolution of the city council shall be made in order to accomplish the following:
1. Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and users classes;
2. Generate sufficient revenue to pay not less than the total cost of collection, disposal and administrative overhead assigned for the function.
C. Each user shall be notified annually of the rate or rate changes which are attributable to the solid waste services in conjunction with a regular bill.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.6
ARTICLE 9-2 PUBLIC NUISANCES AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 1
9-2-1 Purpose
9-2-2 Definitions
9-2-3 Authority to Enforce
9-2-4 Inspections
9-2-5 Litter on Public Place or Private Property Prohibited
9-2-6 Public Nuisances Prohibited; Owner to Maintain Premises and Contiguous
Areas
9-2-7 Notice of Nuisance or Violation of Litter Control
9-2-8 Request for Time Extension of Notice to Abate
9-2-9 City Abatement of Nuisance or Litter Control Violation
9-2-10 Lien to Cover City Abatement Costs
9-2-11 Violations Not Exclusive; Each Day a Separate Violation
9-2-12 Enforcement Jurisdiction of City
9-2-13 Option to Proceed Civilly or Criminally for Violation
9-2-14 Civil Violations; Citation and Enforcement Procedure
9-2-15 Habitual Offender
9-2-16 Interfering with Abatement or Other Enforcement Procedure
9-2-17 Giving False Information to Enforcement Personnel
9-2-18 Civil/Criminal Penalties; Restitution
9-2-19 Appeals to City Magistrate
9-2-20 What May be Appealed
9-2-21 Appeal Procedure
9-2-22 Stay of Order During Appeal
9-2-23 Appeal from City Magistrate Decision
9-2-24 Procedures for Service of Notices
Section 9-2-1 Purpose
A. The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, economic, aesthetic and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Benson and to protect neighborhoods against nuisances, blight and deterioration by establishing requirements for maintenance of all private property, whether residential or non-residential, or structures of whatever kind, and establishing maintenance of all land, whether improved or vacant.
B. This article shall apply to all buildings, structures and lands within the City of Benson without regard to the use, the date of construction or alteration.
Section 9-2-2 Definitions
In this article unless the context requires otherwise:
1 Modified by Ordinance No. 448
A. "Attractive Nuisance" means maintaining a condition, instrumentality, machine or other agency which is dangerous to young children due to their inability to appreciate peril and which may reasonably be expected to attract them.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.7
B. "Debris" means junk, lumber, furniture, furniture parts, stoves, sinks, cabinets, household fixtures, refrigerators, appliances, car parts, abandoned, broken, or neglected equipment, or the scatter remains of something of little or no economic value.
C. "Litter" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including, but not limited to, ashes, street cleanings, garbage, rubbish, dead animals, abandoned or junked vehicles or parts thereof, solid market and industrial waste, paper, rags, wood, cans, bottles, empty barrels, crates, packing cases, packing materials, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, yard clippings, leaves, metal, mattresses, bedding, crockery, trash, boxes, glass, cartons, refuse, plaster, plastic, asphalt, tile, rock, bricks, concrete dribble, or other materials tending to create an unsightly condition and having an adverse effect upon the health, safety, economic, aesthetic, or general welfare of the adjoining properties or occupants thereof.
D. "Planning and Zoning Coordinator's designee" shall mean an individual employed by the City of Benson who has been appointed by the City Manager, in writing, to have the authority to issue City Code violations. The authorization shall be filed with the City Clerk.
E. "Private property" means any dwelling, house, building, vacant land or other structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any tract, lot, yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibules or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such vacant land, dwelling, house, building or other structures, which is not owned by the federal government, state, county, city or political subdivision of the state.
F. "Public Nuisance" means any condition or use of premises or building exteriors which tends to endanger, injure or impair the health or safety of any person, or which may, directly or indirectly, cause disease or endanger, injure or damage the property of others. This definition shall include, but is not limited to:
1. Allowing premises to become unsanitary, a fire menace or a danger to health and safety of the citizens of the City through the accumulation, growth, storage or retention of rubbish, trash, animal or vegetable matter, metal, glass, grass or other cuttings, or other accumulation of filth or debris;
2. Creating an environment favorable to the harboring of insects and vermin by allowing the growth of weeds or grass in excess of ten inches in height. Natural growth in the public rights-of-way or in areas designated by the Parks Supervisor as "natural areas" are excepted from this provisions;
3. Permitting pools of water or other liquids to accumulate and remain upon the premises and become stagnant and foul. This provision shall not apply to natural drainage or drainages connected with streets or other public rights-of-way;
4. Retention of a dilapidated and dangerous building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which by reason of age, fire, faulty construction, lack of proper repair or any other cause is in such a condition that it constitutes an attractive nuisance to children or that its strength or stability substantially less than a well constructed new building or it is likely to or collapse in whole or in part and its condition endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public;
5. The unsheltered storage for fifteen consecutive days or more of inoperable, junked, partially dismantled, discarded or unregistered motor vehicles and other objects such
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.8
as appliances, machinery, implements and/or equipment which are no longer safely usable for the purposes for which manufactured (hereinafter collectively referred to as "personal property objects"), and which are visible from ground level beyond the boundary of the property. This definition shall not include personal property objects in a storage area repair shop, or other business enterprise in which the presence of such objects is necessary to the operation of the business and the business is operated in a lawful place and manner and in compliance with applicable zoning laws. Further, this definition shall not include inoperable historical vehicles, those vehicles being more than twenty-five years old, so long as said vehicles and covered in such a manner as approved by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator;
6. All places used or maintained as junkyards or dumping grounds, or for the disassembling, repair or rebuilding of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, trailer or other vehicles, machinery of any kind or of any parts thereof or the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or other persons, which places are kept or maintained in such a manner so as to essentially interfere with the use and enjoyment of the surrounding public or private property owners. This definition shall not include business enterprises in which the presence of such objects is necessary to the operation of the business and the business is operated in a lawful place and manner and in compliance with applicable zoning laws;
7. Any unguarded, uncovered, unprotected or abandoned excavation, pit, well or hole dangerous to life or constituting an attractive nuisance to children;
8. Burning or disposing of refuse, sawdust or other materials in a manner as to permit ashes, sawdust, soot or cinders to be cast upon the streets or alley of the City or to cause or permit the smoke, ashes, soot or gases arising from the burning to substantially or unnecessarily interfere with the use and enjoyment of the surrounding public or private property or to injure or endanger the health of others; provided this subsection shall not prohibit any burning authorized under other sections of this Code;
9. Any private property area which is visibly filthy from the ground level from beyond the boundary of the property because of litter, debris or trash covered exterior areas and under any roof area not enclosed by walls, doors and windows of any building; including, but not limited to, cans, bottles, wood, metal, plastic, rags, boxes, papers, tires, auto parts, unused or inoperable appliances, discarded items or anything whatsoever, which is or may become a hazard to public safety; unless the same is kept in covered bins or receptacles;
10. Any object, building, tree, bush or vehicle that interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous the free passage, use or vision of any public sidewalk, street or alley in the City; the Arizona Department of Transportation shall regulate obstructions, visual or otherwise, on state highways within the City;
11. Uncultivated plants, trees, shrubs, weeds or tall grass, growing or otherwise higher than ten inches; or any dead trees, bushes or shrubs or trees having dead or dry fronds descending downward more than eight feet and less than five feet from the ground;
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.9
12. Any fence with numerous missing blocks, boards or other fence structure maintained in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair so as to constitute a health or safety hazard to persons or property; and,
13. Any commercial or industrial type of equipment, including, but not limited to, tractor trailers, bulldozers, trenchers, cranes or other similar equipment parked in an area visible from the ground level beyond the boundary of the property for more than forty-eight hours in any residential district except when the equipment is being used for construction purposes on the site.
G. "Public place" means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
H. "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except bodily wastes) including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned or inoperative vehicles, appliances or machinery or parts thereof, and solid market and industrial waste.
I. "Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of either combustible or noncombustible wastes including, but not limited to paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, construction materials, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, weeds, trash, ashes or other accumulation of filth or debris.
J. "Weeds" means any of the following, living or dead, either standing or fallen:
1. Uncultivated brush, grass, cactus or any other vegetative growth not maintained for agricultural or ornamental purposes, and in an orderly manner, of a height in excess of ten inches as determined by measuring the maximum height of the tallest plant.
2. Useless or injurious plants.
Section 9-2-3 Authority to Enforce
A. Authorization for the regulations set forth in this article is granted to the City of Benson pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes '9-240(B)(21)(a) as such may be amended from time to time.
B. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee is assigned the primary responsibility of enforcing this article and is granted the express and implied authority needed and necessary for enforcement.
C. Nothing in this article shall preclude the Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee from seeking voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article or for enforcing this article, proactively or reactively, through warnings, notices to comply or other such devices designed to achieve compliance in the most efficient and effective manner under the circumstances. Any person who neglects, fails or refuses to correct the violations contained within the notice to comply or other similar device issued pursuant to this article may be assessed a reinspection fee for inspections that occur after the compliance date. Reinspection fees, as established by separate council resolution, may be collected as a lien against the real property.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.10
Section 9-2-4 Inspections
A. Unscreened exterior areas may be inspected at any time, with or without the involvement of the owner or occupant, in accordance with the legal requirements governing administrative inspections of private property.
B. Screened exterior areas shall be inspected only during the normal business hours of the City unless otherwise arranged, and only upon invitation or with the concurrence of the occupant, owner or agent for the owner when the premises are unoccupied, or when ordered by the court when probable cause exists to believe that conditions may be detrimental to the health, safety, economic or general welfare of the public.
C. Except in cases of alleged imminent hazard, if the occupant is not the owner of the premises to be inspected, the Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee shall provide notice in writing or by telephone to the owner or agent of the owner as to the date and time of inspection. The owner or agent may be present for the inspection if the occupant concurs. The inability to contact the owner or owner's agent, or the convenience of the owner or agent, shall not require the rescheduling of the inspection.
Section 9-2-5 Litter on Public Place or Private Property Prohibited
A. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any public place or private property whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place.
B. It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on or along any public street or alley any refuse, unless it shall be contained in vehicles or receptacles so constructed as to prevent the contents from falling, leaking or spilling or any noxious odor escaping therefrom, and to prevent any flies, insects or rodents from having access to contents. Every person hauling any refuse along any street or alley shall replace immediately, in the conveyance used for such hauling, any of the contents which may fall therefrom in or upon any street, alley or public or private property.
C. Persons owning or occupying property or places of business shall keep the sidewalk, alley or easement and any landscape area surrounding their premises free from litter, garbage or debris.
D. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City unless the vehicle is so constructed, loaded or secured as to prevent the load, contents, litter, garbage or debris from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place.
E. The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter, garbage or debris. This provision does not prohibit the storage of litter, garbage or debris in authorized private receptacles for collection, or within any building when not in violation of any health, fire, building or other regulation, order, ordinance or statute.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.11
Section 9-2-6 Public Nuisances Prohibited: Owner to Maintain Premises and Contiguous Areas
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessor, lessee, manager, agent or other person having lawful control over a building, structure or parcel of land to cause, allow, permit, facilitate or aid or abet any violation of any provision of this article or to fail to perform any act or duty required by this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessor, lessee, manager or other person in control of any private property and the areas appurtenant and adjacent thereto to fail to maintain the property and contiguous areas in such manner so as not to create a public nuisance and be free of litter, weeds and debris.
C. The owner of record, as recorded in the County Recorder's Office, of the property which the violation of this article exists shall be presumed to be a person having lawful control over a structure or parcel of land. If more than one person is recorded as the owner of the property, the persons shall be jointly and severally presumed to be persons having lawful control over a structure or parcel of land. This presumption shall not prevent the enforcement of the provisions of this article against any individual person in violation of this article.
Section 9-2-7 Notice of Nuisance or Violation of Litter Control
A. Prior to the filing a civil citation or criminal complaint with the Benson City Magistrate Court, the Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall prepare a Notice to Abate and Cost Assessment to be served upon the person or persons in violation of any provision of this article.
B. Notice to abate:
1. The Notice to Abate and Cost Assessment shall be delivered in person or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, from the Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee to the person, manager, agent or employee, owner, occupant or lessee of the property to be enjoined, at their last known address or the address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed.
2. The notice shall contain a description of the property, both by street address and legal description, a specific statement of the violation, a statement that the person, manager, agent or employee, owner or lessee of the property has thirty days to abate or correct the violation, and in the event the violation is not corrected within thirty days, a civil citation or criminal complaint may be filed with the City of Benson Magistrate Court and/or the City of Benson may elect to clean up the property and the cost of such removal shall be assessed as a lien against the property, and the estimated cost of such removal to the City if the violation is not abated within thirty days.
3. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee may record the notice in the office of the county recorder. If the notice is recorded and compliance with the notice is subsequently satisfied, the Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee shall record a release of the notice.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.12
4. If the person, manager, agent or employee, owner, occupant or lessee of the property to be abated cannot be located, such notice of abatement shall be posted upon the buildings, lots or grounds to be abated and shall be clearly legible and in a conspicuous place and shall be published at least two times in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the City, such publications to occur at least seven days apart.
5. The effective date of the notice to abate shall be the date received if delivered in person, or sent by certified mail, or the date the property is posted or the date of first publication if the alternate method of service is used.
C. The written notice shall be in substantially the following format:
NOTICE TO ABATE AND COST ASSESSMENT
TO: The Owner, Occupant or Lessee of the following property located within the City of Benson, Arizona:
(state the legal description and street address of the property)
You are hereby notified that there exists on the above described premises a violation of Section ___________ of the Code of the City of Benson, Arizona, namely:
(describe the violation in specific terms, such as excessive weeds higher than ten (10) inches on the north side of the property adjacent to 1st Street)
You are further notified that this violation must be abated and corrected by the ____ day of _______, 20__, which is at least 30 days after your receipt of this Notice. If you do not comply within that time, the City of Benson, acting through its agents or employees, may elect to file a civil citation or criminal complaint against you with the City of Benson Magistrate Court or may elect to enter upon your property and remove the nuisance at your cost and expense. In that event, the minimum cost of removal that will be charged to you will be $___________. This cost will be assessed against you and the property and, if unpaid, will convert into a lien upon the real property.
You may appeal this Notice and the Cost Assessment to the City Magistrate by filing a written request for an appeal hearing with the Planning and Zoning Coordinator at 160 S. Huachuca, Benson, Arizona 85602 within ten (10) days from your receipt of this Notice. A hearing on your appeal will be scheduled before the City Magistrate within thirty (30) days from receipt of your written appeal. You will be notified of the time and date of the hearing by a mailing sent at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing. At the hearing, you must appear and show cause, if any, why the condition existing on the property should not be declared a violation which must be abated or why the costs of abating such violation should not be assessed against you. If the City Magistrate decides that a violation exists which must be abated, you must abate and correct the violation by the date set by the City Magistrate. If you have not corrected the nuisance by that date, the City may do so at your expense, as set out above.
A Request for Appeal Hearing form may be obtained from the Planning and Zoning Coordinator at 160 S. Huachuca, Benson, Arizona 85602.
If you have questions, you may call (520) 586-2245 and speak to the Planning and Zoning Coordinator.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.13
Dated this ______ day of _______________, 20___.
_________________________________________
Planning and Zoning Coordinator
Section 9-2-8 Request for Time Extension on Notice to Abate
A. Any person may request an extension of time on a notice to abate. The request shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Coordinator.
B. A written request for an extension of time to comply with the notice to abate may be filed with the Planning and Zoning Coordinator at 160 S. Huachuca, Benson, Arizona 85602, within five days of receipt of the notice.
C. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator may grant one extension of the time limit set forth in the Notice to Abate. The extension shall not exceed 30 days. The extension period granted by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall start to run on the day the Planning and Zoning Coordinator issues his or her decision to grant the extension. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator may grant an extension of time only where it is shown that:
1. It would create a hardship to bring the property into compliance within the thirty day period required in the Notice to Abate; and,
2. The moving party presents a plan that is approved by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator by which the property will be brought into compliance within an additional thirty days.
Section 9-2-9 City Abatement of Nuisance or Litter Control Violation
When any person, owner, agent, occupant, or lessee of any building, grounds, or property within the City, neglects, fails or refuses to abate or correct a violation of this article for more than thirty days from the effective date of the notice to abate, the Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee may abate such violation at the expense of such person, owner, occupant or lessee.
Section 9-2-10 Lien to Cover Abatement Costs
A. Abatement by City; Expense Statement:
The Planning and Zoning Coordinator, his designee or authorized representative shall prepare a verified statement and account of all the expenses incurred by the City or occasioned by, or incidental to, such abatement and file such verified statement and account with the City Clerk or his or her designee. The verified statement shall include an administration charge with the cost of recording liens and releases thereof. The administration charge and cost of recording liens and releases shall be collected whether or not the violation is abated by the City.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.14
B. Assessment of City Abatement Costs:
1. After filing of the verified statement and account as set forth, the Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee shall prepare duplicate copies of a notice of lien and record one copy with the office of the county recorder, and within in five days thereafter serve by certified mail the remaining copy off such notice of lien upon the person, owner or occupant of the building, grounds or premises.
2. If the owner or occupant of the property to be liened cannot be located, a copy of the notice of lien shall be posted up on the buildings, lots or grounds affected thereby and be clearly legible and in a conspicuous place and shall be published at least two times in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the City, such publications to occur at least seven days apart.
3. From and after the date of recording such notice of lien with the county recorder, all expenses incurred in connection with or incidental to such abatement and as fixed and determined by such verified statement and account are hereby declared as a lien upon such buildings, grounds and premises and shall be charged and assessed upon and against such buildings, grounds and premises.
4. The recorded lien shall bear interest at the legal rate for judgments in the State of Arizona from the date that the lien is recorded until it is paid in full.
5. The lien shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of this section shall be made upon judgment or foreclosure and order of sale. The City may institute an action to enforce the lien in the superior court of the county at any time after the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the lien by the action shall not affect its validity. The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof.
C. Assessments that are imposed under subsection (B) of this section shall run with the land and against the property until paid in full and are due and payable in equal annual installments as follows:
1. Assessments of less than $500 shall be paid within one year after the assessment is recorded.
2. Assessments of $500 or more but less than $1,000 shall be paid within two years after the assessment is recorded.
3. Assessments of $1,001 or more but less than $5,000 shall be paid within three years after the assessment is recorded.
4. Assessments of $5,001 or more but less than $10,000 shall be paid within six years after the assessment is recorded.
5. Assessments of $10,001 or more shall be paid within ten years after the assessment is recorded.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.15
D. A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for these purposes, and any number of assessments on the same lot or tract act of land may be enforced in the same action.
Section 9-2-11 Violations Not Exclusive; Each Day a Separate Violation
A. Violations of this article are in addition to any other violation enumerated within the City ordinances or this code and in no way limit the penalties, actions, or abatement procedures which may be taken by the City for any violation of this article which is also a violation of any other ordinance or code provision of the City or Arizona Revised Statues.
B. Each day any violation of any provision of this article or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this article continues may constitute a separate offense.
Section 9-2-12 Enforcement Jurisdiction of City
Jurisdiction of all proceedings to enforce the provisions of this article, whether civil or criminal, shall be in the City of Benson Magistrate Court.
Section 9-2-13 Option to Proceed Criminally or Civilly
The Planning and Zoning Coordinator or designee may proceed pursuant to this article by citation for civil sanctions or by complaint for criminal sanctions.
Section 9-2-14 Civil Violations; Citation and Enforcement Procedure
A. Civil Citation - Authority to Issue:
The Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee may issue a civil citation pursuant to this article.
B. Civil Violation - Commencement of Action:
1. A civil violation may be commenced by issuance of a citation in the City of Benson Magistrate Court by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator or his designee.
2. The citation shall direct the defendant to appear before the City Magistrate within ten days after issuance of the citation.
3. The citation will further notify the defendant that if he or she fails to appear on or before the date specified in the citation, a judgment by default will be entered against him or her, and the City Magistrate may, in his or her discretion, impose a civil sanction not to exceed Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00).
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.16
4. Service of the citation may be accomplished and will be deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods:
a. By hand delivering a copy of the citation to the defendant.
b. By mailing a copy of the citation to the person charged by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the person's last known address; or,
c. In the event service cannot be accomplished as set forth in subparagraphs a or b of this paragraph, the City may serve the defendant by any means allowed by under the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure for the superior court.
C. Appearance by Defendant:
The defendant shall, within ten days of the issuance of the complaint, appear in person or through his or her attorney before the City Magistrate and shall either admit or deny the allegations contained in the complaint. If the defendant admits the allegation, the City Magistrate may enter judgment against the defendant and impose a civil sanction for the violation. If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation, the City Magistrate shall set the matter for hearing.
D. Default Judgment:
If a person served with a citation fails to appear on or before the time directed to appear or at the time set for hearing by the City Magistrate, the allegations in the citation shall be deemed admitted and the City Magistrate may enter judgment for the City and impose a civil sanction.
E. Rules of Procedure for Civil Violations:
The Arizona Rules of Court for civil traffic violation cases shall be followed by the City Magistrate for civil violations of this article, except as modified or where inconsistent with the provisions of this article, local rules of procedure established for the hearing or rules of the supreme court.
F. Collection of Fines:
Any judgment for civil sanctions taken pursuant to this article may be collected as any other civil judgment.
Section 9-2-15 Habitual Offender
A person who commits a violation of this article after having previously been found responsible by the City Magistrate for committing three or more civil violations of this article within a twenty-four month period, whether by admission, by payment of the fine, by default or by judgment after hearing shall be guilty of a Class Three Misdemeanor. The City Attorney is authorized to file a criminal misdemeanor complaint in the Magistrate Court against habitual offenders who violate this article. In applying the twenty-four month provision, the dates of which the offender was found responsible shall be the determining factor, irrespective of the sequence of the commission of the offense.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.17
Section 9-2-16 Interference with Abatement or Other Enforcement Procedure
Any person who interferes, prevents, or attempts to interfere or prevent, an individual employed by the City or other person contracted for by the City, from investigating an alleged violation of this article or from correcting or abating a violation of this article is guilty of a Class Three Misdemeanor.
Section 9-2-17 Giving False Information to Enforcement Personnel
Any person who knowingly makes a false or fraudulent statement, or knowingly misrepresents a fact, or misleads an individual employed by the City or other person contracted for by the City, when that individual is investigating, correcting or abating a violation of this article, is guilty of a Class Three Misdemeanor and the Planning and Zoning Coordinator is authorized to commence an action under this section by issuing a criminal complaint in the City of Benson Magistrate Court.
Section 9-2-18 Civil/Criminal Penalties; Restitution
A. Civil penalties. Upon finding a person responsible for a civil violation of this article, the City Magistrate may impose a civil sanction of not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00. The City Magistrate may suspend the imposition of the civil sanction if at the time of sentencing, he or she finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the violation the defendant was found responsible for has now been corrected, and that the defendant is now in compliance with this article. In that event, the City Magistrate may suspend all or part of the fine.
B. Criminal penalties.
1. A person who is convicted of a violation of this article is guilty of a Class Three Misdemeanor and shall be sentenced to a fine of not less than $250.00, nor more than $500.00 and probation for not less than six months. The City Magistrate shall not suspend any or all of the impositions or execution of the sentence required by this section.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this subsection, if the City Magistrate finds at the time of sentencing, and by a preponderance of the evidence, that the violation the defendant was convicted of has been corrected, and that the defendant is now in compliance with this article, the court may:
a. Sentence the defendant to pay a fine of not less than $100.00; and
b. Suspend all or part of the probation.
C. Restitution. In addition to any sanction or penalty provided for in subsections A and B of this section, the person shall be liable for all costs which may be associated with the City's bringing the property into compliance with this article. The City Magistrate may impose restitution as part of a civil sentence or criminal sentence.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.18
Section 9-2-19 Appeals to City Magistrate
A. Any notice to abate or assessment may be appealed to the City Magistrate.
B. An appeal must be filed within ten days of the service of the notice to abate or assessment and must be filed with the Planning and Zoning Coordinator at 160 S. Huachuca, Benson, Arizona 85602.
C. Failure of a person entitled to appeal under this article to timely file an appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to an appeal hearing on the notice before the City Magistrate, and the person shall be estopped to deny the validity of any notice or assessment which could have been timely appealed.
D. The notice of appeal shall set forth, in writing, the person’s reasons for believing they are not in violation of this article or that the assessment is excessive.
Section 9-2-20 What May Be Appealed
Any person may appeal a Notice to Abate and Cost Assessment to the City Magistrate:
A. When it is claimed the property or building subject to the notice is not in violation of this article.
B. When it is claimed the true intent of this article or standards described in this article have been incorrectly interpreted.
C. When it is claimed that the statement of costs for correcting or abating the violation is excessive.
Section 9-2-21 Appeal Procedure
A. The City Magistrate shall set a date for hearing on appeal to be heard within thirty days of the receipt of notice of appeal by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator.
B. The City Magistrate shall take testimony from all parties to the appeal. The parties may, if they choose, be represented by an attorney.
C. The City Magistrate shall render a decision within five days of the hearing and the findings and decision shall be mailed to all parties to the appeal.
Section 9-2-22 Stay of Order During Appeal
Except for orders to vacate or violations presenting an imminent hazard, the timely filing of an appeal shall stay enforcement of a Notice to Abate and Cost Assessment until the appeal is finally determined by the City Magistrate.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.19
Section 9-2-23 Appeal from City Magistrate Decision
Any party aggrieved by a decision of the City Magistrate may appeal to the superior court in accordance with the Rules of Procedure for special actions.
Section 9-2-24 Procedure for Service of Notice
A. Any notice required to be given for any purpose under this article delivered in accordance with the terms of Section 9-2-14 D shall be deemed proper and complete.
B. Notice is deemed effective on the date it is hand delivered or deposited in the United States mail.
C. Nothing in this article shall preclude the City from giving additional oral or written notice at its discretion. If the City does elect to give any additional notice in any instance, it shall not thereby become obligated to give such additional notice thereafter in the same or other situation.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.20
ARTICLE 9 - 3 Smoking and Public Health (Added by Ordinance #459)
9-3-1 Purpose
9-3-2 Definitions
9-3-3 Regulation of Smoking in Buildings Owned by the City of Benson
9-3-5 Enforcement
9-3-6 Severability
Section 9-3-1 Purpose
The City Council of the City of Benson, Arizona, finds as follows:
1. The smoking of tobacco and other plants or weeks is a health danger to those exposed to the smoke and a source of annoyance and discomfort to those present in confined areas where such smoke is present;
2. It is in the best interest of the employees of the City of Benson to protect non-smokers from involuntary exposure to environmental tobacco smoke within the workplace;
3. It is in the best interest of the employees of the City of Benson to protect non-smokers from involuntary exposure to environmental tobacco smoke within City owned vehicles;
4. It is in the best interest of the citizens of the City of Benson and the public in general to protect non-smokers from involuntary exposure to environmental tobacco smoke within all buildings owned by the City of Benson; and
5. For these reasons, the purpose of this Section is to regulate smoking in enclosed public places and places of employment.
6. The City of Benson shall post no smoking signs in prominent locations in all enclosed public places by this ordinance.
Section 9-3-2 Definitions
1. Smoke or smoking@ means burning or carrying any lighted cigarette, cigar, tobacco or any other plant or weed or placing any burning tobacco, weed or plant in an ashtray or other receptacle and allowing smoke to diffuse into the air.
2. Public place@ means any enclosed buildings owned, controlled, occupied or managed by the City of Benson.
3. Smoking area@ means any area in which the burning or carrying of any lighted cigarette, cigar, tobacco or any other plant or weed or placing any burning tobacco, weed or plant in an ashtray or other receptacle and allowing smoke to diffuse into the air is permitted.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.21
Section 9-3-3 Regulation of Smoking in Buildings Owned by the City of Benson
1. Smoking shall be prohibited within all enclosed buildings owned, controlled, occupied or managed by the City of Benson.
2. Smoking shall be prohibited within twenty-five (25) feet of the main entrance or ten (10) feet from any secondary, side or back entrance of any enclosed public place where smoking is prohibited.
3. The City of Benson shall not be required to provide any smoking areas outdoors of any public place.
4. If any smoking area is provided outdoors, said area shall not require others to walk through it upon entering any public place.
5. In the event any smoking area is provided outdoors, all smoking trash receptacles shall be placed beyond the twenty-five (25) feet limit prescribed above.
Section 9-3-4 Regulation of smoking in Vehicles owned by the City of Benson
Smoking shall be prohibited within all vehicles owned, controlled, leased or managed by the City of Benson.
Section 9-3-5 Enforcement
1. Any person who smokes in the area required to be smoke free shall be guilty of a civil offense and shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second offense, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the third offense and four hundred dollars ($400.00) for each offense thereafter within a twelve month period.
2. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate civil offense and may be charged accordingly.
3. The Benson City Manager or such enforcement officer designated by the City Manager shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.
4. Enforcement of this Section shall be commenced by the issuance of a civil complaint signed by the enforcement officer and referred to the Municipal Court for adjudication.
5. By enforcing this Section, the City undertakes only to promote the general welfare and health of the community. This Section shall not create any private cause of action by a member of the public and this Section shall not create the basis for or create the standard of care for any private cause of action. It does not in any way assume, nor does it impose on its officers and employees an obligation for breach of which it is liable for money damages to any person claiming injury from such breach.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.22
Section 9-3-6 Severability
If any section or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, that section or portion shall be deemed severable and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the Ordinance.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.23
Article 9-4 SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING EPHEDRINE OR PSEUDOEPHEDRINE 1
9-4-1 Purpose
9-4-2 Definitions
9-4-3 Public Access to Pseudoephedrine Products
9-4-4 Seizure and Destruction of Pseudoephedrine Products
9-4-5 Seizure Appeal Procedure
9-4-6 Retail Establishment’s Right to Refuse Sale
9-4-7 Reporting Requirements for Sales of Pseudoephedrine Products
9-5-8 Criminal Penalty
Section 9-4-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
the City of Benson by regulating the manner of sale of products containing pseudoephedrine,
ephedrine and norpseudeophedrine as key ingredients in the production and illicit manufacture of
methamphetamine.
Section 9-4-2 DEFINITIONS
In this article unless the context requires otherwise:
A. "PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT" means any product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine and includes any compound, mixture or preparation that contains any detectible quantity of pseudoephedrine, ephedrine and norpseudoephedrine or their salts, optical isomers or salts of optical isomers. Product packaging that lists pseudoephedrine, ephedrine and norpseudeophedrine as an active ingredient shall constitute prima facie evidence that the product is a pseudoephedrine product.
B. "RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT" means any place of business that offers any pseudoephedrine product for sale at retail.
C. "PERMITEE" means any person who holds or is required to hold a license of permit to sell drugs at retail pursuant to Title 32, Chapter 18 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
D. "OPERATOR" means any owner, manager, corporation or other fictitious person or other responsible party.
Section 9-4-3 PUBLIC ACCESS TO PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS
A. The operator and/or the permittee of a retail establishment shall keep all pseudoephedrine products behind a store counter or otherwise in a manner that is inaccessible to customers without the assistance of the operator or an employee of the establishment.
B. Any pseudoephedrine products found to be displayed in a retail establishment in violation of subsection (A) constitutes a nuisance and a subject to seizure and disposal by the City in the manner provided in section 9-4-5 of this Article.
1Added by Ordinance No. 499
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.24
Section 9-4-4 SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS
A. Products subject to seizure under this section may be seized by a peace officer under the authority of a search warrant or upon probable cause to believe that the products are subject to seizure pursuant to section 9-4-3(B). Before removing any products subject to seizure from the retail establishment, the peace officer shall give the operator or permittee of the establishment a reasonable opportunity to remove the products from the area of the establishment accessible to the public, unless the operator or the permittee has been afforded this opportunity on a previous occasion within the preceding twelve (12) months.
B. At the time of seizing any products under this section, the peace officer will deliver a notice of intent to dispose of the seized products. This notice shall include the date and location of the seizure, an inventory of the items seized, a description of how a post seizure hearing may be requested, the time for requesting that hearing, and a warning that failure to request the hearing in a timely manner will result in the disposal and destruction of the seized property. The notice under this subsection shall be personally served on the operator or permittee of the retail establishment present at the time of seizure, or if that person cannot be identified at the time of seizure, on any employee of the establishment.
Section 9-4-5 APPEAL PROCEDURE FOR SEIZURE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS
A. A person receiving a notice of intent to dispose under section 9-4-5 may request a post-seizure hearing to determine the validity of the seizure within fifteen (15) days of receiving the notice.
B. The court shall conduct the post-seizure hearing within ten (10) days of the court’s receipt of the request, excluding weekends and holidays. Failure to request a hearing in a timely manner, or failure to attend a scheduled hearing, constitutes waiver of the right to challenge the validity of the seizure. At the hearing the City shall have the burden of establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that the property was subject to seizure pursuant to sections 9-4-4 and
9-4-5 of this Article. At the hearing the court may admit any reliable and relevant evidence. If the court finds that the products were not subject to seizure, it shall order the immediate return of all seized items. If the court finds that the products were properly seized pursuant to this section, the court shall order that the products are forfeited to the City and shall direct the City to destroy and dispose of the seized items.
Section 9-4-6 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT’S RIGHT TO REFUSE SALE
A. Any operator, permittee or employee of a retail establishment may refuse to sell any pseudoephedrine product to any person if the operator, permittee or employee has reason to believe that the product will be used in the unlawful manufacture of methamphetamine or other controlled substance. Facts that give rise to the reason to believe that the product will be used unlawfully include but are not limited to a “suspicious transaction” as defined in Section 13-3401 of the Arizona Revised Statutes; the attempted purchase of pseudoephedrine products in excess of the amounts permitted by Arizona law; the attempt to purchase pseudoephedrine products in a series of transactions in an effort to circumvent the limitations on sales; or the attempt to purchase pseudoephedrine products in conjunction with other products, such as red phosphorous or iodine, that are known to be used in manufacturing methamphetamine.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
9.25
B. Any person who refuses to make a retail sale in accordance with this section is not liable to its customer or any other person for any loss or damage caused in whole or in part by the refusal to sell.
Section 9-4-7 REPORTING SALES OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS
A. A person making a retail sale of a product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine shall require acceptable photo identification from the purchaser and shall record the purchaser’s name, date of birth, address and quantity of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine product purchased. For purposes of this subsection, acceptable photo identification means any of the following:
1. Current driver’s license or picture identification issued by this or any other state or territory of the United States of America or the United States Government;
2. A current valid passport issued by the United States of America or a
foreign government;
3. A current tribal identification card issued by a Federally Recognized
Tribe;
4. A current military identification card issued by the United States Armed Forced or the Department of Defense; or,
5. A consular identification card that provides the required above information issued by a foreign government.
B. A retail establishment of pseudoephedrine products shall maintain a report consisting of the information required to be obtained under subsection (A) for sales occurring in the previous month for a period of one (1) year. The report shall be in writing and shall be available for inspection by the Benson Police Department or any other law enforcement agency requesting examination.
Sec. 9-2-8 CRIMINAL PENALTY
A violation of this Article is a class one misdemeanor and shall be punishable in accordance with Title 13, Chapter 7 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
10.1
CHAPTER 10 OFFENSES
ARTICLE 10-1 OFFENSES
10-1-1 Dangerous Constructions
10-1-2 Excavations to be Covered
10-1-3 Explosives
10-1-4 Littering
10-1-5 Minors
10-1-6 Noise
10-1-7 Obstruction of View
10-1-8 Signs and Banners
10-1-9 Water--Flow Upon Streets
Section 10-1-1 Dangerous Constructions
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs, billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
Section 10-1-2 Excavations to be Covered
A. It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig any hole, drain or ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the city without providing a sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable obstruction around or in front of such excavation during the day.
B. It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit or other excavation of more than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot without providing substantial curbing, covering or protection of such excavation.
Section 10-1-3 Explosives1
It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to blast or use powder or other explosives without a permit from the chief of police in writing.
Section 10-1-4 Littering
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any litter in or upon any street, alley, public grounds, school grounds or church grounds.
1 Modified by Ord. No. 551
10.2
Section 10-1-5 Minors
A. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to be abroad upon any of the streets, alleys, public ways or places within the city limits between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. each day, Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. each Friday and Saturday, except under the following circumstances:
1. If said minor child is accompanied by his or her parent(s), guardian or by an adult who has been charged with and accepted said charge of responsibility for the actions of said minor child.
2. If the presence of said minor child on the streets, alleys, public ways or places open to the public is for the purpose of attending or returning from any function whatsoever sponsored by any church or religious group or any function sponsored by any school whether public, parochial or private or school sponsored group, or any public function sponsored or co-sponsored by any governmental agency or civic or community service organization unless such civic or community service organization is not approved by the mayor and council.
3. If the presence of said child on the streets, alleys, public ways or places open to the public within the city limits is required by the minor child's employment.
4. If said minor child is married.
5. If the presence of said minor child on the streets, alleys, public ways or places open to the public is caused by an emergency or necessitated by danger to the life, health or property of the minor child or his immediate family.
6. If said minor is attending or returning home from an event open to the public and said event had not been concluded for the day for longer than one-half (2) hour provided only that event not be held on a premises licensed by the State of Arizona to sell alcoholic beverages unless said license is a Special Event license issued for a period of not more than three (3) consecutive days.
B. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor child under the age of eighteen years to suffer or permit said child to be about or loitering upon any of the streets, alleys, public ways or places open to the public within the city limits between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. each day, Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. each Friday and Saturday unless said child comes within the exceptions listed in paragraphs 1 through 6 of subsection A of this section. The punishment for the conviction of this crime shall be a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than ten days or both. Each day of any violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense. It shall not constitute a defense that such parent or guardian did not have knowledge of the presence of the minor upon any of the streets, alleys, public ways or places open to the public within the city limits.
C. It is unlawful for any minor to violate the provisions of subsection A of this section and proceedings shall be taken in accordance with and pursuant to the relevant sections of the Juvenile Code as contained in Chapter 2, Title 8 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended or superceded.
OFFENSES
10.3
Section 10-1-6 Noise
A. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or operating or in control of any restaurant, hotel, dance hall, show, store or any place of public amusement, entertainment or accommodation, to play or permit to be played any music or musical instrument or instruments whether played by individuals, orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box or other mechanical device or means in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the senses, or so as to disturb the slumbers, peace and quiet or otherwise interfere with or annoy the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any person in the neighborhood, and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance inflicted is unequal.
B. It is unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound truck, loud speaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with loud speaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless such person in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from the chief of police to operate any such vehicle so equipped.
Section 10-1-7 Obstruction of View
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstruction which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
Section 10-1-8 Signs and Banners
It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign including political signs, upon any street light pole, traffic signal pole or utility pole within the city without first obtaining authorization from the council and written permission from the owner of the pole.
Section 10-1-9 Water-Flow Upon Streets
It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the city.
Section 10-1-10 Fireworks2
A. Definitions – The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
2 Added by Ord. No. 551
OFFENSES
10.4
1. Consumer fireworks means those fireworks defined by Arizona Revised Statutes Section 36-1601(1).
2. Display fireworks means those fireworks defined by Arizona Revised Statutes Section 36-1601(2).
3. Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition, substance or combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, that is a consumer firework, or display firework as defined by Arizona Revised Statute Section 36-1601(3).
4. Novelty items means federally deregulated novelty items that are known as snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices, sparklers and certain toys.
5. Permissible consumer fireworks means those fireworks as defined by Arizona Revised Statute Section 36-1601(5) that may be sold within the City even where the use of those items has been prohibited.
6. Supervised public display means a monitored performance of display fireworks open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire Chief or his designee.
B. Possession of Fireworks Prohibited; Exception – No person shall possess fireworks within the City except as follows:
1. Persons may possess novelty items.
2. Persons at least sixteen (16) years of age or older may possess permissible consumer fireworks.
C. Use of fireworks Prohibited; Exception – The use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks within the City is prohibited except as provided for in this section:
1. Fireworks are permitted to be used beginning at 9 a.m. the day of the special event and end at 2 a.m. the following morning for the following holidays:
a. The Fourth of July
b. New Year’s Eve
2. Nothing in this section or article shall be construed to prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence of a properly permitted supervised public display of fireworks. Sparklers greater than sixteen inches in total length are prohibited.
3. Permits may be granted by the Fire Chief or designee for conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does not endanger persons, animals, or property. A permit shall not be issued, and may be revoked, during time periods of High Fire Danger warnings. The Fire Chief has authority to impose conditions on any permits granted.
OFFENSES
10.5
4. Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by the Fire Chief is a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.
D. Sale of Fireworks
1. No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under sixteen years of age.
2. No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with state law or the Benson City Code.
3. No person shall sell permissible consumer fireworks without first obtaining an inspection from the Fire Chief for compliance with the currently adopted International Fire Code and applicable reference standard enforced in the City of Benson. Following such inspection, the Fire Chief shall issue a permit if the sales site is in compliance.
4. Temporary stands, canopies, and structures are required to obtain a temporary use permit or conditional use permit, as applicable.
5. No roadside sales shall be permitted.
E. Labeling of Fireworks for sale. All fireworks for sale within the City of Benson shall be categorized, segregated, and labeled as either novelty items or permissible consumer fireworks so as to permit a reasonable inspection to determine if seller is in compliance with the requirements of Arizona Revised Statute Section 36-1601 and this Code.
F. Signage required for sale of Fireworks.
1. Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating the following:
a. The use of fireworks, except novelty items as defined by City Code, is prohibited, and
b. Permissible consumer fireworks may be used only on the Fourth of July and New Year’s Eve.
c. Consumer fireworks authorized for sale under state law may not be sold to persons under the age of 16.
2. Signs required under this section shall be placed at each cash register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale and shall conform to the rules and regulations of the State Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to Arizona Revised Statute Section 36-1609.
OFFENSES
10.6
3. The Fire Chief or designee shall develop regulations concerning the size and color of the required signs and shall develop a model sign. The required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on the City’s website and filed with the Clerk’s office.
4. Failure to comply with subparts 1 and 2 of this section is a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
G. Authority to enforce violations of this article; means of enforcement.
1. The Fire Chief or designee, a City Police Officer, or the City Attorney may issue charges to enforce violations of this article.
2. Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue charges may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid charges as stated in the code.
3. A City Police Officer or the City Attorney may issue charges as stated in the code to enforce this article.
H. Liability for emergency responses related to use of fireworks; definitions
1. A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible consumer fireworks, fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is caused by such use, discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a violation(s) of this article is prima facie evidence of liability under this section.
2. The expenses of an emergency response include all reasonable costs directly incurred by public agencies to make an emergency response to the incident. Such expense constitutes a debt against the person liable for those expenses pursuant to subpart 1 of this section. The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed.
3. For the purposes of this section:
a. “Expenses of an emergency response” means reasonable costs directly incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident.
b. “Reasonable costs” includes the costs of providing police, fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.
I. Penalty. The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement imposed by this section is a class three misdemeanor unless another penalty is specifically provided for.
1
PARKS AND RECREATION 1
CHAPTER 11
ARTICLE 11-1 GENERAL
11-1-1 Definitions
Section 11-1-1 Definitions
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Animal” means any mammal, bird, fish, reptile, amphibian or invertebrate, including wild and domesticated species, other than a human being.
B. “Camp” means the placement of any tent, temporary shelter or structure, blanket, cloth, or other sleeping implement on park property for the purpose of protection from the elements for any persons remaining in the park.
C. “Director” means the City of Benson Parks and Recreation Director.
D. “License” means a permit for an event that occurs more than once.
E. “Park” means any public park or recreation or playground area within or outside the corporate limits of the city, owned and maintained by the city as a public park, or recreation or playground area, including rodeo grounds and sports fields.
F. “Park Ranger” means a city employee designated by the Director, working under the supervision of the Director, and authorized to enforce all park rules and regulations.
G. “Permit” means authority issued by the Director granting a named person or persons permission to perform a specified activity in a park or any portion thereof.
H. “Pollution” means the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of park waters, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity or odor of the waters, or discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive or other substance into any park waters as will or is likely to create a public nuisance or render park waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, recreational or other beneficial uses, or to animals.
I. “Reservation” means authority issued by the Director for named persons to use a park or any portion thereof for a specified time and purpose.
J. “Recreation Manager” means the city employee designated by the Director and tasked with the supervision and management of the City’s recreation programs.
K. “Vehicle” means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn, or personally-propelled, including any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. Not included are baby carriages, vehicles in the service of the city, and vehicles authorized and properly equipped for emergency duties.
ARTICLE 11-2 ADMINISTRATION; LIABILITY
11-2-1 Park hours
11-2-2 Closing of parks
1New chapter – Ordinance 523
2
11-2-3 Operation of parks
11-2-4 Limitation of city liability
Section 11-2-1 Park hours
No person shall trespass upon or be on the grounds of any park during the hours posted that the park is closed; unless such person has received written permission from the Director or his or her designee. All activities sponsored or co-sponsored by the City of Benson are exempt from this section. However, the park in question will close immediately upon completion of the city-sponsored activity. The total number of people admitted for any usage shall not exceed the capacity of the facility involved as determined by the Director, the Recreation Manager, or the Fire Marshal.
Section 11-2-2 Closing of parks
Any park or portion of a park may be declared closed to the public by the City or any agent of the City, including the police department, at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain users, as the City shall find reasonably necessary; no person shall enter any closed area of a park if such entry is prohibited; nor shall any person utilize any portion of a park if such utilization is prohibited.
Section 11-2-3 Operation of parks
A. The City Manager may make such reasonable rules and regulations as are necessary to manage, use, preserve and govern park property and activities, and may designate hours of operation and opening and closing times of the various parks, which may be different as to individual parks.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the Director or his or her designee at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Director shall find in the interests of the public health, safety or welfare, or for proper operation of the park.
Section 11-2-4 Limitation of city liability
The City of Benson, its officers, employees and agents shall not be liable or responsible for any accident, injury or loss of or damage to property resulting from the use of the park by any individual, group or organization.
ARTICLE 11-3 REGULATIONS REGARDING PARK USE
11-3-1 Relating to park grounds and park property
11-3-2 Relating to wild animals
3
11-3-3 Relating to sanitation
11-3-4 Relating to traffic
11-3-5 Relating to recreation
11-3-6 Relating to commercial activities
11-3-7 Relating to miscellaneous activities
Section 11-3-1 Relating to park grounds and park property
No person in a park shall:
A. Disfigure or remove buildings, structures or facilities.
B. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, destroy, tamper with, abuse, displace or remove: any building; bridge; table; bench; fireplace; railing; paving or paving material; waterline or other public utility or parts or appurtenances thereof; sign; notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent; monument; stake, post or other boundary marker; or other structure or equipment, facility or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
C. Enter any restroom or washroom to engage in any unlawful act or to use the facilities for other than their primary purpose; or use the restrooms or washrooms designated for the opposite sex, unless under six years of age and accompanied by an adult entitled to enter that restroom.
D. Dig, remove or damage soil, rocks, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency.
E. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across park land. This section is not intended to apply to shade tarps, umbrellas, and the like; nor is it intended to apply to temporary concession stands allowed by permit.
Section 11-3-2 Relating to wild animals
No person in a park shall:
A. Hunt, molest, aggravate, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, or the eggs, nest, or young of any animal.
B. Give or offer, or attempt to give or offer, to any animal any food or tobacco, alcohol or other noxious substances.
Section 11-3-3 Relating to sanitation
No person in a park shall:
A. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, or other bodies of water in a park, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result in the pollution of park waters.
B. Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, cigarette butts, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash of any kind unless placed in the proper receptacles where provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried off park premises and properly disposed of elsewhere.
4
C. Have a glass beverage container in his or her possession.
D. Throw, toss or otherwise propel, or either knowingly or recklessly break any glass object.
Section 11-3-4 Relating to traffic
A. No person in a park shall violate any state or city motor vehicle law relating to traffic on highways, which laws shall apply to all persons and vehicles in a park at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, except upon such roads as the city may designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel. No person shall drive a vehicle on any park area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the city.
B. No person in a park shall park a vehicle in other than established or designated parking areas, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions thereat.
C. The city may cause to be designated and posted any park area in which parking is prohibited for a limited or a permanent time.
Section 11-3-5 Relating to recreation
No person in a park shall:
A. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in a park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefore and specifically designated by the city as such, and in compliance with such rules and regulations as may be set forth or hereafter adopted by the Director. Nor shall any person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, when such activity is prohibited by the Director upon finding that such use of the water would be dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare.
B. Frequent any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the Director for such purposes for each individual area.
C. Hunt, trap, or pursue wildlife at any time.
D. Process or explode or cause to be exploded any explosive or pyrotechnical device without a written permit from the Director or his or her designee.
E. Camp, lodge or sleep therein during the hours the park is closed, unless special written permit is obtained 72 hours in advance from the Director or his or her designee.
F. Hit golf balls or take practice swings with a golf club, or strike a simulated golf ball except at a municipal golf course, or at practice areas designated therein, or other areas set aside by the Director or his or her designee for such purposes.
Section 11-3-6 Relating to commercial activities
No person in a park shall:
A. Utilize any park property for any commercial purposes, except by permit issued by the Director or his or her designee.
5
B. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing; or station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or thing. A regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the city, and vendors of food and refreshments who are in possession of a current vendor’s permit issued by the city are exempted from this provision.
C. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription, except by written permit issued by the Director.
D. Distribute or attempt to distribute business or commercial literature to persons, or place them upon vehicles, except in specifically designated areas or by written permit issued by the Director.
Section 11-3-7 Relating to miscellaneous activities
No person in a park shall:
A. Bring or escort a dog or any other domestic animal or pet into any area within park boundaries that is clearly marked by signs bearing the words: “Domestic Animals and Pets Prohibited in This Area.” Even in areas where domestic animals are permitted, such dog, domestic animal or pet will not be permitted unless restrained at all times on a leash not to exceed eight (8) feet in length and unless wearing a collar and displaying thereon a valid license. This subsection shall not be construed so as to prohibit the use of assistance animals by the disabled.
B. Build, or attempt to build, kindle or ignite a fire except in such areas and under such rules and regulations as may be designated by the city; or drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, charcoal or coals, or other flammable or flaming materials within any park area.
C. Enter an area posted as “Closed to the Public,” or posted “No Trespassing,” or use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
D. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity, under the authority of a permit, license or reservation.
E. Emit, eject or cause to be deposited any excreta of the human body, except in those places designated for such purposes.
F. Gain admission to, attempt admission to, or make use of park facilities for which a charge is made without paying the fixed charge or admission, unless otherwise authorized by the Director or his or her designee.
G. Interfere with any of the authorized participants of any game, contest or athletic event conducted on any playing field from the time the event starts until its conclusion, and any time in between.
H. Bring or permit horses, cattle or any other livestock in a park without advanced written permission from the Director or his or her designee.
ARTICLE 11-4 PERMITS, LICENSES AND RESERVATIONS
11-4-1 Permit
11-4-2 Issuance
11-4-3 Standards for issuance
11-4-4 Appeal
6
11-4-5 Effect of permit
11-4-6 Liability of permittee
11-4-7 Revocation
Section 11-4-1 Permit
A person seeking issuance of a permit, license or reservation for use of a park area or facility shall make such request in writing to the Recreation Manager or his or her designee. The request shall state the park name, date and time of use and all information pertaining to the proposed use of the park facility.
Section 11-4-2 Issuance
A permit, license or reservation for use shall be obtained from the Recreation Manager or his or her designee by persons, organizations or individuals conducting, operating, presenting or managing any of the following activities:
A. Picnics, outings or gatherings sponsored by an organization or individuals that are attended by 100 or more persons.
B. A special event in a park. Special events include contests, exhibits, dramatic performances, spectacles, plays, motion pictures, radio or television broadcasts, fairs, circuses, jumping castles, shows, musical events such as a band, glee club, choir or orchestra concert, the use of public amplification systems, or any similar event. The Director shall have the authority to determine whether any given activity constitutes a special event within the meaning of this subsection.
C. The sale or giving away of food, refreshments (except nonperishable, prepackaged items contained within the manufacturer’s original unopened wrapping), articles or things to the public; subject to the additional requirement that, in the case of the sale or giving away of food or refreshments that are potentially hazardous, whether prepackaged or not prepackaged, the applicant shall provide proof of a separately obtained health permit from the Cochise County health department.
D. Announcing, advertising or calling to the public’s attention articles or services for hire or sale.
E. Broadcasting of amplified sound, which shall be limited to a reasonable decibel level and allowed only in an area designated by Recreation Manager or his or her designee.
F. The reservation of any park facilities for a certain person or group of persons to the exclusion of others.
Section 11-4-3 Standards for issuance
The Director or his or her designee shall issue a permit, license or reservation on a city form developed for the purpose when he or she finds all of the following:
A. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public’s enjoyment of the park or cause annoyance or disturbance to any other person’s reasonable use of park facilities, or cause annoyance or
7
disturbance to the peace of persons residing near the park, or interfere with the maintenance of the park or its facilities.
B. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation.
C. That the proposed activity or use is not unreasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
D. That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense to or police supervision by the city.
E. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour requested in the application.
F. In the case of vendors of food and refreshments who are not regularly licensed concessionaires, that the required fees have been paid. Those fees shall be as set from time to time by the City Manager.
G. In the case of fairs, that vendors have paid the required fees. These fees shall be set from time to time by the City Manager.
Section 11-4-4 Appeal
If a permit is denied, the Recreation Manager shall notify the applicant in writing, within 10 working days after receipt of the request for permit, of the reasons for denial of a permit. An aggrieved person may appeal in writing to the Director within six working days of receipt of the Recreation Manager's written notice, who shall consider the application of the standards set forth in this Article and sustain, modify, or overrule the Recreation Manager's decision within six working days of receipt of the appeal.
Section 11-4-5 Effect of permit
Any person using a permit, reservation or license shall be bound by all park rules and regulations, all applicable state statutes, and the city codes as fully as though they were set forth in full in the form. The applicant shall retain the form in his or her possession at all times while utilizing the park and shall show the form to any park ranger or peace officer upon request.
Section 11-4-6 Liability of permittee
The person or persons to whom a permit, license or reservation is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury to any person or property whatever by reason of negligence of the person or persons, their agents or employees, to whom such permit, license or reservation shall have been issued.
Section 11-4-7 Revocation
The Director or Recreation Manager or his or her designee may revoke a permit, license or reservation upon finding a violation of this code, state statute or regulation, or a park rule or regulation, or upon good cause shown. All reservations are voidable if the reserved area is not in use within 1 hour after the reservation period starts.
8
ARTICLE 11-5 SPIRITOUS LIQUOR ON PARK PREMISES
Option C.
No restrictions on alcoholic beverages
11-5-1 Open container
Section 11-5-1 Open container
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have an open container of any spirituous liquor within parking lots or vehicles within the city.
ARTICLE 11-6 RENTAL OF PARK FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT
11-6-1 Fees for use of expendable recreation equipment; damage deposits
11-6-2 Fees for use of certain meeting rooms; reservation fees for ramadas, reserved park areas, special interest areas, sports fields; fees for special maintenance
11-6-3 Procedure for waiver of fees
Section 11-6-1 Fees for use of expendable recreation equipment; Damage deposits
The Recreation Manager may charge fees and require the payment of a damage deposit for use of expendable recreation equipment belonging to the city. Such fees shall be reasonable and shall be based on the type of activity for which the equipment is to be used, the time of use, and the condition of the equipment. When the equipment is returned to the department of parks and recreation, a portion of the damage deposit shall be refunded after retaining the fair market value of the damages, if any, to the equipment. Failure to return equipment shall result in forfeiture of the damage deposit. The Recreation Manager shall prepare, in duplicate, an itemized list of equipment issued and shall set forth thereon the deposit paid for each item issued.
Section 11-6-2 Fees for use of certain meeting rooms; Reservation fees for armadas, reserved park areas, special interest areas, sports fields; Fees for special maintenance
A. The fee for reservation and use of recreation centers, meeting rooms, armadas, reserve park areas, special interest areas, sports fields, and other park facilities shall be as set by a fee schedule adopted from time to time by the City Manager.
9
B. The users of any park facility governed by this Article may request special maintenance of any athletic facility governed by this Article. The request shall be in writing at least 7 days prior to the requested special maintenance. The department shall advise the party requesting special maintenance in writing, within a reasonable time, the cost of providing the special maintenance. The costs shall be an estimate of the actual cost to the city of providing the special maintenance, and shall be paid in advance.
C. The rental fee for each concession stand at sports fields shall be as set from time to time by the City Manager.
Section 11-6-3 Procedure for waiver of fees
The fees established in this Article for use of recreation facilities may be waived in whole or in part by the Director or his or her designee. Waiver or partial waiver of a fee shall not prevent the Director or his or her designee from requiring a full or partial fee for subsequent use by the same or another individual or applicant. No waiver shall be given for participation in team league sports. The Recreation Manager shall maintain a roster of those who have been granted waivers or partial waivers of fees provided for herein. Obtaining waiver or partial waiver of any fee authorized to be waived or partially waived as provided for herein, by furnishing false information to the Director or his or her designee, shall be a violation of this section.
ARTICLE 11-7 ENFORCEMENT
11-7-1 Officials
11-7-2 Ejectment
11-7-3 Seizure of property
11-7-4 No limitation
Section 11-7-1 Officials
The Director, Recreation Manager, park rangers and peace officers may enforce this Chapter, this code, state laws and park rules and regulations, and may when deemed necessary call upon the city police or other law enforcement officers and agencies for assistance.
Section 11-7-2 Ejectment
The Director, Recreation Manager, park rangers and peace officers may eject any person acting in violation of this Chapter from any park, for a specific period of time.
Section 11-7-3 Seizure of property
The Director or his or her designee, park rangers and peace officers may seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in a park used in violation of this Chapter.
Section 11-7-4 No limitation
10
No provision in this Chapter shall preclude any peace officer from the enforcement of any law, statute or provision of this code in the routine performance of his or her duties.
CHAPTER 12 TRAFFIC AND PARKING 1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Section 12-1 Application of Arizona Revised Statutes
Those provisions of the Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended or succeeded, pertaining to the parking and operation of motor vehicles and other means of transportation are hereby incorporated and adopted within the city limits of the City of Benson.
Section 12-2 Definitions in General
The definitions in A.R.S. Title 28 (A.R.S. § 28-101 et seq.) apply to this Chapter unless a term is specifically defined in this Chapter, or unless the context requires otherwise.
Section 12-3 Definitions Pertaining to this Chapter
The below words and phrases, when used in this Chapter, are defined as follows:
(a) City – The City of Benson.
(b) Adjacent – Next to.
(c) Curb Loading Zone – Space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
(d) Dumpster – A large metal bin for refuse designed to be hoisted onto a specially equipped truck for emptying or hauling away.
(e) Motor Vehicle or vehicle – A wheeled vehicle that is propelled by an internal combustion engine that does not operate on rails and that is capable of carrying a passenger or passengers.
(f) Non-motorized vehicle – Any trailer or other device that is not self-propelled and is designed with the intended purpose of being towed behind a vehicle.
(g) Official Traffic Control Devices – All signs, signals, parking meters, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
(h) Operator – A person who operates or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle.
(i) Oversized Motor Vehicle – Any motor vehicle more than twenty-two (22) feet in length or with a gross vehicle weight rating of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or more.
(j) Owner – A person who holds the legal title to a motor vehicle.
(k) Parade – Any march or procession consisting of people, animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
(l) Procession – An orderly file of six (6) or more vehicles with suitable escort, such escort being approved by the Chief of the Police Department.
(m) Rights-of-Way – All property used as a public thoroughfare and lying between the exterior boundary lines of any area granted to or received by the City by grant, gift, easement, deed, dedications or operations of law for street, alley, walk or utility purposes.
(n) Sidewalk – That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.
(o) Stand or Standing–Stopping a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than for the active
1 Adopted by Ordinance 583
engagement of receiving or discharging passengers.
(p) Stop or Stopping, when prohibited – Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
(q) Stop or Stopping, when required – The complete cessation from movement of a vehicle.
(r) Temporary Storage Unit – A transportable, non-motorized unit designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building materials (before they are utilized for building purposes), household goods, and other such materials for use on a limited basis on residential property.
ARTICLE II. ROADWAY AND TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section 12-4 Authority to Designate Crosswalks, Establish Safety Zones, Designate No Parking Zones and to Mark Traffic Lanes
The City Engineer or Chief of Police is authorized:
(a) To designate at intersections and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
(b) To establish school zones in accordance with ARS §28-797 and ARS §28-641 and safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(c) To designate permanent or temporary no-parking zones along City streets and rights-of-ways, and to maintain such zones, by appropriate signage, as he may deem necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the community.
(d) To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the City.
Section 12-5 Lane Markings; Restricted Turns
(a) The City Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles traveling through or turning at such intersections, and such courses may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
(b) The City Engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which Operators of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall place and maintain markers or signs giving notice of such determination at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited entirely or between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted.
Section 12-6 One-Way Streets and Alleys
The City Engineer may designate any street or alley to be limited to one-way traffic by placing signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement at every affected intersection.
Section 12-7 Regulation of Traffic at Intersections
The City Engineer may designate through streets, intersections where stops are required, and
intersections where vehicles shall yield the Right-of-Way.
Section 12-8 Curb Markings
The City Engineer shall designate restricted parking zones by use of signs, painted curbs, or both.
(a) If the curb is painted red, parking shall be prohibited in the area adjacent to the painted curbs at all times. Curbs painted red may also indicate bus loading zones, but only when accompanied by appropriate signs, in which case bus loading and unloading shall not be prohibited.
(b) If the curb is painted yellow, the space adjacent to the curb so painted shall be used exclusively as a Curb Loading Zone during those hours designated by the City Engineer and stated in signs giving notice of such determination at either one or both ends of such zone.
Section 12-9 Gross Vehicle Weight Restrictions
(a) The City Engineer is authorized to establish gross weight limits for vehicles using City streets and to prohibit certain vehicles from using certain designated streets by the placement of appropriate signs limiting the gross weight of vehicles permitted to use those streets.
(b) Vehicles may use the streets designated under this article to make a delivery or pickup or to provide services to a property as permitted under this article. A vehicle regulated under this article may: deliver, pick up, load, or unload merchandise, materials, or equipment, including furniture and other household goods, or provide construction, repair, or similar services to a property.
(c) This section shall not prohibit:
1. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the City.
2. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the City, or contracted by the City, upon any street in the City.
3. The operation of recreational vehicles upon any street in the City.
Section 12-10 Suspension of Traffic and Parking Ordinances
The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to adopt regulations necessary to temporarily suspend traffic and parking ordinances of the City to cover emergencies or special conditions.
Section 12-11 Obedience to Traffic Regulations
It is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this Code, for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this Chapter or willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer, police volunteer or duly authorized agent of the City in the performance of their duties related to the enforcement of this Chapter.
Section 12-12 Directing Traffic
(a) The City police department, including appointed volunteers, is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal.
(b) Fire officials, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the City police department in directing traffic at that scene or in the immediate vicinity thereof.
(c) Public works employees, when at the scene of an emergency or an active construction site may
direct or assist the police or fire departments in directing traffic at that scene or in the immediate vicinity thereof.
Section 12-13 Traffic Control Devices
(a) The City Engineer shall provide for the placement and maintenance of traffic control devices, signs, signals, and markers when and as required under the traffic regulations of the City, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as may be deemed necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of the City or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.
(b) The Operator of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the City unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other duly authorized City agent, subject to the exceptions granted in this Chapter or by state law.
Section 12-14 Limitations on Turning Around
The Operator of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street unless such movement can be made safely and without interfering with other traffic.
Section 12-15 Driving on Private Property
(a) No person shall operate, drive or leave any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter, dune buggy, jeep or other form of transportation propelled by an internal combustion engine upon the private property of another or upon public property which is not held open to the public for vehicle use, without permission from the owner of the property or the person entitled to immediate possession thereof, or the authorized agent of either.
(b) No Operator shall drive upon or through any private property such as a commercial property, oil station, vacant lot or similar property to avoid obedience of any regulation included in this Chapter or any traffic control device.
Section 12-16 Operation of Vehicles on Vacant Lots
No person shall operate a vehicle on or across any portion of a vacant lot other than on an established dustproof driveway, except during activities authorized by the City.
Section 12-17 Processions
No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held without first securing a permit from the City, and all such requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march, destination and such other information as the City may set forth therein.
Section 12-18 Prohibition Against the Use of Engine Brakes
It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or permit the operation of the engine of a commercial vehicle so as to assist in braking or slowing the vehicle through the use of any engine brake or engine retarding device on any street or roadway within the City unless the vehicle is an emergency services vehicle.
Section 12-19 Placing Debris on a Public Roadway
(a) No person or persons will deliberately place debris, construction material, signage or any other material in or on a public street within the City of Benson that will affect the safe flow of traffic, without having obtained the appropriate construction permit from the City.
(b) This section does not apply to City employees in performance of their roadway related duties.
ARTICLE III. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section 12-20 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
In any prosecution charging a violation of this Article, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this Article, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.
Section 12-21 Method of Parking
The City Engineer may have erected signs requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left hand curb on one-way streets, notifying Operators that parking is prohibited and restricting parking in any way that may be necessary. When such signs have been erected, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle in disobedience to such parking restrictions. City employees, or their agents, may disobey such parking restrictions if necessary to perform their public duties.
Section 12-22 Prohibited Parking
Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other duly authorized City agent or in accordance with properly erected signage to the contrary, no person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle or non-motorized vehicle on any City street, roadway, or right of way:
(a) In such a manner or under such conditions as to obstruct or impede traffic in any manner.
(b) In such a manner as to block an alley or the entrance to a private driveway except for the loading or unloading of materials, and not then unless such loading or unloading can be accomplished without interference to the free movement of vehicular traffic, including into or from adjacent private property.
(c) In any area designated, signed, and marked as a fire lane.
(d) Within thirty-three (33) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy five (75) feet of the entrance when properly posted.
(e) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.
(f) For the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle thereon for sale, hire or rental.
(g) For the principal purpose of painting, greasing or repairing said vehicle except for repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(h) For the principal purpose of washing or polishing such vehicle or any part thereof when a charge is made for such services.
(i) Within a lane designated for the making of turning movements or for the operation of bicycles.
(j) Within an intersection.
(k) On a crosswalk.
(l) Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
(m) Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(n) Within an area designated as a public transit stop.
(o) Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing or within eight (8) feet six (6) inches of the center of any railroad track, except while a motor vehicle with motive power attached is loading or unloading railroad cars.
(p) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street (double parking).
(q) On a sidewalk or in that area between the curb and sidewalk or on those roadways without curbs in a manner so as to force a pedestrian to walk in the traveled portion of the roadway.
(r) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure.
(s) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstructions when stopping, standing or parking would impede traffic.
(t) Upon any public street, public Right-of-Way or public property when such vehicle does not display current registration.
(u) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway.
(v) Directly in front of a community or individual postal box served by the U.S. Postal Service except for the purpose of delivering or collecting mail.
(w) In violation of posted no parking signs or while in the area of a painted red curb.
Vehicles parked in violation of the requirements of this Section are subject to removal and storage at the expense of the registered owner under A.R.S. §28-872.
Section 12-23 Parking Duration
(a) No person shall park any vehicle upon any public street or upon publicly owned, maintained or operated property for a period of seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours. For purposes of this Section, the vehicle shall be considered to have remained parked unless, during the seventy-two (72) hour period, said vehicle has been moved at least one hundred feet (100’) from the position it previously occupied, or the odometer on said vehicle exhibits a change of at least one-tenth of one mile.
(b) Vehicles parked in violation of subsection (a) are subject to removal and storage at the expense of the registered owner.
Section 12-24 Parking on Private Property
(a) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, it is unlawful for the Operator of a motor vehicle to park the vehicle in or upon property of another without first obtaining permission of the person legally entitled to possession of the property.
(b) Vehicles in violation of this Section may be subject to removal at the vehicle owner’s cost.
Section 12-25 Emergency; No Parking
(a) No person shall park a vehicle upon any public highway, street or parking lot in violation of an emergency no parking sign that has been conspicuously posted.
(b) The City Engineer or designee is authorized to post emergency no parking signs on public highways, streets or parking lots for the purpose of street maintenance, construction, special events or any community related event. The duration of emergency no parking shall be no longer than seventy-two (72) hours. After a reasonable attempt has been made to contact the owner, any vehicle parked in violation shall be removed at the owner’s expense.
Section 12-26 Prohibition Against the Parking of Oversized Vehicles
(a) Subject to the exceptions below, no person shall stop, stand, or park any oversized motor vehicle or non-motorized vehicle on any public street, road or alleyway within any residential or commercial district.
(b) The prohibition set forth in subsection (a) shall not apply to oversized vehicles, or non-motorized vehicles parked for a period of less than twelve (12) hours for the purpose of loading, unloading, cleaning, or other activity preparatory to or incidental to travel.
(c) The prohibition set forth in subsection (a) shall not apply to oversized vehicles, or non-motorized vehicles parked in residential areas zoned as rural where the minimum lot size is one acre or more.
Section 12-27 Restricted Parking Areas for the Physically Disabled; Identification
(a) Except as provided in subsection (d), no person may stop, stand or park a motor vehicle within any specially designated and marked parking space provided for a physically disabled person, which includes the area indicated by hash marks painted adjacent to any such space, in accordance with
this Section, A.R.S. § 28-882, or any related provision, whether on public or private property, unless the motor vehicle is transporting a person eligible to obtain a special license plate with the international wheelchair symbol or a placard issued pursuant to state law for this purpose and the vehicle displays either the special plate or the placard.
(b) Parking spaces subject to this Section shall be clearly and conspicuously designated as being reserved for the physically disabled. Such designations shall include a standard symbolic disabled parking sign bearing the number of this section of this Code and conform to specifications for design and placement as approved by the City Engineer. The property owner is responsible for all required postings.
(c) If a police officer or other duly authorized agent finds a motor vehicle in violation of this Section, a complaint shall be issued to the Operator or other person in charge of the motor vehicle, or a notice of violation placed on the vehicle, as appropriate.
(d) Any person who is chauffeuring a physically disabled person shall be allowed, without a distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, to park momentarily in any such parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading such physically disabled person. No complaint shall be issued to the driver for such momentary parking.
(e) It is unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle in such a manner as to block or deny access to a wheelchair curb access ramp, except that this provision shall not prohibit the operator of a vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other parking regulations for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading physically disabled passengers.
Section 12-28 Placement of Temporary Storage Units and Dumpsters
(a) Unless permitted by the City Engineer, Temporary Storage Units and Dumpsters are prohibited from being placed in the public Right-of-Way or streets.
(b) The property owner(s) and/or Lessee(s) of the property and supplier that is found in violation of Section 12-27, shall be fined, upon conviction, a maximum sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250).
(c) The, Property owner(s) and/or Lessee(s) of the property and Supplier shall all be jointly and severally be liable for all costs incurred by the City for the removal of the Temporary Storage Unit or Dumpster.
Section 12-29 Overnight Camping
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other organization to camp or park an occupied recreational vehicle between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. upon the private or public property of any other person, firm, corporation or other organization, without first having obtained permission from the owner or occupant of the property upon which such camping or parking is conducted. For the purposes of this section, an RV park/campground receipt or a special use permit approved by the City shall be considered permission.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 12-30 Enforcement
(a) It shall be the duty of the City Police Department to provide for the enforcement of the street
traffic regulations of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law, to investigate accidents and to assist the City Engineer in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out all duties specifically imposed upon the City Police Department by this Chapter.
(b) Any peace officer of the City may be authorized by the Police Chief to perform any of the duties of the police department included in this Chapter.
(c) The City Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of the City or of the State vehicle laws of which any person has been charged in accordance with the City of Benson Records Management Program[pal1].
(d) All forms for records of violations and notices shall be serially numbered.
Section 12-31 Civil Traffic Procedure
An action or proceeding alleging a violation of this chapter may be initiated and served as provided in the Arizona rules of procedure in civil traffic cases or Arizona rules of procedure in traffic cases. The rules governing individual cases as determined by the governing court shall apply to the determinations of all questions arising out of any initiated action or proceeding.
Section 12-32 Violation; classification; exception; civil traffic violation; surcharge
(a) A person who violates a provision of this title or who fails or refuses to do or perform an act or thing required by this title commits a civil traffic offense unless the statute defining the offense provides for a different classification. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any of these provisions shall result in the imposition of a civil sanction which shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A person who violates any provision of Section 12-26 shall be assessed a mandatory minimum fine of one-hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), no part of which may be suspended or waived by the court.
(c) A person who violates any other provision of this Chapter which regulates the time, place, or method of parking a vehicle shall be assessed a mandatory minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), no part of which may be suspended or waived by the court.
(d) A person who commits any violation of this Chapter and who within the past two years has previously been convicted of or been found responsible for two or more violations of this Chapter is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
(e) In addition to any other penalty assessment provided in this title, the court shall levy surcharges required by State law.
Section 12-33 Payment of Penalty Fee upon Receipt of Notice of Violation
(a) The presiding judge of the municipal court shall, from time to time, prepare a table of charges and penalty fees for violations of this Chapter consistent with ordinances and resolutions of the City council.
(b) Any person who becomes aware that a notice of violation has been issued with respect to an alleged violation of any provision of this Chapter classified as a civil infraction may, in lieu of court proceedings, pay the base penalty fee as established by the municipal court and any state or local mandatory surcharges within thirty (30) days of the date of violation indicated on the notice of violation.
(c) The owner or operator of a vehicle for which a notice of violation has been issued may contest the violation by requesting a civil traffic hearing. The request for hearing must be in writing and shall be promptly submitted to the hearing officer or designee.
(d) If the owner or operator of a vehicle for which a notice of violation has been issued fails to pay the amount of the fine or request a hearing within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the notice of violation, then a summons and complaint shall be issued to the registered owner of the vehicle. The notice of violation for a parking violation shall be issued within sixty (60) days from the date of violation. The summons shall command the registered owner to appear in the City court on a date and time certain.
(e) When a person is found responsible for a violation by a judge or a civil traffic hearing officer, whether by default or after a hearing, the judge or hearing officer shall impose a civil sanction for the violation, which shall be not less than the amount of the prescribed fine, as indicated in subsection (a) above.
(f) It is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of Section 12-58, if at the time of a hearing in municipal court, the vehicle that was the subject of the violation was eligible for and had been issued a valid distinguishing insignia placard at the time of the violation.
Section 12-34 Vehicle Impound Fees
An assessment of a vehicle impound fee shall be collected by the Benson Police Department as necessary revenue to offset the costs of inspection, transmission of required documentation to the Arizona Department of Motor Vehicles, and the provision of facilities and manpower to effectuate the storage of motor vehicles impounded by the City of Benson Police Department. The impound fee shall be assessed as follows:
(a) The vehicle impound fee shall consist of an administrative fee and a daily storage fee calculated as follows:
1. An administrative fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be assessed on the impound of each vehicle; and,
2. A daily storage fee at the rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per day, shall accrue starting on the first (1st) day of impoundment.
(b) The total vehicle impound fee assessed against any one vehicle on any single occasion of impound shall not exceed six hundred seventy five dollars ($675.00).
(c) Payment of impound fees shall be by U.S. currency, cashier’s check, or money order payable to the City of Benson.
(d) The City shall generate a written receipt upon payment of any impound fees, and provide the same to payor.
(e) The impounded vehicle must be removed from storage on the date impound fees are paid in full, or an additional daily storage fee shall be incurred.
22R7141
13.1
CHAPTER 13 UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13-1 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT
13-1-1 Established; Composition
13-1-2 Compensation
13-1-3 Appointment and Duties of Utilities Manager
13-1-4 Maintenance, Upkeep and Extension
13-1-5 Utility Improvement Zones
Section 13-1-1 Established; Composition
A. There is hereby established the utilities department of the city.
B. The utilities department shall consist of the utilities manager and all employees deemed necessary in order to service and maintain the gas, water and sewer systems, garbage pickup and disposal, and other duties as may be assigned from time to time within the city.
Section 13-1-2 Compensation
Monthly salaries shall be paid to the personnel of the utilities department as approved by the council from recommendations submitted from time to time by the utilities manager and the city manager.
Section 13-1-3 Appointment and Duties of Utilities Manager
A. The utilities manager shall be appointed by the city manager.
B. The utilities manager shall have the following duties:
1. Exercise entire charge of the utilities department and all apparatus and property used by said department, and have full and complete charge of all employees of the utilities department.
2. Recommend to the city manager the number of employees necessary to fulfill the responsibilities of the department and provide the names of all candidates for those positions along with recommendations as to their acceptance or rejection.
3. Cooperate with the city manager regarding all purchases of any and all equipment or apparatus utilized by the utilities department and assist in the preparation of the annual budget for consideration of the council.
4. Consult with the city manager and the council from time to time in order to furnish information, data or opinions concerning questions arising about the public utilities within the city.
5. Be responsible for the installation, upkeep, maintenance, repair or replacement of all sewer lines, gas lines and water lines of the city along with the safe and efficient removal and disposal of all trash and garbage, maintenance of roadways, identification of fees or charges to be assessed relative to the above activities and all other duties inherent in running the utilities department of the city.
UTILITIES
13.2
Section 13-1-4 Maintenance, Upkeep and Extension
The council shall make such allowances for the maintenance, upkeep and extension of the utilities department as it deems necessary.
Section 13-1-5 Utility Improvement Zones1
A. The mayor and city council are authorized to establish by resolution any number of Utility Improvement Zones (UIZ) provided that each UIZ shall have a clearly ascertainable boundary enclosing the specific area to which extraordinary capital and/or operating expenses can be ascribed.
B. Upon adoption of a resolution establishing a UIZ, each of which shall be identified by an area name or alphabet character selected by the mayor and city council at the time of designation as a UIZ, the mayor and council shall thereafter, and from time to time as it deems appropriate, be authorized by resolution to impose such additional charges, surcharges, hook up fees, service availability charges, unit charges or other rates and/or charges in such amounts and for such periods as are reasonably necessary to offset the extraordinary costs found by the mayor and council to have incurred, or continuing to be incurred, to provide certain specific city utility service in the UIZ.
C. Consideration of the creation of UIZ and/or the determination of the level of any additional fees or charges in conjunction therewith, occur only after the convening of a duly noticed public hearing at which the mayor and city council may receive public input and comments; however, a single public hearing may be convened to consider both the UIZ designation and the proposed or appropriate additional charges to be collected from users within the UIZ.
Section 13-1-6 Developer Installation of Metering Equipment 2
1Created by Ordinance No. 387
2Created by Ordinance No. 483
Any Developers wishing to establish any interconnections with any of the City of Benson’s utility systems shall be required to establish such connection(s) based upon the current metering equipment specifications as approved by the Building Inspector in conjunction with the Utilities Department. Any connections established which do not meet the required metering equipment specifications will be refused for service by the City of Benson. (Enacted by Ordinance No. 483.)
UTILITIES
13.3
ARTICLE 13-2 GAS SERVICE1
13-2-1 Definitions
13-2-2 Establishment of Service
13-2-3 Deposits
13-2-4 Grounds for Refusal of Service
13-2-5 Rates and Charges
13-2-6 Master Metering
13-2-7 Provision of Services
13-2-8 Unsafe or Hazardous Customer Gas Line
13-2-9 Billing
13-2-10 Termination of Service
13-2-11 Annual Review and Notification
13-2-12 Gas Line Extension Policy
Section 13-2-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply:
A. "Accommodation charge" shall be the charge applied to any initial turn on 2 (modified by Ordinance #455) summer turn off, turn off for construction or repair, moving or other turn off requested by the customer except for discontinuing service.
B. "Applicant" means a person requesting the utility to supply gas service.
C. "Application" means a request to the utility for gas service, as distinguished from an inquiry as to the availability or charges for such service.
D. "Billing month" shall be the period between any two regular readings of the city's meters at approximately thirty day intervals.
E. "Billing period" shall be the time interval between two consecutive meter readings that are taken for billing purposes.
F. "Commodity charge" shall be the unit of cost per billed usage as set forth by city ordinance.
G. "CCF" means one hundred cubic feet.
1Modified by Ordinances No. 307 and 376
2Modified by Ordinance No. 455
H. "Customer" means the person or entity in whose name service is rendered, as evidenced by signature on the application or contract for service or by the receipt and/or payment of bills regularly issued in his/her name regardless of the identity of the actual user of the service.
I. "Customer charge" shall be the amount the customer must pay the city for availability of gas service, excluding any gas used.
UTILITIES
13.4
J. "Customer gas line" shall mean any gas pipe connecting to the gas meter setting, as herein defined, and continuing on to the user's gas consuming fixture whether or not said gas pipe is located on the user's property.
K. "Day" as used herein shall mean a calendar day.
L. "Distribution main" shall be the gas line belonging to the city from which service lines may be extended to customers.
M. "Gas meter setting" shall mean the gas meter, pressure regulator and the upstream (or city- side) gas pipe riser necessary to make the connection between the city's gas main or distribution line and the gas meter, and the gas meter setting shall end at the first elbow coming out of the low pressure side of the gas meter on the customer's side of said gas meter.
N. "Hazardous customer gas line" shall mean a customer gas line which, because of its condition, location or material of construction presents or may present an imminent danger to persons or property.
O. "Interruptible gas service" means gas service that is subject to interruption or curtailment.
P. "Main extension" shall be the lines and equipment necessary to extend the existing gas distribution system to provide service to additional customers.
Q. "Master meter" shall be the instrument for measuring or recording the flow of gas at a single location where said gas is transported through an underground piping system to multiple tenants or occupants for their individual consumption.
R. "MCF" means one thousand cubic feet.
S. "Meter" shall be the instrument or device for measuring and indicating or recording the volume of gas or flow that has passed through it.
T. "Meter tampering" means any situation where a meter has been illegally altered; common examples are meter bypassing and other unauthorized connections.
U. "Person" as used herein shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, governmental agency or other organization operating as a single entity.
V. "Point of delivery" shall mean the point where pipes owned, leased or under license by a customer connect to the utility's pipes or at the outlet side of the meter.
W. "Premises" shall mean all of the real property and apparatus employed in a single enterprise on an integral parcel of land undivided by public streets, alley or railway.
X. "Residential use" shall mean the service to customers using gas for domestic purposes such as space heating, air conditioning, water heating, cooking, clothes drying and other residential uses and includes use in apartment buildings, mobile home parks and other multi-unit residential buildings.
UTILITIES
13.5
Y. "Service establishment charge" shall be the charge as specified in the city's ordinances for establishing a new account.
Z. "Service line" means a gas pipe that transports gas from a common source of supply (normally a distribution main) to the customer's point of delivery.
AA. "Service reconnect charge" shall be the charge specified herein or to be paid by the customer prior to reestablishment of gas service each time the gas is disconnected for nonpayment or whenever service is discontinued for failure otherwise to comply with the city ordinances.
BB. "Service reestablishment charge" means the charge as specified herein or otherwise established for gas service at the same location where the same customer had ordered a service disconnection within the preceding twelve-month period. Same as accommodation charge.
CC. "Standard delivery pressure" shall be 0.25 pound per square inch gauge at the meter or point of delivery.
DD. "Temporary service" means service to premises or enterprises which are temporary in character, or where it is known in advance that the service will be limited duration; additionally, it shall also include service which, in the opinion of the city, is for operations of a speculative character.
EE. "Utility" as used herein shall mean the city.
FF. "Zone A customers" shall be those customers receiving natural gas service within the corporate limits of the city.
GG. "Zone B customers" shall be those gas customers outside the limits of the city.
Section 13-2-2 Establishment of Service
A. An applicant requesting gas service shall provide the following information to the city prior to the initiation, reconnection or reestablishment of said service:
1. Name or names of applicant(s);
2. Name, address and telephone of employer;
3. Social Security number or name, address and phone number of next of kin not living with them;
4. Service address or location and telephone number;
5. Billing address or location and telephone number, if different than service address;
6. Address where service was provided previously and if outside the city, the name and billing address of the service provider;
UTILITIES
13.6
7. Date applicant will be ready for service;
8. Indication of whether premises has been supplied with city gas service previously;
9. Purpose for which service is to be used;
10. Indication of whether applicant is owner, tenant or agent for the premises;
11. Information concerning the gas usage and demand requirements of the customers;
12. Type and kind of life-support equipment, if any, used by the customer.
B. A new applicant for service must appear at city hall to produce proof of identity and sign the utility's application form
C. Where service is provided to two or more individuals, at the same location, the city shall have the right to collect the full amount owed to the city from any one of the individuals.
Section 13-2-3 Deposits
A. The city shall only require a 50% of the deposit 1 (modified by Ordinance 455) from a new applicant for residential service if the applicant meets either of the two following requirements:
1. The applicant has had service of a comparable nature by the city at another location for the past two years and was not delinquent in payment more than twice during the last twelve consecutive months and was not disconnected for nonpayment; or,
2. The applicant can produce a letter or credit or verification from a gas utility where service of a comparable nature was last received and which states that the applicant has had service of a comparable nature with such utility at the previous service location within the past two years and was not delinquent in payment more than twice during the last twelve consecutive months and was not disconnected for nonpayment.
B. The city may require a customer to establish or reestablish a deposit if the customer becomes delinquent in the payment of three or more bills within a twelve consecutive month period or has been disconnected for service during the last twelve months.
C. If an advance cash deposit is required by the city, the full amount of such deposit shall
Be paid before service is connected according to the following schedule:
1. Individual/Residential: Upon application by a single residential gas user,
1Modified by Ordinance No. 455
UTILITIES
13.7
There shall be a cash deposit in the sum of one hundred and fifty dollars1
(modified by Ordinance #455).
2. Multi-residential: Upon application by a multi-residential gas user, they shall make a cash deposit with the city in a sum equal to one-sixth the annual billing as evidenced by the former account for such property in the utility office, or seventy-five dollars whichever is greater.
1Modified by Ordinance No. 455
3. Commercial: Upon application by a gas user, they shall make a cash deposit with the city utility office in a sum equal to one-sixth the annual billing as evidenced by the former account for such property in the city utility office. If no former account existed for the property, the city manager shall establish the initial deposit requirement based on such information as he deems appropriate.
4. Irrigation: Upon application by a gas user, they shall make a cash deposit with the city utility office in a cash sum equal to one-sixth the annual billing as evidenced by that account for such property in the city utility office. If no former account existed, the procedure applicable to commercial accounts shall be followed.
D. Deposits shall be refunded if one of the following conditions are met:
1. The customer has completed twelve consecutive months of service without being delinquent in the payment of more than two utility bills; or,
2. If service is disconnected and the customer has paid all outstanding amounts due the city.
E. Deposits will remain with the city an additional twelve months if the customer has been delinquent in the payment of two or more utility bills during the first twelve months of service except after service has been terminated at the customer's request and all unpaid amounts discharged.
Section 13-2-4 Grounds for Refusal of Service
The city may refuse to establish service if any of the following conditions exist:
A. The applicant has an outstanding amount due for any city utility service and the applicant has not made acceptable payment arrangements with the city; or,
B. A condition exists which in the city's judgement is unsafe or hazardous to the applicant, the public or the utility's personnel or facilities; or,
UTILITIES
13.8
C. Refusal by the applicant to provide the city with an acceptable deposit when the customer has failed to meet credit provisions set forth in Section 13-2-3 for waiver of deposit requirements; or,
D. Failure of the customer to furnish such funds, service equipment and/or rights-of-way necessary to serve the customer or which have been specified by the city as a condition for providing service; or
E. Applicant falsifies his or her identity for the purpose of obtaining service or it appears that another person is being presented as the prospective customer because the actual primary resident of the property has an outstanding utility account balance due or has an unacceptable payment history.
Section 13-2-5 Rates and Charges
A. Rates
1. There shall be a customer charge to all Zone A customers within the City limits of $9.007.50 per month, for each meter, to maintain the availability of natural gas at the customer's location. The charge shall be made whether or not the customer takes natural gas during the month. The monthly charge will increase to the amounts in the chart as follows:
Natural Gas Charges
2018 Fee
2019 Fee
2020 Fee
2021 Fee
Base Fee within City Limits
$9.90
$10.89
$11.98
$13.18
2. There shall be a customer charge to all Zone B customers outside the City limits of $11.0010.00 per month for each meter to maintain the availability of natural gas at the customer's location. The charge shall be made whether or not the customer takes natural gas during the month. The monthly charge will increase to the amounts in the chart as follows:
3. The price per CCF of natural gas to all customers shall be established by resolution from time to time by the city council. The fees as adopted by Council in 2017 are as follows:
Natural Gas Charges
2018 Fee
2019 Fee
2020 Fee
2021 Fee
Base Fee within City Limits
$12.00
$13.00
$14.00
$15.00
UTILITIES
13.9
Natural Gas Charges
2018 Fee
2019 Fee
2020 Fee
2021 Fee
Rate per Therm
$0.70
$0.85
$0.90
$0.90
B. Accommodation Charges
1. Zone A accommodation charges shall be $30.00 during regular working hours.
2. Zone B accommodation charges shall be $40.00 during regular working hours.
C. Service Reconnection Charge
1. Zone A reconnection fee for turn off because of nonpayment shall be $30.00 for residential accounts and $50.00 for commercial accounts which must be paid with the delinquent amount before service is restored.
2. Zone B reconnection fee for turn off because of nonpayment shall be $40.00 for residential accounts and $60.00 for commercial accounts which must be paid with the delinquent amount before service is restored.
D. Re-Reads
1. The city shall at the request of a customer re-read the customer's meter within five working days after such request by the customer.
2. The city shall charge the Zone A customer for each meter re-read the sum of $5.00. The re-read charge for Zone B customers is $15.00. Whenever a re-read reveals a previous reading to be in error, the re-read shall be at no charge to the customer.
3. In order to process a re-read, the customer must appear at city hall, request the re-read and pay the appropriate fee. If the reading is found to be in error, the fee shall be applied as a credit to the customer's account.
E. In addition to the applicable development fee, the City shall collect the following fees before any service taps or gas meters are connected to the gas system: 1
1. A connection fee, as established by resolution from time to time by the City Council; and,
2. The cost of repairing or replacing any pavement or other structure necessarily
1Modified by Resolution 47-2006
UTILITIES
13.10
damaged in the process or because of the installation of any service connection, either within or without the corporate limits of the City of Benson, shall be paid by the person making the application for such service, in addition to any other charges that may be required for such service, and such amount shall be estimated by the City Manager or his designee, and paid in advance of the City being obligated to undertake the utility work.
F. There shall be a charge of twenty-five dollars (modified by Ordinance #455) for each check returned for insufficient funds, stop payment order, checks drawn on closed accounts, or any other reason within the customer's control.
Section 13-2-6 Master Metering
All meters shall be subject to the following provisions:
Mobile Home Parks - New Construction/Expansion
A. The city shall refuse service to all new construction and/or expansion of existing permanent residential mobile home parks unless the construction and/or expansion is individually metered by the city.
B. Permanent residential mobile home parks for the purpose of this rule shall mean mobile home parks where, in the opinion of the city, the average or reasonably anticipated length of stay for an occupant is a minimum of six months.
C. For the purposes of this section, expansion means any construction which has been started for additional permanent residential spaces after May 19, 1988.
D. For master meters already installed, for all Zone A customers the service availability charge shall be five dollars per month per connection whether or not such connection is actually in use. For customers in Zone B the service availability charge shall be seven dollars and fifty cents per month per connection whether or not such connection is actually in use.
Section 13-2-7 Provision of Services
A. Customer Responsibility
1. Each customer shall be responsible for maintaining all customer piping, fixtures and appliances on the customer's side of the point of delivery in safe operating condition.
2. Each customer shall be responsible for safeguarding all city property installed in or on the customer's premises for the purpose of supplying gas service.
UTILITIES
13.11
3. Each customer shall exercise all reasonable care to prevent loss or damage to city property, excluding ordinary wear and tear and the customer shall be responsible for loss of or damage to, city utility property on the customer's premises arising from neglect, carelessness or misuse and shall reimburse the city for the cost of necessary repairs or replacements.
4. Each customer shall be responsible for payment for any equipment damage and/or estimated unmetered usage resulting from unauthorized breaking of seals, interfering, tampering or bypassing the city's meter.
5. Each customer shall be responsible for notifying the city of any gas leakage identified in the customer's or the city's equipment.
B. Continuity of Service
1. The city shall make reasonable efforts to supply a satisfactory and continuous level of service. However, the city shall not be responsible for any damage or claim of damage attributable to any interruption or discontinuation of service resulting from:
a. Any cause against which the city could not have reasonably foreseen or made provision for i.e., force majeure;
b. Intentional service interruptions to make repairs or perform routine maintenance;
c. Curtailment due to lack of available gas for distribution.
2. In the event of a national emergency or local disaster resulting in disruption of normal service, the city may, in the public interest, interrupt service to any customers to provide necessary service to civil defense or other emergency service agencies on a temporary basis until normal service to these agencies can be restored.
C. Standard Delivery Pressure
1. The city shall maintain the standard delivery pressure at the outlet of the customer's meter of approximately 0.25 pounds per square inch gauge subject to variation under load conditions.
2. In cases where a customer desires service at greater than standard delivery pressure, the city may supply at its option such greater pressure if and only as long as the furnishing of gas to such customer at higher than standard delivery pressure will not be detrimental to the service of other customers or facilities of the city. The city reserves the right to lower said delivery pressure or discontinue the delivery of gas at higher pressure at any time upon reasonable notice to the customer. Where service is provided at such higher pressure, the meter volumes and billing charges will be adjusted to reflect that higher pressure.
D. Access to Customer Premises - The city shall at all times have the right of safe ingress to and egress from every customer's premises at reasonable hours for any purpose connected
UTILITIES
13.12
with the furnishing of gas service and the exercise of any rights or responsibilities secured to it by law or this article.
Section 13-2-8 Unsafe or Hazardous Customer Gas Line
A. The city's responsibility for maintenance, repair, inspection and replacement of its gas system components shall include the gas meter setting as herein defined, but shall not extend to, or include, customer gas lines as herein defined.
B. In the event the city, in the course of its usual standard operating procedures, becomes aware of the existence of a customer gas line which it determines to be in an unsafe condition, the customer shall be given written notice of the existence of such condition, by first class mail addressed to the customer's billing address as shown in the city's utility department records, and thereafter the customer shall, within thirty days, repair or correct the unsafe condition to the satisfaction of the city gas department representative designated by the city manager, and said representative shall indicate approval in writing on a form approved by the city manager. Failure to correct or repair a customer gas line designated as unsafe for more than thirty days after the date of the written notice specified above shall result in termination of the customer's gas service until such time as acceptable repairs have been completed.
C. If the city determines a customer gas line to be in a hazardous condition, gas service shall be terminated immediately and service shall not be restored until the gas line is determined by the city gas department representative to be restored to a safe condition.
D. The city shall incur no liability by reason of its interruption of gas service when said interruption is caused by discovery of an unsafe or hazardous customer gas line even though such interruption is without advance notice to the customer.
E. The city shall have no duty or obligation to undertake to inspect or otherwise determine the condition of customer gas lines or devices except in the usual course of its general accepted standard operating activities.
Section 13-2-9 Billing
A. Frequency
1. The city shall bill monthly for services rendered.
2. Failure on the part of the customer to comply with a reasonable request by the city for access to its meter shall be grounds for immediate discontinuance of service.
B. Combining Meters - Each meter at a customer's premises will be considered separately for billing purposes, and the readings of two or more meters will not be combined for any purposes.
C. Billing Terms
UTILITIES
13.13
1. All bills for utility services are due and payable no later than fifteen days from the date the bill is mailed. Payments not received within fifteen days shall be considered delinquent. For purposes of this rule, the date a bill is mailed may be evidenced by the city's record of mailing.
2. All delinquent bills for which payment has not been received within ten days shall be subject to the provisions of the city's termination procedures.
UTILITIES
13.14
3. Failure to receive bills or notices which have been according to city records placed in the United States mail shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent and will not relieve the customer of the obligation for timely payment as set forth herein.
4. Charges for service commence when the service is installed and connection made, whether used or not.
D. Meter Error Corrections
1. If any meter, after testing, is found to be more than three percent in error, either fast or slow, an adjustment correction of the amount calculated as being between three percent of the correct amount and the amount of the erroneous billing shall be made of previous readings and adjusted bills shall be rendered according to the following terms:
a. For the period of three months immediately preceding the removal of such meter from service for test or from the time the meter was in service since last tested, but not exceeding three months since the meter shall have been shown to be in error by such test.
b. From the date the error occurred, if the date of the cause can be definitely fixed.
2. No adjustment shall be made by the city except to the customer last served by the meter tested and only back six billing months 1 (modified by Ordinance #455).
E. Insufficient Funds (NSF) Checks
1. When the city is notified by the customer's bank that there are insufficient funds to cover the check tendered for utility service or the account is closed or no longer exists, the city may require the customer to make payment in cash, by money order, certified check or other means which guarantee the customer's payment to the city.
2. A customer who tenders an insufficient check shall in no way be relieved of the obligation to render payment to the city under the original terms of the bill nor defer the city's provision for termination of service for nonpayment of bills. A customer who tenders two insufficient checks shall lose the convenience of paying by check 2 (modified by Ordinance #455).
F. Change of Occupancy
1. Not less than three working days advance notice must be given in person at the city utility office to discontinue service due to change of occupancy.
1Modified by Ordinance No. 455
2Modified by Ordinance No. 455
UTILITIES
13.15
2. The customer of record at the time of notice to discontinue service shall be responsible for all utility services provided and/or consumed up to the scheduled turn-off date.
Section 13-2-10 Termination of Service
A. The city may disconnect service without advance written notice under the following conditions:
1. The existence of a hazardous condition.
2. The city has evidence of meter tampering or fraud.
3. Failure of a customer to comply with the curtailment requirements imposed by the city during supply shortages.
B. The city shall not be required to restore service until the conditions which resulted in the termination have been corrected to the satisfaction of the city.
C. Termination of Service with Notice
1. The city may disconnect service to any customer for any reason stated below.
a. Customer violation of any of the city's gas utility regulations;
b. Failure of the customer to pay a delinquent bill for utility service;
c. Failure to meet or maintain the city's deposit requirements;
d. Failure of the customer to provide the city reasonable access to its equipment
and property;
e. Customer breach of a written contract for service between the city and customer.
f. Whenever necessary for the city to comply with an order of any governmental agency having jurisdiction.
2. Right to Hearing – In all of those instances enumerated in paragraph 1 of this subsection in which termination of service may be unjust or cause severe hardship to an occupant of the premises which will be affected, either the customer of the occupant thereof may request a hearing, as hereafter provided with a city employee designated by the City Manager who shall act as a hearing officer and who shall consider any evidence which may be presented and thereafter make a determination as to whether or not the termination should occur and, if so, when such termination will take place. The hearing officer may enter into such other arrangements as he deems appropriate to allow continuation of gas service under conditions which protect the city’s interest in light of the reason upon which the termination order was initially based.
UTILITIES
13.16
3. Hearing Procedure – In the event any person so entitled elects a hearing by reason of the provisions of this section, such hearing shall be requested by filing a written “Request for Hearing” on a form supplied by the City and delivered personally or mailed to the utility billing department manager, the city clerk or the hearing officer designated in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of this subsection and the hearing be held thereafter as soon as reasonably practicable during normal work hours. If the request for hearing is filed at least four hours prior to the scheduled termination of service, the termination shall be delayed until the hearing has been concluded according to the schedule which shall be determined by the city. The hearing officer shall be empowered to affirm, delay, cancel or modify the termination of service order and may impose such conditions as he deems reasonable to protect the city’s interest in light of the evidence presented by the person requesting the hearing and the past experience with the customer affected thereby. In the event service has been terminated prior to the request for hearing being filed, the hearing officer may upon good cause being shown direct that the service be temporarily restored pending deposition of the matter in the same manner as provided in those instances when the request for hearing is received prior to termination of service. In all instances, burden of proving a hardship shall be on the person requesting the hearing. Hearings shall be scheduled if actual notice cannot be delivered, by posting notice of the scheduled hearing at least twenty-four hours in advance on the public notice bulletin board located in city hall. Failure to appear at a requested hearing shall be considered a withdrawal of the request for hearing.
Section 13-2-11 Annual Review and Notification
A. A review of natural gas users and users classes, total costs of operation and maintenance of the gas distribution system and the user rate charges will be made no less often than annually.
B. Revision to the user class or user rate charges as may be approved by resolution of the city council shall be made in order to accomplish the following:
1. Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs to amount of users and user classes;
2. Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation, maintenance and replacement of the system.
Section 13-2-12 Gas Line Extension Policy
A. Whenever a natural gas main line is extended to provide new gas service, the total cost of the line extension shall be borne by the person requesting extension. A person requesting the gas main extension shall be required to pay for a gas main extension whenever the city elects to install a line, the diameter of which exceeds four inches; in which case the person requesting the service shall pay only that portion of the cost which would have been incurred had a four inch main been installed.
B. The actual installation of all gas main lines referred to in subsection A of this section shall be accomplished by the city. The person requesting the installation shall pay the actual costs of
UTILITIES
13.17
installation incurred by the city including right-of-way acquisition, labor, fringe benefits, materials and equipment costs and a ten percent administration charge which shall be calculated on the total of all other charges. The city manager shall require a minimum deposit of fifty percent of the estimated costs of installation to be paid to the city before construction begins. The balance of the actual costs incurred shall be paid prior to the city furnishing gas to any customer served by the newly constructed line or fifteen days after construction of the new line is completed, whichever occurs first.
C. The person requesting the gas line extension may elect to provide their own trenching and backfill work in conjunction with the activities described in subsections A and B of this section. If such an option is selected, the person electing that option shall notify the city manager of their intent to provide trenching and backfill work at least ten working days prior to beginning the work. The individual or organization performing trenching or backfilling work shall immediately comply with all specifications and directions etc. given to them by the city manager or his authorized representative during the course of the trenching and backfill work in conjunction with the gas line installation.
D. Immediately upon completion of any gas line constructed under the foregoing provisions of this section, the gas line shall become the property of the city which shall maintain exclusive control of the gas line and rights-of-way associated with said extension.
E. In the sole and complete discretion of the city council or the city manager, the city may enter into into extension agreements with individuals or organization who have installed a gas line extension pursuant to this section. Such agreements may provide that any person other than the person who paid for extending a specific line connecting to that line shall pay a predetermined portion of the original construction costs and the amount or a specific portion thereof shall be remitted to the party who paid the cost of such extension. The extension agreement may specify the amount future users shall pay for each connection based on the circumstances of each individual extension. The total of such repayments shall not exceed the original construction cost and the period of any repayment agreement negotiated pursuant to this section shall not extend fifteen years from the date construction of the gas main was completed. No interest may be accrued to the original construction cost.
F. The city shall have the right to install, at its own expense, any extension or facility it deems appropriate and desirable. Additionally, the city council may enter into any extension agreement which provides for a sharing of costs in any manner deemed to be in the best interests of the city.
UTILITIES
13.18
ARTICLE 13-3 SEWER SERVICE1
13-3-1 Purpose
13-3-2 Definitions
13-3-3 General Provisions
13-3-4 Application for Approval
13-3-5 Fees for Connection to Sewer
13-3-6 Construction under Private Contract
13-3-7 Permits for Temporary Installations for Areas not Contiguous to Sewers
13-3-8 User Fee Charges
13-3-9 Annual Review and Notification
13-3-10 Restrictions Upon Sewer Use
13-3-11 Interceptors Required
13-3-12 Authority of Wastewater Department
13-3-13 Preliminary Treatment
13-3-14 Manholes
13-3-15 Tests and Analyses
13-3-16 Special Agreements with Industrial Concerns
13-3-17 Penalties
Section 13-3-1 Purpose
1Modified by Ordinances No. 323 and 335
A. The purpose of this article is to insure that all connections to the city sewer collection system shall be done only under plumbing inspection permits issued by the city; provide a connection fee method to equitably construct main, trunk and interceptor sewers and to establish and build a sewer improvement fund for future sewer and wastewater treatment system expansion; provide a method for authorizing construction of sewers under private contract; provide a means for reimbursement for oversize sewer mains and provide equitable methods for payment of sewer construction.
B. In addition, the purpose of this article is to provide for maintenance and operation of wastewater collection and treatment, expansion or renovation of treatment facilities and retirement of sewer and wastewater treatment facilities bonds by establishment of a sewer service charge.
C. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or cause to be constructed any sanitary sewer or to connect to any sanitary sewer in the city without complying with the provisions of this article. The fees provided herein shall be in addition to plumbing permit fees, building permit fees or development impact fees then in effect.
D. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge waste into the sewer system of the city without complying with the provisions of this article.
Section 13-3-2 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
UTILITIES
13.19
A. "Acre" means 43,560 square feet of land, excluding easements or rights-of-way and any other unusable portions of the land.
B. “A.D.E.Q.@ means the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
C. “A.D.H.S.@ means the Arizona Department of Health Services.
D. "Applicant for development" means an applicant for sewer service for an area under development for marketing purposes.
E. "Applicant for service" means an applicant for sewer service for personal use requiring an extension of an existing sewer.
F. "Area under development" means an area in which sanitary sewer improvements are being constructed including, but not limited to, single-family and multiple-family residential subdivisions, mobile home subdivisions and parks, improvement districts, and plats or development plans with intent of developing land for residential, commercial or industrial use. The term includes all development in which "on-site" sewerage improvements have been provided by the applicant by improvement district or contract.
G. "Biochemical Oxygen Demand (B.O.D.)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic mater under standard laboratory procedures measured in milligram per liter.
H. "Building drain" means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning two feet (0.6 m) outside the building way.
I. "Building sewer" means that part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and which receives the discharge of the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage disposal system or other point of disposal. The installation, cleaning, maintenance and replacement of said building sewer shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
J. "Commercial" means buildings or property not normally used as a residence, and where the public has general access to plumbing fixtures such as restaurants, bars, laundromats, service stations, motels, etc.
K. "Improvement district" means a district formed under the provisions of Chapter 4, Title 48 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
L. "Industrial" means buildings or property not normally used as a residence, and where the public has restricted access to fixtures such as manufacturing where the discharge of sewage is not normally associated with residential or commercial uses.
M. "Industrial wastes" means the liquid, gaseous or solid wastes produced as a result of any industrial operation.
UTILITIES
13.20
N. "Multi-family residence" means any residential complex under single or corporate ownership, designed for use by more than one family unit; including apartments, mobile home parks, hotels, motels, school dormitories, guest ranches and churches, but excluding townhouses and condominium projects excepting those fixtures to which the public has general access such as restaurants, laundromats, bars, etc., and which shall be continued under the commercial classification.
O. "Non-participating property" means property which is either residential, commercial or industrial that has not participated directly in the construction cost of a sanitary sewer providing service to that property.
P. "Off-site sewage improvements" means all sewage construction necessary to connect "on-site" facilities to an existing system as required by the manager and approved by the A.D.H.S. or A.D.E.Q., whichever agency has jurisdiction.
Q. "On-site sewage improvements" means all sewage facilities within any plat, improvement plan, development plan or other development, excluding capacities in excess of what is necessary to provide sewer service to that development as may be required by the supervisor, subject to approval by the A.D.H.S. or A.D.E.Q., whichever agency has jurisdiction.
R. "Participating property" means property, either residential, commercial or industrial, that has participated directly in the construction cost of a sanitary sewer providing service to that property.
S. "Person" means the State of Arizona, a municipality, county or other political subdivision of the State of Arizona; a cooperative, institution, corporation, company, firm, partnership or individual person.
T. "Pollution" means contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the city; discharge of any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any waters, onto or under any land within the city or into any of the air surrounding it that creates a nuisance or renders such waters, land or air harmful or injurious to public health, safety or welfare to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other lawful beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other natural life.
U. "Private sewer" means sewer service lines of less than six inches in diameter, which receive sewage discharge from one or more building drains and transmit it to the public sewer system.
V. "Public sewer" means the common sewage collection system, including manholes and sewer lines, six inches or larger in diameter that receives sewage from private sewer lines and has been built or accepted by the city.
W. "Public sewage system" means pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains and all other devices, appurtenances and facilities used for collecting and conducting common wastes to a point of treatment and disposal under the control of the administrative authority.
X. "Residential" means in an area under development where a family unit normally resides.
UTILITIES
13.21
Y. "Sewage" means the wastes from toilets, baths, sinks, lavatories, laundries and other plumbing fixtures in residences, institutions, human habitation, employment or recreation.
Z. "Supervisor" means the utilities manager of the City of Benson, Arizona.
AA. "Suspended solids (S.S.) means the total suspended matter which floats on the surface, or is suspended in, the wastewater which is removable by laboratory filtering, measured in milligrams per liter.
BB. "U.P.C." means the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials.
CC. “Unit of water@ means the measuring unit of 748 gallons or 100 cubic feet.
DD. “User” means any person, lot, parcel of land or premises that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of water into the public sewage system.
EE. "User fees" means a charge as set by resolution of the council made to the recipient of sanitary sewer service by the city to defray the costs of operation, maintenance and replacement of sewage collection and treatment facilities of the city.
FF. "Waste treatment works" means any plant, disposal field, lagoon, pumping station, incinerator or other works used for the purpose of treating or stabilizing sewage and industrial wastes.
GG. "Waters of the city" means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private which are contained within, flow through or border upon the city or any portion thereof.
Section 13-3-3 General Provisions
A. No sewage or industrial wastes shall be permitted to flow into waters within the city or upon or under any lands within the city in any manner determined by the A.D.H.S. or A.D.E.Q. to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons who may be affected by the resulting environmental condition.
B. No individual disposal system, development plan or improvement plan shall be approved nor shall any sewage disposal system be installed on a subdivision or development consisting of lots one acre in size or less except as approved by the supervisor, subject to the approval of the A.D.H.S. or A.D.E.Q.
C. Where soil conditions or topography are such that in the opinion of the A.D.H.S. or A.D.E.Q. or A.D.E.Q., based on experience, knowledge or engineering data, a septic tank system cannot be expected to function satisfactorily or where groundwater conditions are such that septic systems may cause pollution of the groundwater supply, other sewage disposal methods satisfactory to the A.D.H.S. or A.D.E.Q. shall be provided; except that in no such case shall an individual disposal system be approved or installed.
UTILITIES
13.22
D. Subdivisions consisting of lots of one acre or less shall be connected to a sewerage system.
E. Every property located within three hundred feet of a public sanitary sewer shall have all sanitary drains connected to the public sanitary sewer. Any sewer or drain not so connected shall be a violation of this code.
Section 13-3-4 Application for Approval
Before any person shall construct or contract for the construction of any main line sewerage systems, sewerage system extensions or waste treatment works or shall install any process, device or equipment, either in whole or in part, an application for approval to construct the contemplated works shall be made to the supervisor on forms provided by such officer. The supervisor, subject to the approval of the A.D.H.S. or A.D.E.Q., shall act on the application within thirty days upon receipt thereof, by designating either approval or disapproval. No construction shall be commenced until approval has been obtained from the A.D.H.S. or A.D.E.Q.
Section 13-3-5 Fees for Connection to Sewer
All fees charged for the connection to the city's sanitary sewer system shall be at the rate set by this article by the city council.
A. Participating Property in Areas Under Development:
1. All fees listed herein shall not apply to that property which by August 11, 1980 has paid a sewer assessment or sewer connection fee. These fees shall apply to all other properties subject to this article which have not previously paid any sewer assessment or sewer connection fee to the city as well as to all new developments requiring the installation of new sewer lines.
2. Single Family Residential. For service of residential subdivisions and residential improvement districts, said fee shall be charged at a rate of one hundred seventy-five dollars per residential lot in addition to the appropriate development impact fee allocated to sewer service.
3. Multiple Family Residential. For service of residential subdivision and residential improvement districts, said fee shall be charged at the rate of one hundred dollars per residential unit in addition to the appropriate development impact fee allocated to sewer service.
4. Commercial and Industrial. For service of commercial and industrial property, said fee, payable in cash at the time of application or upon execution of a written agreement between the owner and the city for sewer service, shall be at a rate of twenty-five dollars per fixture unit, so connected as shown in the U.P.C. as adopted by the city, and according to Tables 1 and 2 in addition to the appropriate development impact fee allocated to sewer service.
5. Drainage piping serving batteries of appliances capable of producing continuous flow shall be adequately sized to provide peak loads. Clothes
UTILITIES
13.23
washers in groups of three or more shall be rated at six units each for the purpose of common waste piping sizing.
6. Where trap sizes are increased over the minimums shown in Table 1 or greater waste loadings are evident, the discharge rating shall be determined in accordance with Table 2.
7. Trap sizes shall not be increased to a point where the fixture discharge may be inadequate to maintain their self-scouring properties.
UTILITIES
13.24
TABLE 1 *
Kind of Fixture
Minimum Trap & Trap Arm Size
Residential Units
Public Commercial & Industrial Units
Bath Tubs
1 - 2"
2
4
Bidets
1 - 2"
2
3
Dental Units or Cuspidors
1 - 3 A
1
Drinking Fountains
1 - 3 A
1
Floor Drains
2"
2
*
*Interceptor for Grease, Oil, Solids, Etc.
2"
3
*
*Interceptor for Sand, Auto Wash, Etc.
3"
*
Laundry Tubs
1 2 "
2
4
Clothes Washers
2"
2
4
*Indirect Waste Receptors for Commercial Sinks, Dishwashers, Airwashers, Etc.
2"
4
*Indirect Waste Receptors for Coffee Urns, Refrigerators, Water Stations, Etc. (Floor Sinks)
1 - 2 A
*
Showers, Single Stall
2"
2
4
Showers, Gang (One Unit per Head)
2"
*
Sinks, Bar - Private (1 - 2 " Min. Waste)
1 - 2 A
1
Sinks, Bar - Commercial (2" Min. Waste)
1 - 2 A
2
Sinks; Including Dishwashers, Washup Sinks and Wash Fountains (2" Min Waste)
1 - 2 "
4
Sinks, Flushing Rim, Clinic
3"
10
Sinks, and/or Dishwashers(2" Min Waste)
1 - 2 A
2
Sinks, Service
2"
3
4
Trailer Park Traps (One for Each Trailer)
3"
6
6
Urinals, Pedestal
3"
10
Urinals, Stall
2"
5
Urinals, Wall (2" Min. Waste)
1 - 2 "
5
Urinals, Wall Through (2" Min. Waste)
1 - 2 "
3
Wash Basins (Lavatories) Single
1 - 2 "
1
2
Wash Basins, in Sets
1 - 2 "
2
4
Water Closet-tank Type (Trap Arm Only)
3"
4
5
Water Closet-flush Valve Type (Trap Arm Only)
3"
6
10
UTILITIES
13.25
TABLE 1 *
*NOTE--The size and discharge rating of each indirect waste receptor and each interceptor shall be based on the total rates discharge capacity of all fixtures, equipment or appliance discharging thereinto in accordance with Table 2.
TABLE 2
FIXTURE UNIT EQUIVALENTS
DISCHARGE CAPACITY
(IN GALS. PER MIN.)
Up to 7 G.P.M. or 1 1/4" EQUALS 1 UNIT
8 to 15 G.P.M. or 1 1/2” EQUALS 3 UNITS
16 to 30 G.P.M. or 2" EQUALS 4 UNITS
31 to 50 G.P.M. or 3" EQUALS 6 UNITS
51 to 60 G.P.M. or 4" EQUALS 8 UNITS
Over 61 Gallons shall be determined by the supervisor.
B. Connection Fees Relating to Non-Participating Property in Areas Under Development:
1. Single Family Residential. For services of single family residential property said fee shall be charged at the rate of twenty-five dollars per fixture unit as determined from the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the city which shall be in addition to the appropriate development impact fee.
2. Multi-Family Residential. For services of multi-family residential property, said fee shall be charged at the rate of twenty dollars per fixture unit as determined from the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the city, with the minimum fee to be not less than that rate as set by the city council which shall be in addition to the appropriate development impact fee.
3. Commercial and Industrial. For service of commercial and industrial property, said fee shall be charged at the rate of fifty dollars per fixture unit as determined from the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the city which shall be in addition to the appropriate development impact fee.
C. Special Facilities:
If the property to be connected to the sanitary sewer system necessitates the construction of special facilities required to handle the waste, the city manager may require the applicant to provide these special facilities at his own expense.
D. The cost of repairing or replacing any pavement or other structure necessarily damaged in the process or because of the installation of any service connection, either within or without the corporate limits of the city, shall be paid by the person making application for such service, in addition to any other charges that may be required for such service.
UTILITIES
13.26
Section 13-3-6 Construction under Private Contract
A. General Provisions. Upon written application, the city manager may permit construction of permanent sanitary sewer systems where no existing sewer is available. Said sewer will be constructed at the sole expense and cost of the applicant within streets, avenues, alleys and rights-of-way pursuant to grants of easements. The applicant will be required to construct all "on-site" and "off-site" facilities large enough to provide service to his development and in no case shall a line be less than eight inches in internal diameter.
B. Permits for Construction. Plans for construction will be provided by the applicant, certified by a registered professional engineer and the supervisor, subject to the approval of the A.D.E.Q. The construction of the sewer facilities authorized by said permit will be inspected by the utilities manager or his authorized representative. An inspection fee shall be charged as set by resolution of the city council. Upon completion of the sewers and acceptance by the utilities manager, title to such sewer shall be transferred to the city.
C. Agreement for Construction. With each application for a permit for the construction of sewers authorized by this section, the applicant shall submit in duplicate, the proposed agreement for the construction thereof by private contract. If the proposed construction is approved and the agreement otherwise conforms with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the utilities manager to approve the agreement, subject to further approval of the city council, for and on behalf of the city, and to issue the permit in accordance therewith.
D. Sewer Installed Through Private Contract by an Applicant for Development. If the utilities manager requires an applicant to install an "on-site" or "off-site@ sewer system of a size and/or capacity larger than is required to collect the waste of the area under development, as determined by the utilities manager, an agreement for refund of the cost of the oversizing may be made with the applicant. The refund amount shall not include any portion of the development impact fees collected and shall be limited to sewer or wastewater connection service fees and shall not exceed the total fees to be collected as authorized in Section 13-3-5 or as otherwise provided in a separate development agreement with applicant if such an agreement exists.
E. Sewers Installed Through Private Contract by Applicant for Service. If a sewer system is installed by an applicant for service in such a manner as to provide service to a non-participating property, an agreement for refund of the cost of the sewer system may be made with the applicant. The refund shall not include any portion of a development impact fee, whether paid directly or indirectly by the applicant for service, nor shall it include any fees other than sewer or wastewater connection fees actually collected by the city as authorized in Section 13-3-5. Such refunds shall be made until the full sum has been refunded, or for a maximum period of five years from the date of the refund agreement, whichever shall first occur. In the event the full sum has not been refunded within the said five year period, any balance remaining unpaid shall be considered canceled, and the city shall be fully discharged from any further obligation under the agreement.
UTILITIES
13.27
Section 13-3-7 Permits for Temporary Installations for Areas not Contiguous to Sewers
The city manager may, upon written application, issue a permit authorizing an area not contiguous to any sewer to be temporarily connected to a nearby sewer. All permits issued and installations made pursuant to this section shall be on a temporary basis only and shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:
A. The temporary line referred to in this section shall be only at such locations as shall be approved by the city manager.
B. All such installations shall be made without cost or expense to the city.
C. Upon the installation of permanent sewers contiguous to the area being serviced by such temporary line, the temporary installations shall be abandoned, connection shall be made to the permanent sewers and the area serviced shall be subject to the same fees set forth in Section 13-3-5.
D. All charges and expenditures, including rental charges incurred or paid by the applicant in installing and maintaining such temporary line, shall in no manner be considered as having been incurred or paid with respect to any permanent sewer improvement district, private contract authorized by this article or any sewer installed by the city.
Section 13-3-8 User Fee Charges
A. The city shall collect sewer user fees for the use and services rendered by the city's public sewage system and waste treatment works from the person who is the owner or occupant of every lot, parcel of real estate or building that is connected to the public sewage system of the city or which discharges wastewater, sewage, industrial wastewater or other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the public sewage system of the city. Except as otherwise provided herein, sewer user fees shall be based upon the quantity of water, measured in units of water, used on the premises as measured by the city's meter on the property or premises subject to such fees and those fees shall be computed as set forth herein.
Where the potable water consumed by a public sewage system user is obtained from any source other than the city, the following provisions shall apply:
1. For a sewer system user who obtains water from a source other than the city either of two methods may, (subject to the conditions stated in subsection C of this section), be used to compute the monthly sewer user fee charge. The two computation methods are:
a. Water consumption records acceptable to the city manager or his designate, showing the previous December, January and February months water usage may be used to compute the sewer user volume charge or,
b. The median sewer user volume charge experienced for all other users of the same category may be used and the resultant charge known as the median usage method rate;
2. For those users who chose not to use the median usage method of determining the monthly sewer charge, suitable metering, as approved by the city manager or his designate, shall be provided and maintained by the user at all times in connection
UTILITIES
13.28
with each or all sources of water not purchased from the city and delivered through a city meter. The city manager or his designate shall have access to the premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, testing and reading of the water user's water meter;
3. The city reserves the right to determine if the "median" usage method is an appropriate method of determining user fees in all cases. The city may require a water metering device to be installed and used to determine the sewer user charges in cases where the city has determined the median usage method is not acceptable;
4. The city manager shall be authorized to direct that sewer service to user's premises be disconnected and plugged by the city to prevent sewage from entering the public sewage system from the premises unless a suitable water metering device is installed. Sewer service may be restored upon compliance with the requirements of this section. A fee equal to the actual cost of labor and materials plus a fifteen percent administration fee shall be charged each time sewer service to a premises is disconnected and/or reconnected.
B. For all users whose premise is served by metered city water service, the monthly sewer user charges shall be based on the average monthly water usage billed for the months of December, January and February, which shall be known as the "winter average water usage. If a sewer user has not established a "winter average water usage", the monthly sewer user charge shall be the median charge for all other residential users or that of the same meter size commercial user, whichever is applicable to establish a "winter average water usage." All users shall be billed according to one of the foregoing methods beginning with the July 1, 1989 billing. The winter average water usage shall be established each March, and subsequently the sewer user fee charged will be adjusted as of the subsequent April 1 billing.
C. In the event a public sewage system user has a consumptive use of water or in some other manner uses water which does not enter the wastewater collection system during the winter average water usage period, the sewer user charge for that contributor may be adjusted according to a method acceptable to the city manager. The city manager, in making his determination of an acceptable adjustment method, shall rely upon a quantitative method of determining the amount of water which did not enter into the wastewater collection system and in the event the user disputes either the method or the resultant calculation, the user shall have the burden of proving a different method or calculation to be more appropriate.
As an alternative to the foregoing adjustment method, any non-residential public sewage system user may select any three consecutive months as an alternative to the months of December, January and February, as is provided in subsection B of this section, and the period so selected shall become the basis for calculating the period known as the winter average water usage. In the event that an alternative period is selected for determination of the winter average water usage, the users monthly sewer charge shall be adjusted annually on the month following the end of the period selected.
UTILITIES
13.29
D. The monthly base minimum sewer user charge shall be the rates listed in the below chart eleven dollars and sixty cents 1 (changed by Resolution 5-2006 and Resolution 7-2017) per month for all residential customers. For commercial and multi-user customers, the monthly base minimum charge shall be based on the size of the water meter used by that customer according to the following chart:
WasteWater Fee Existing New New New New New 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Base Fee 5/8" X 3/4" Waterline $11.60 $12.76 $14.04 $15.44 $16.98 $18.68 Base Fee 1" Waterline $22.90 $25.19 $27.71 $30.48 $33.53 $36.88 Base Fee 1 1/2" Waterline $38.10 $41.91 $46.10 $50.71 $55.78 $61.36 Base Fee 2" Waterline $53.40 $58.74 $64.61 $71.08 $78.18 $86.00 Base Fee 4" Waterline $137.20 $150.92 $166.01 $182.61 $200.87 $220.96 Base Fee 6" Waterline $206.50 $227.15 $249.87 $274.85 $302.34 $332.57 Charge Per Unit Average Water Use Dec-Feb $1.80 $1.98 $2.18 $2.40 $2.64 $2.90 NEWLY ADOPTED WASTEWATER UTILITY RATE (5) YEAR PLAN
Size of Meter Minimum Charge 2
3/4 “ $ 11.60
1" $22.90
1 1/2 “ $38.10
2" $53.40
4 “ $137.20
6" $206.50
E. In addition to the monthly base sewer user charge, each user shall pay a sewer user volume charge for operation and maintenance, including facilities replacement and debt retirement, of such amounts as the city council may, from time to time, determine and fix by resolution and said amount shall be assessed on the basis of the units of water consumed as determined by the winter average water usage method.
F. Any user discharging sewage which is significantly stronger than normal residential sewage will be charged a surcharge rate in proportion to the concentration of pollutants in discharged sewage. The surcharge will be determined according to the following formula:
CS = BC x B + SC x S = PC x P x VU
Where:
CS is a surcharge for wastewaters of excessive strength.
BC is the operation and maintenance costs for the treatment of a unit of B.O.D.
B is the concentration of B.O.D. from a user above that typical in the city.
SC is the operation and maintenance costs for the treatment of a unit of S.S.
S is the concentration of suspended solids from a user above that typical in the city.
PC is the operation and maintenance costs for the treatment of a unit of any pollutant.
P is the concentration of any pollutant above that typical in the city.
1Modified by Resolution 5-2006
2Modified by Resolution 5-2006
UTILITIES
13.30
VU is volume contribution from a user per unit time.
Section 13-3-9 Annual Review and Notification
A. A review of the base sewer user charges, individual user volume and surcharge rates, the total cost of operation and maintenance of the waste treatment works will be made no less often than annually.
B. Revisions to sewer rates as stated in Section 13-3-8 may be made by resolution of the city council and shall be at levels which generate adequate annual revenue to pay those expenses which the city council designates through the adoption of its annual budget to be paid by the sewer user fee system.
Section 13-3-10 Restrictions upon Sewer Use
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooler or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer without complying with the provisions of Section 13-3-5 (C).
B. Except as provided in this section, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into any public sewer:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit.
2. Any water or waste which may contain more than fifty parts per million by weight of fat, oil or grease.
3. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
4. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
5. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, grits such as brick, cement, onyx, carbide or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewer works.
6. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and one-half or higher than nine or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
7. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
UTILITIES
13.31
8. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
Section 13-3-11 GREASE & OIL CONTROL CODE 1 (Amended by Ordinance No. 476)
13-3-11(A). Purpose
13-3-11(B). Policy
13-3-11(C). Definitions
13-3-11(D). Applicability
13-3-11(E). Design
13-3-11(F). Existing Establishments
13-3-11(G). Service Records
13-3-11(H). Variance or Appeal
13-3-11(I). Enforcement
Section 13-3-11(A). PURPOSE
The intent of this policy is to provide guidelines and procedures to ensure compliance with City’s Sewer Use Ordinance. This policy is designed to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases discharged to the sanitary sewer system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities.
Section 13-3-11(B). POLICY
1. The City’s Wastewater Department, like most sewer utilities, continues to experience sewer blockages caused by the accumulation of fats, oils and grease on the surfaces of sewer lines. Greasy wastewater can be discharged to the sewer system from several sources, including food service operations. In order to reduce sewer blockages, customers in the City’s service area that discharge wastewater that contains grease must install and properly operate and maintain a grease trap or interceptor.
2. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of City, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not normally be required for
1Amended by Ordinance 476
UTILITIES
13.32
residential professional, such as an engineer, as meeting City requirements and shall be easily accessible for cleaning, testing and inspection.
Section 13-3-11(C). DEFINITIONS
1. Fats, Oils, and Greases: Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures. All are sometimes referred to herein as “Grease” or “Greases”.
2. Food Preparation or Serving Facility: Any commercial or industrial facility that prepares or serves food, including but not limited to a restaurant, café, cafeteria, snack bar, grill, deli, catering service, bakery, grocery store, butcher shop, or similar establishment that discharges wastewater to the City’s system.
3. Cooking Establishments: Those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available food for consumption and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching and which discharge wastewater to the City’s system. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.
4. Grease Trap or Interceptor: A device for separating and retaining waterborne Greases and Grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect settable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease Traps and Interceptors are sometimes referred to herein as “Grease Interceptors”.
5. Minimum Design Capability: The design features of a Grease Interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain Greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer.
6. Non-cooking Establishments: Those establishments primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and serving establishments.
7. User: Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of City, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the sewer collections system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
8. Vehicle Maintenance Facility: Any commercial or industrial facility where automobiles, trucks or equipment are serviced or maintained, including garages, service stations, repair shops, oil and lubrication shops, or similar establishments.
Section 13-3-11(D). APPLICABILITY
1. The following types of facilities will be required to have grease interceptors: restaurants, schools, hospitals, service stations, car washes, vehicle repair and lubrication facilities,
UTILITIES
13.33
nursing homes and any other facility that handles grease and which discharges wastewater containing grease into the City’s sewer collection system. All such establishments are required to have a properly sized and functioning grease interceptor, which a qualified professional certifies, to City, is designed to meet City’s sewer use and grease control requirements.
2. All vehicle maintenance facilities are required to have a properly sized grease, oil and sand interceptor.
3. Facilities other than those noted in Section 4.1 and 4.2 may require the installation of a grease and oil interceptor. The City’s Building Inspector or his/her designee shall determine the need and applicability of such device.
Section 13-3-11(E). DESIGN
1. Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at lease to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal and wastewater sampling activities.
2. All interceptors shall be located outside of the building in such a manner that personnel from City can inspect the interceptors at any time.
3. The City shall be notified of any changes of operation or process at the permitted establishment. The establishment may be required to upgrade their grease interceptor to meet current requirements and standards.
4. The following documents shall be submitted to City’s Building Inspector for review and approval prior to issuance of a permit for installation of an interceptor. Building Inspector shall approve any changes to the approved plan, prior to implementation:
a. A site plan showing the location of the interceptor, lines and cleanout or manhole;
b. Details of the interceptor, lines and cleanout or manhole;
c. Formula and calculations used to determine the interceptor capacity.
5. Every interceptor shall have sufficient capacity to perform the service for which it is provided. Interceptors shall be designed to provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24 minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate as predicted by the Uniform Plumbing Code fixture criteria, between the influent and effluent baffles with 20 percent of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate.
6. All grease traps and interceptors must be designed using standard engineering principles for sedimentation and floatation in gravity separators. Baffles and good inlet design are required to deflect the flow across the surface areas of the units and sufficient grease and solids storage capacity is required. Grease traps and interceptors shall be rated for the designed flow-through rate of the unit in gallons/minute.
7. Users as required by City shall install grease interceptors. Grease interceptors shall be installed at the user’s expense. All grease interceptors shall be of a type, design, and
UTILITIES
13.34
capacity approved by City’s Building Inspector and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste contents as required in order to maintain minimum design capabilities or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less than once every 60 days.
Section 13-3-11(F). EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS
1. Businesses and other locations subject to this regulation which were in operation before the effective date of this regulation (“Existing businesses”) and do not have grease interception systems are generally required to install such a system within one year of the effective date of this regulation. Such businesses may receive approval from the Building Inspector of his/her designee, to install a system under alternate standards taking into account the circumstances of the business’s operation, production of waste grease and the practicality of installation under normal requirements.
2. Existing businesses with an existing grease interception system that does not meeting City’s standards may be required to upgrade the system or may be allowed to continue use of the present system subject to requirements such as a clean-out frequency less than 60 days.
Section 13-3-11(G). SERVICING AND RECORDS
1. Servicing and maintenance is essential for the efficient operation of grease traps and interceptors. All grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum design capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor. All users’ shall be required to provide documentation of servicing to the City every 60 days or as otherwise specified. Servicing frequency is site-specific and is dependent on the amount of oil and grease and suspended solids generated at each operation and the size of the grease trap or interceptor. In no case shall the frequency of cleaning be less than once every 60 days, or as otherwise specified in City’s permit for the interceptor system. The volumes of greases and solids in grease traps and interceptors must not exceed the designed grease and solids storage capacity of the unit.
2. All grease interceptors shall be cleaned by a properly licensed cleaning and disposal operation.
3. All users, including food preparation or serving facilities and vehicle maintenance facilities shall maintain a written record of maintenance performed on the interceptor for a minimum of three years. All such records will be available for inspection by the City upon request.
Section 13-3-11(H). VARIANCE/APPEAL
1. Under certain circumstances, the interceptor size and location may need special exceptions to this policy. If an exception to this policy is requested, the user must demonstrate that the size and location will not cause the facility any problems in meeting the discharge requirements of City.
2. The Building Inspector or his/her designee, reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance, facility site and building plan review and to require repairs to, or modification or replacement of such traps.
UTILITIES
13.35
Section 13-3-11(I). ENFORCEMENT
A. If, an obstruction of an City’s sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow and such overflow can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease in City’s sewer main(s), the City will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in City’s Ordinance codes, against the generator or contributor of such grease. These actions may include fines, civil penalties or a discontinuance of sewer service.
Section 13-3-12 Authority of Wastewater Department
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having any of the following characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of the wastewater department:
A. A five day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred parts per million by weight.
B. Containing more than three hundred fifty parts per million by weight of suspended solids.
C. Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in Section 13-3-10.
D. Having an average daily flow of greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city.
Section 13-3-13 Preliminary Treatment
A. Federal pretreatment regulations shall be enforced as applicable.
B. Where necessary in the opinion of the wastewater department or for any industrial wastes, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
1. Reduce the B.O.D. to three hundred parts per million and the suspended solids to three hundred fifty parts per million by weight.
2. Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 13-3-12.
3. Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.
C. Plans and specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of the plumbing code in effect, and shall be submitted for approval of the wastewater department and the engineering division of the A.D.H.S. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing.
UTILITIES
13.36
D. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
Section 13-3-14 Manholes
When required by the wastewater department, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation and sampling of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the wastewater department. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Section 13-3-15 Tests and Analyses
All tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes, shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared by APHA, AWWA, and WPCF, latest edition and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in Section 13-3-14 or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole.
Section 13-3-16 Special Agreements with Industrial Concerns
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and the industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. All industries and entities subject to the Federal Industrial Cost Recovery Regulations shall enter into an agreement with the city in accordance with U.S. EPA regulations.
Section 13-3-17 Penalties
A. It is unlawful for any person to excavate or to cause an excavation to be made for the purpose of laying any sewer mains or pipes in the public streets, alley ways or upon the property of the city without first complying with the provisions of this article or for any person to fail to obtain permits as required by this article prior to the commencement of construction of sewers or temporary installations.
B. Civil Penalties. Any person who connects or attempts to connect to the sewage system of the city without complying with the provisions of this article shall also be liable to an additional penalty of five hundred dollars for each day such violation continues. Said penalty shall be collected by the city in a civil action filed in the appropriate court.
C. Liens. Any contractual or service agreement entered into between the owner and the city pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall provide that any unpaid charges, rentals or expenses for the services provided to the property under said agreement shall be and become a lien thereon until the same has been fully paid and discharged. Said lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as the foreclosure of a realty mortgage.
UTILITIES
13.37
D. Right of City to Remove Sewer Connections. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the city has the right, and such right shall be reinforced by contract between the city and the owner of the property or tenant involved whether inside the city limits or outside the city limits, to disconnect by any reasonable means any connection when the sewer service charges provided for in this article have not been paid within thirty days after said owner has been notified in writing of the delinquency.
E. Right of City to Bring Suit. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to deprive the city of its right to bring suit against any person, corporation or other entity for damages to the city sewer lines or wastewater disposal system resulting from the careless or deliberate discharge of wastes contrary to the provisions of this article.
F. Returned Checks. There shall be a charge of twenty-five dollars for each check returned for insufficient funds or any other reason.
ARTICLE 13-4 WATER SERVICE1
1Modified by Ordinance No. 334, 335, 356 and 428
13-4-1 Definitions
13-4-2 Application
13-4-3 Deposit
13-4-4 Connection Fees
13-4-5 Rate Schedules
13-4-6 Other Charges
13-4-7 Payment for Services
13-4-8 Penalty for Late Payment
13-4-9 Water Shortage
13-4-10 Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Code
Section 13-4-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Accommodation charge" means that charge applied to any initial turn on (modified by Ordinance #456), summer turn off, turn off for construction or repair, moving or any other turn off requested by the customer except for discontinuing of service.
B. "Delivery pressure" means a minimum pressure delivered to the customer,
C. "In-city customers" means those customers receiving water service within the corporate limits of the city.
D. "Out-of-city customers" means those customers receiving water service outside the corporate limits of the city.
E. "Rate" means the fees charged for each unit or fraction thereof.
F. "Service availability charge" means that monthly charge affixed to the water service whether in service or not.
UTILITIES
13.38
G. "Unit" means the measuring unit meaning seven hundred forty-eight (748) gallons or 100 cubic feet (Ccf).
H. “302 Area Utility Improvement Zone Number 1" means the area described as:
Those portions of Sections 7, 8, 17, 18 and 19, Twp. 17 South Range 20 East of the Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian, Cochise County, Arizona, said portion being specifically described as:
That portion of the south half of Section 7 lying south of the right-of-way of Interstate Route 10,
That portion of the west half of Section 8 lying south of the right-of-way of Interstate Route 10,
The northwest quarter of Section 17, and,
All of Section 18 and all of Section 19.
I. “Private Water Well” means any well or system for the delivery of water within the Corporate
Limits of the City of Benson, for any use whatsoever, including but not limited to agricultural and potable uses, upon real property that does not belong to, is leased to or presently licensed by the City of Benson for the operation of a water well. (Amended by Ordinance No. 488)
Section 13-4-2 Establishment of Service (modified by Ordinance #456)
A. An applicant requesting water service shall provide the following information to the City prior to the initiation, reconnection or reestablishment of said service:
1. Name or names of applicants;
2. Name, address and telephone of employer;
3. Social security number or/and name, address and phone number of next of kin not
living with them;
4. Service address or location and telephone number;
5. Billing address or location and telephone number, if different than service address;
6. Address where service was provided previously and if outside the City, the name and billing address of the service provider;
7. Date applicant will be ready for service;
8. Indication of whether applicant is owner, tenant or agent for the premises.
B. A new applicant for service must appear at City Hall to produce proof of identity and sign the utility application form.
C. Where service is provided to two or more individuals, at the same location, the City shall have the right to collect the full amount owed to the City from any of the individuals.
D. The City may refuse to establish service if any of the following conditions exist:
UTILITIES
13.39
1. The applicant has an outstanding amount due for any City utility service and the applicant has not made acceptable payment arrangements with the City; or,
2. A condition exists which in the City=s judgement is unsafe or hazardous to the
applicant, the public or the utility=s personnel or facilities; or,
a. Refusal by the applicant to provide the City with an acceptable deposit when the customer has failed to meet credit provisions set forth in Section 13-4-3 for waiver of deposit requirements; or
b. Failure of the customer to furnish such funds, service equipment and/or rights-of-way necessary to serve the customer or which may have been specified by the City as a condition for providing service; or,
c. Applicant falsifies his or her identity for the purpose of obtaining service or it appears that another person is being presented as the prospective customer because the actual primary resident of the property has an outstanding utility account balance due or has an unacceptable payment history.
Section 13-4-3 Deposit
A. The City shall require only 50% of the deposit (modified by Ordinance #456) providing the customer has established a good payment record with the city or presents a verifiable credit reference from another utility.
B. An advance cash deposit shall be made to the utility office before any service is permitted. Such deposits shall be in accordance with the following table.
1. Residential. Upon application by a water user, they shall make a cash deposit with the city utility office in the sum of fifty dollars (modified by Ordinance #456) dollars as a final payment advance and guarantee.
2. Multi-Residential. Upon application by a water user, they shall make a cash deposit with the city utility office in a sum equal to one-sixth the annual billing as evidenced by the account in the city utility office.
3. Commercial. Upon application by a water user, they shall make a cash deposit with the city utility office in a sum equal to one-sixth the annual billing as evidenced by that account in the city utility office.
4. Irrigation. Upon application by a water user, they shall make a cash deposit with the city utility office in a sum equal to one-sixth the annual billing as evidenced by that account in the city utility office.
C. Accounts where no history exists shall be compared to a similar operation by the utility department for setting the required cash deposit in accordance with this article.
D. Accounts turned off because of delinquency shall be required to pay the necessary deposits in accordance with this article.
E. Deposits shall be refunded if one of the following conditions are met:
UTILITIES
13.40
1. The customer has completed twelve consecutive months of service without being delinquent in the payment of more than two bills; or
2. If service is disconnected and the customer has paid all outstanding amounts due the city. (Modified by Ordinance #456)
`
Section 13-4-4 Connection Fees 1
In addition to the applicable development impact fee, the City shall collect the following fees before any service taps or water meters are connected to the water system:
A. A connection fee, as established by resolution from time to time by the City Council; and,
B. The cost of repairing or replacing any pavement or other structure necessarily damaged in the process or because of the installation of any service connection, either within or without the corporate limits of the City of Benson, shall be paid by the person making application for such service, in addition to any other charges that may be required for such service, and such amount shall be estimated by the City Manager, or his designee, and paid in advance of the City being obligated to undertake the utility work.
Section 13-4-5 Rate Schedules 2
A. RESIDENTIAL RATES (COMBINED REGULAR AND 302):
Availability Charge $/month
5/8 x ¾ “ $8.00
¾ $12.00
1 $20.00
1 ½ $40.00
2 $64.00
3 $120.00
4 $200.00
6 $400.00
CITY OF BENSON
NEWLY ADOPTED WATER UTILITY RATES
(5) YEAR PLAN
Residential Water 5/8” x 3/4”
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
1-5 Units
$1.00
$1.10
$1.21
$1.33
$1.46
$1.61
6-10 Units
$1.50
$1.65
$1.82
$2.00
$2.20
$2.42
11-30 Units
$2.50
$2.75
$3.03
$3.33
$3.66
$4.03
1Modified by Resolution 51-2006
2Modified by Resolution 04-2006 and Ord. No. 517
UTILITIES
13.41
> 30 Units
$3.50
$3.85
$4.24
$4.66
$5.12
$5.64
Residential Water 1””
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
1-5 Units
$1.00
$1.10
$1.21
$1.33
$1.46
$1.61
6-10 Units
$1.50
$1.65
$1.82
$2.00
$2.20
$2.42
11-30 Units
$2.50
$2.75
$3.03
$3.33
$3.66
$4.03
> 30 Units
$3.50
$3.85
$4.24
$4.66
$5.12
$5.64
Residential Water 2”
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
1-5 Units
$1.00
$1.10
$1.21
$1.33
$1.46
$1.61
6-10 Units
$1.50
$1.65
$1.82
$2.00
$2.20
$2.42
11-30 Units
$2.50
$2.75
$3.03
$3.33
$3.66
$4.03
> 30 Units
$3.50
$3.85
$4.24
$4.66
$5.12
$5.64
Commercial Water 5/8" X 3/4"
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Fixed Unit Fee
$1.43
$1.72
$1.97
$2.27
$2.61
$3.00
Commercial Water 1”
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Fixed Unit Fee
$1.43
$1.72
$1.97
$2.27
$2.61
$3.00
Commercial Water 1.5”
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Fixed Unit Fee
$1.43
$1.72
$1.97
$2.27
$2.61
$3.00
Commercial Water 2”
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
UTILITIES
13.42
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Fixed Unit Fee
$1.43
$1.72
$1.97
$2.27
$2.61
$3.00
Commercial Water 3”
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Fixed Unit Fee
$1.91
$2.29
$2.64
$3.03
$3.49
$4.01
Hydrant Meter
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Fixed Unit Fee
$3.80
$4.18
$4.81
$5.53
$6.36
$7.31
Commercial Water 4”
Existing
New
New
New
New
New
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Fixed Unit Fee
$1.91
$2.29
$2.64
$3.03
$3.49
$4.01
1. Single Residential Units:
Consumption Charge ($/CCF)
First 5 Units $1.00
6-10 Units $1.50
11-30 Units $2.50
Over 30 Units $3.50
B. COMMERCIAL RATES (INCLUDES MULTI-FAMILY):
Availability Charge $/month
5/8 x ¾” $8.00
¾ $12.00
1 $20.00
1 ½ $40.00
2 $64.00
3 $120.00
4 $200.00
6 $400.00
Consumption Charge ($/CCF)
All units $1.43
UTILITIES
13.43
C. Construction Water:
$5.00 minimum. Plus above Hydrant Meter fees listed in above chart$3.80 per 1,000 gallons.
Section 13-4-6 Other Charges
A. Accommodation charge shall be $30.00 (Modified by Ordinance #456) per call.
B. Reconnection fee for turn off because of nonpayment shall be $30.00 for residential, multi-residential and commercial accounts, which must be paid with the delinquent amount before service is restored.
C. There shall be a charge of $25 per check returned for insufficient funds or any other reason.
Section 13-4-7 Billing (Modified by Ordinance #456)
A. Frequency
1. The city shall bill monthly for services rendered.
2. Failure on the part of the customer to comply with a reasonable request by the City for access to its meter shall be grounds for immediate discontinuance of service.
B. Billing terms
1. All bills for utility services are due and payable no later than fifteen days from the date the bill is mailed. Payments not received within fifteen days shall be considered delinquent. For purposes of this rule, the date a bill is mailed may be evidenced by the City’s record of mailing.
2. All delinquent bills for which payment has not been received within ten days shall be subject to the provisions of the City’s termination procedures.
3. Failure to receive bills or notices which have been according to City records placed in the United States mail shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent and will not relieve the customer of the obligation for timely payments as set forth herein.
4. Charges for service commence when the service is installed and connection made, whether used or not.
Section 13-4-8 Penalty for Late Payment
If payment is not received by the thirtieth day after the billing date, the account shall be subject to disconnection. Reconnection charges shall be those currently in effect at the time of reconnection and shall be payable in advance along with a new deposit for each meter reconnected.
UTILITIES
13.44
Section 13-4-9 Water Shortage
A. Since a critical water shortage may occur within the city at anytime, it may be in the best interest of the citizens of the city to curtail the nonessential usage of water.
B. The city manager shall identify the water levels and/or equipment malfunctions which may indicate a potential hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and is hereby directed to implement a water curtailment program. The city manager shall immediately notify, by most appropriate means available, the citizens of the city to discontinue all unnecessary usage of water, until such time as the danger shall have passed.
C. After notification of a critical water shortage, any individual, business or corporation who shall continue to use water in an unnecessary manner, such as, but not limited to, sprinkling, pool filling or vehicle washing, shall be in violation of this section.
SECTION 13-4-10 BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION
CONTROL CODE (Amended by Ordinance No. 475)
13-4-10(A). Application
13-4-10(B). Purpose
13-4-10(C). Definitions
13-4-10(D). Backflow Prevention Required
13-4-10(E). Hazzard Potential
13-4-10(F). Approved Backflow Prevention Methods
13-4-10(G). Backflow Prevention Methods Required
13-4-10(H). Backflow Assembly Installation Requirements
13-4-10(I). Installation of Backflow Prevention Assemblies for Fire System
13-4-10(J). Inspection Testing
13-4-10(K). Permit Required
13-4-10(L). Maintenance and Records
13-4-10(M). Modification of Backflow Prevention Requirements
13-4-10(N). Discontinuance of Water Service
13-4-10(O). Administrative Appeal
13-4-10(P). Violation a Civil Infraction
13-4-10(Q). Retroactive Application
13-4-10(R). Fees
Section 13-4-10(A). APPLICATION
This Code shall be applicable to all water service connections, including those which existed prior to the effective date of this amendment, in accordance with the compliance schedule hereinafter set forth.
Section 13-4-10(B). PURPOSE
1. To protect the City of Benson's drinking water quality and to ensure that the
City supplies safe drinking water in compliance with the provisions of Arizona law and the
UTILITIES
13.45
rules adopted by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, the City of Benson shall require the installation of a backflow prevention assembly under those circumstances hereinafter defined.
2. To protect the public water supply of the City of Benson from the possibility of contamination or pollution from the backflow of contaminants and pollutants into the public potable water supply system.
3. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, with a customer's internal potable water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems.
4. To provide for a continuing program to monitor, control, and prevent cross- connection contamination or pollution of the public potable water supply system.
Section 13-4-10(C). DEFINITIONS
1. Benson Water as used in this Code means the municipal water department for the City of Benson and/or the Benson City Building Inspector.
2. Department as used in this Code means the municipal water department for the City of Benson.
3. UPC as used in this Code means the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by Ordinance No. 344 on March 2, 1992.
Section 13-4-10(D). BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIRED
1. An approved backflow prevention method shall be utilized or installed at every service connection when it is determined by the City of Benson that the public potable water system may be subject to contamination, pollution or deterioration of its sanitary quality or condition.
2. The backflow prevention method to be utilized or installed shall be determined by Benson Water. The method of backflow prevention which an applicant will be required to use shall be of a nature sufficient to protect the public potable water supply against potential hazards from contamination or pollution.
Section 13-4-10(E). HAZARD POTENTIAL
1. The degree of hazard potential to the public potable water supply and system from a customer's water supply system shall be determined using the following hazard factors:
Contamination: Any condition, device or practice which, in the judgement of Benson Water, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the potable water customers.
Cross-connection: An actual or potential plumbing connection that is not properly protected by an approved backflow prevention method.
UTILITIES
13.46
Hazard: An actual or potential threat of backflow which may cause severe damage to the physical facilities of the public potable water supply system or which may have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
Pollution: An actual or potential threat to the physical facilities or the public potable water supply system or to the public potable water supply which would constitute a nuisance or cause objectionable odor, taste, or discolor or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances.
B. A public water system customer shall ensure that a backflow-prevention assembly is installed whenever any of the following occur:
1. A substance harmful to human health is handled in a manner that could permit its entry into the public water system. These substances include chemicals, chemical or biological process waters, water from public water supplies that has deteriorated in sanitary quality, and water that have entered a fire sprinkler system. A Class 1 or Class 2 fire sprinkler system is exempt from the requirements of this Section.
2. A source of water supply exists on the user's premises that is not accepted as an additional source by the public water system or is not approved by the Department.
3. An unprotected cross-connection exists or a cross-connection problem has previously occurred within a user's premises; or
4. There is a significant possibility that a cross-connection problem will occur and entry to the premises is restricted to the extent that cross-connection inspections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or on sufficiently short notice to assure that unprotected cross-connections do not exist.
C. Unless a cross-connection problem is specifically identified, or as otherwise provided in this Section, the requirements of this Section shall not apply to single-family residences used solely for residential purposes.
D. A backflow-prevention assembly required by this Section shall comply with Section 13-4-10(F).
Section 13-4-10(F). APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS
The minimum level of backflow protection that is provided to protect a public water system shall be the level recommended in Section 7.2 of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control, Ninth Edition, USC-FCCCHR, KAP-200 University Park MC-2531, Los Angeles, California, 90089-2531, December 1993, (and any future editions or amendments), incorporated by reference and on file with the Department and the Office of the Secretary of State. The types of backflow prevention that may be required, listed in decreasing order according to the level of protection they provide, include: an air-gap separation (AG), a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention (RP) assembly, a pressure vacuum breaker (PVB) assembly, and a
UTILITIES
13.47
double check valve (DC) assembly. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the public water system from requiring the use of a higher level of protection than that required by this subsection. A backflow prevention method shall be any assembly or other means designed to prevent backflow. The following are the recognized backflow prevention methods which Benson Water may require to be installed or in place as a condition of water service:
a. Air Gap: The unobstructed vertical distance between the opening of the pipe or faucet supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter or the supply pipe or faucet and in no case less than one (1) inch.
b. Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly (hereinafter "RPA"): An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks.
c. Double Check Valve Assembly (hereinafter "DCVA"): An assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks.
d. Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assembly (hereinafter "PVB"): An assembly containing an independently operating, loaded check valve and an independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly.
2. A backflow-prevention assembly required by this Section shall comply with the following:
a. If equipped with test cocks, it shall have been issued a certificate of
approval by:
i. The University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCCCHR),
or;
ii. A third-party certifying entity that is unrelated to the product's
manufacturer or vendor, and is approved by the Department.
b. If not equipped with test cocks, it shall be approved by a third-party
certifying entity that is unrelated to the product's manufacturer or vendor
and is approved by the Department.
C. Benson Water shall maintain a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies by type and manufacturer. The list shall be available to any customer required to install a backflow prevention assembly.
D. A backflow prevention method may be approved by Benson Water if it has received the approval of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the
UTILITIES
13.48
University of Southern California and, for assemblies, has a local manufacturer's parts and service center.
Section 13-4-10(G). BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS REQUIRED
Whenever the following items exist or activities are conducted on premises served by the public potable water system, a potential hazard to the public potable water supply shall be presumed, and a backflow prevention method of the type specified herein for that item or activity must be utilized or installed at each service connection for that premise. The type and size of the assembly shall be determined by Benson Water.
1. Cooling Tower, boiler, condenser, chiller, and other cooling systems
utilizing potable water: RPA
2. Tank, vessel, receptacle, and all other water connections including mobile units without approved air gap (except emergency vehicles and private swimming pools): RPA
3. Ice Maker (other than a residential service): RPA
4. Water cooled equipment, boosters, pumps or autoclaves: RPA
5. Water treatment facilities and all water processing equipment (other than residential water softeners): RPA
6. Bottle washer, bedpan washer, garbage can washer: RPA
7. Pesticide, herbicide, fertilizer, and chemical applicators (other than typical in-home use): RPA
8. Aspirator: RPA
9. Commercial Dishwashers, food processing and/or preparation equipment, carbonation equipment, or other food service processes utilizing potable water. RPA
10. Decorative fountain, baptismal, or any location water is exposed to atmosphere: RPA
11. X-ray equipment, plating equipment, or any other photographic processing equipment utilizing potable water: RPA
12. Auxiliary water supply and/or connections to unapproved water supply systems: RPA
13. Reclaimed water customers: RPA
14. Recreational vehicle dump stations (sewer), or any other location where potable water may be exposed to bacteria, virus, or gas: RPA
15. Any premises on which chemicals, oils, solvents, pesticides, disinfectants, cleaning agents, acids or other pollutants and/or contaminants are handled in a manner by which they may come in direct contact with potable water, or there is evidence of the potential to contact potable water (other than typical, infrequent in-home applications): RPA
UTILITIES
13.49
16. Materials and piping systems unapproved by the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) or Environmental Protection Agency for potable water usage Contaminant: RPA-Pollutant: DCVA
17. Separately metered or unprotected irrigation systems, and construction
water services: RPA or PVB as allowed.
18. Any premises where a cross-connection is maintained or where internal
backflow protection is required pursuant to the Uniform Plumbing Code:
RPA
19. Multi-metered properties with more than one meter connected to another or
any building three stories or greater than 34 feet in height from service
level: DCVA
B. When two or more of the activities listed above are conducted on the same premises and served by the same service connection or multiple service connections, the most restrictive backflow prevention method required for any of the activities conducted on the premises shall be required to be utilized or installed at each service connection. The order of most restrictive to least restrictive backflow prevention methods shall be as follows:
1. Air Gap (most restrictive)
2. Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly (RPA)
3. Double Check Valve Assembly (DCVA)
4. Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assembly (PVB) (least restrictive)
Section 13-4-10(H). BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
A. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by the customer, at the
customer's expense and in compliance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the City of Benson, at each service connection.
The assembly shall have a diameter at least equal to the diameter of the
service connection.
B. The assembly shall be in an accessible location approved by Benson
Water. The reduced pressure principle assembly, pressure vacuum
breaker assembly, and the double check valve assembly shall be
installed above ground.
C. When a customer desires a continuous water supply, two backflow
prevention assemblies shall be installed parallel to one another at the
service connection to allow a continuous water supply during testing of
the backflow prevention assemblies. When backflow prevention
assemblies are installed parallel to one another, the sum of the cross
sectional areas of the assemblies shall be at least equal to the cross
sectional area of the service connection.
UTILITIES
13.50
D. No person shall alter, modify, bypass or remove a backflow prevention
method without the approval of Benson Water.
Section 13-4-10(I). INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES FOR FIRE SYSTEMS
All regulation of this section shall apply, with the exception of Class 1 and Class 2 sprinkler system which are exempt.
Section 13-4-10(J). INSPECTION TESTING
A. Customer's water system shall be available at all times during business operations for premises inspection by Benson Water. The inspection shall be conducted to determine whether any cross connection or other hazard potentials exist and to determine compliance with this chapter and modifications, if any, pursuant to this Section.
B. Each backflow-prevention assembly required by this Section shall be tested at least annually, or more frequently if directed by the public water system or the Department. Each assembly shall also be tested after installation, relocation, or repair. An assembly shall not be placed in service unless it has been tested and is functioning as designed.
C. Testing shall be in accordance with procedures described in Section 9 of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control. The public water system shall notify the water user when testing of backflow-prevention assemblies is needed. The notice shall specify the date by which the testing must be completed and the results forwarded to the public water system.
D. Testing shall be performed by a person who is currently certified as a "general" tester by the California-Nevada Section of the American Water Works Association (CA-NV Section, AWWA), the Arizona State Environmental Technical Training (ASETT) Center, or other certifying authority approved by the Department.
E. When a backflow-prevention assembly is tested and found to be defective, it shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
Section 13-4-10(K). PERMIT REQUIRED
A. Notification - It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to notify Benson Water, orally or in writing, that said work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the work is to be inspected and shall be given only if there is reason to believe that the work done will meet Uniform Plumbing Code and University of Southern California standards, as are referenced in the backflow prevention Manual.
B. Stop Orders - Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of the UPC or this Code, Benson Water or an authorized representative may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by Benson Water to proceed with the work.
UTILITIES
13.51
C. Suspension or Revocation - The City of Benson or any authorized employee may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this Code, whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of any provision of the UPC or this Code.
Section 13-4-10(L). MAINTENANCE AND RECORDS
A. A public water system customer shall maintain records of backflow-prevention assembly installations and tests performed on backflow-prevention assemblies in its service area. Records shall be retained by the public water system customer for at least three years and shall be made available for review by the Department upon request. These records shall include an inventory of backflow-prevention assemblies required by this Section and, for each assembly, all of the following information:
1. Assembly identification number and description;
2. Location;
3. Date of tests;
4. Description of repairs and recommendations for repairs made by the tester; and,
5. The tester's name and certificate number.
B. A public water system shall submit a written cross-connection incident report to the Department and the local health authority within five business days after a cross-connection problem occurs that results in contamination of the public water system. The report shall address all of the following:
1. Date and time of discovery of the unprotected cross-connection;
2. Nature of the cross-connection problem;
3. Affected area;
4. Cause of the cross-connection problem;
5. Public health impact;
6. Date and text of any public health advisory issued;
7. Each corrective action taken; and,
8. Date of completion of each corrective action.
C. An individual with direct responsibility for implementing a backflow prevention program for a water system serving more than 50,000 persons, or if the Department has determined that such a need exists, shall be licensed as a "cross-connection control program specialist" by the CA-NV Section, AWWA, the ASETT Center, or other certifying authority approved by the Department.
D. The customer shall maintain records, on forms approved by Benson Water, of
the results of all tests and all servicing, repairs, overhauls or replacements of the backflow prevention assembly. A copy of the records shall be promptly submitted to Benson Water after completion of the activity for which the record is made.
E. Fire systems shall not be out of service for more than eight (8) consecutive hours due to testing, maintenance, or repairs. The Fire Chief shall be notified immediately of any testing, maintenance, or repairs that place a fire system out of service.
UTILITIES
13.52
Section 13-4-10(M). MODIFICATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS
A. If Benson Water determines, after inspection of the customer's system, that a backflow prevention method less restrictive than that required in Section 13-4-10(F) will provide adequate protection of the public potable water supply from the degree of hazard potential by the customer's water system, the customer may appeal to the Backflow and Cross Connection Hearing Committee for relief
Section 13-4-10(N). DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE
A. If Benson Water discovers that a customer's required backflow prevention method
has been improperly tested or maintained, the water service to that service
connection shall be disconnected if the situation is not remedied within the time
specified in the notice sent to the customer as required by this Section. The
service shall not be restored until the condition is remedied.
B. Water service to a fire sprinkler system shall be subject to disconnection under this Section. If a situation, which will result in discontinuance of water service in subsection (A) above, is not remedied within the time provided in the notice sent to the customer, multiple violations will accrue.
C. Prior to disconnecting any water service because a condition set forth in subsection (A) above exists, Benson Water shall issue a notice to the customer describing the condition and notifying the customer that the condition must be remedied within fifteen (15) days from the initial inspection date. If there is no immediate action on the part of the customer, a second notice by certified mail shall be sent ten (10) days after the initial inspection date stating that water service will be disconnected within five (5) days of the second notice. If there is still no action, a turn off notice shall be sent to the customer stating that service will be disconnected on a date certain (approximately two (2) days from the date of the turn off notice) (For retrofit notification procedures, see section 13-4-10(Q).
D. Benson Water may disconnect, without notice, water service to any customer when Benson Water discovers that a direct, contaminated cross connection exists in the customer's water system or that a backflow prevention method has been bypassed or removed.
Section 13-4-10(O). ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL
A. An Administrative appeal may be requested whenever a violation or dispute of any of the requirements of this Code is determined, whether during construction or at the plan review stage, and the applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the staff because of code interpretation, unreasonable hardship or other acceptable reasons. The appeal may be made to the Backflow and Cross Connection Hearing Committee as follows:
1. The applicant shall file a written appeal on the forms provided by the Benson Water Department.
2. The appeal will be heard by the Hearing Committee within seven (7) days,
UTILITIES
13.53
at regular specified time.
3. The Hearing Committee shall consist of the Utilities Manager, the City of Benson Building Inspector, and the City Manager. Additional Inspectors or other technical persons may be added for a particular appeal, at the discretion of the Utilities Manager.
4. Adequate information shall be provided by the applicant in order to fully describe the conditions in question.
5. The applicant may, but is not required to, personally attend the Hearing Committee meeting.
6. If an appeal is denied by the Hearing Committee, the applicant shall comply or appeal to the Benson City Council within ten (10) days of a denial by the Hearing Committee.
Section 13-4-10(P). VIOLATION A CIVIL INFRACTION
A. It shall be a civil infraction punishable pursuant to the Code of the City of Benson for any person, enterprise, or corporation to violate any of the requirement of this Code.
Section 13-4-10(Q). RETROACTIVE APPLICATION
A. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all new water customers or users and all water customers or users existing prior to the enactment date of this Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for multiple-metered premises presenting only a pollution hazard as defined in Section 13-4-10(E) existing as of the effective date of this Chapter, only one new or additional backflow prevention assembly shall be required to be installed within eighteen (18) months from the initial inspection notice and thereafter only one additional backflow assembly installation shall be required during any twelve (12) month period. Noncompliance may result in discontinuance of water service without further notice.
B. Backflow prevention assemblies installed prior to enactment of this article, and
which do not comply with the requirements set forth herein, shall be replaced with
assemblies which comply with the standards set forth herein, within eighteen (18)
months from initial inspection notice.
C. The initial backflow assembly installation permit fee required by Section 13-4-
10(R) shall be waived by Benson Water for retrofit backflow prevention assemblies only.
D. Meters documented as running backwards or contamination conditions as defined
in Section 13-4-10(E) shall be immediately addressed under the provisions of
Section 13-4-10(J), subparagraph (D).
Section 13-4-10(R). FEES
A. The fee for any permit required pursuant to the terms of this article may be established by
UTILITIES
13.54
resolution of the city council.
Section 13-4-11 Private Water Wells within the Corporate Limits of the City of Benson
The drilling of a private well within the Corporate Limits of the City of Benson, for any use whatsoever, shall be prohibited without first obtaining the approval of the Benson City Council. (Enacted by Ordinance No. 487)
ARTICLE 13-5 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE AVAILABILITY CHARGES1
13-5-1 Purpose
13-5-2 Annual Review and Notification
1Modified by Ordinance No. 335
Section 13-5-1 Purpose
The city operates a municipal water and wastewater system, servicing consumers inside and outside of the city limits. The water and wastewater utilities must obtain through the application of rate and other charges an amount of revenue at least equal to the cost of providing the services to its customers as defined in A.R.S. ' 9-530. The cost consists of the amounts required for operation and maintenance expenses, renewals and replacement of properties, and payments of principal and interest on indebtedness, if any.
A. Operation and maintenance expenses shall include all direct out-of-pocket expenditures incurred by the water department and the wastewater department and that proportionate share of the administration department as from time to time may be established by resolution of the mayor and council.
B. The cost of renewals and replacement of properties shall be calculated on an annual basis using the previous year's actual capital expenditures for completed projects having an anticipated useful life of more than ten years. Except as otherwise established by a resolution of the mayor and council, the annual reserve account payment shall equal the proportionate amount for replacement of the capital asset in twenty years from the date of completion of the installation and in calculating said annual amount, the city manager shall assume that inflation or deflation shall equal that experienced during the previous year, as evidenced by the Consumer Price Index and that interest earned on the reserve amounts on deposit, shall equal the previous year's actual average earned interest. Any funds held as a reserve for renewals and replacement of water or wastewater properties shall be segregated from other funds and shall not be expended for purposes other than renewal or replacement of existing water and/or wastewater capital assets.
UTILITIES
13.55
Section 13-5-2 Annual Review and Notification
A. A review of the water users and users classes, the total costs of operation and maintenance of the water system and the user rate charges will be made no less often than annually.
B. Revision to the user class or user rate charges as may be approved by resolution of the city council shall be made in order to accomplish the following:
1. Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and users classes;
2. Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation, maintenance and replacement of the system including the treatment facilities.
C. Each user shall be notified annually of the rate or rate changes which are attributable to the water services in conjunction with a regular bill.
. 14.1
CHAPTER 14 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 14-1 DEFINITIONS
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Alley" means a minor way designated or used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
B. "Area of jurisdiction" means within the corporate limits of the city and in the unincorporated area within three miles beyond such corporate limits.
C. "Arterial street" means such major street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway or boulevard so designated on the general development plan, or so designated by the city council.
D. "Collector street" means a street collecting traffic from local streets and connecting the same with an arterial street or another collector street.
E. "Commission" means the planning and zoning commission of the city.
F. "Drainage easement" means a dedication of land for the conveyance of storm and run off water.
G. "General development plan" means the master plan or any part thereof adopted by the city.
H. "Local street" or "minor street" mean a street exclusively or primarily to provide access to abutting properties.
I. "Person" means any individual, as well as any firm, corporation, partnership, company or any other form of multiple organization for the carrying on of business.
J. "Public works department" means the designated representative of the city as appointed by the mayor and council.
K. "Service street" or "local access street" means that part of an arterial street right-of-way, separated from the main flow of traffic and designated exclusively or primarily to provide access to abutting properties.
L. "Street" means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, freeway, road, boulevard, avenue, lane or however otherwise designated.
M. "Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndicate, trust or other legal entity that files application and initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land.
N. "Subdivision" means improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into four or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is divided into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into more than two parts.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.2
O. "Utility easement" means a dedication of land for installation and maintenance of public utilities only.
ARTICLE 14-2 GENERAL
A. Conformance to Laws. Every subdivision shall conform to requirements and objectives of the general plan, specific plans, or any parts thereof as adopted by the city council, to the city zoning ordinance, to other ordinances and regulations of the city and to the Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended.
B. Unsuitable Land. Land which, in the opinion of the commission, is based on the written recommendation of the city manager, is unsuitable for the proposed use by reason of adverse topography, adverse soils, subsidence of the earth surface, high water table, periodic flooding, lack of water or other natural or manmade hazards to life or property shall not be subdivided. However, the commission may approve subdivision of such land upon receipt of evidence from the developer's engineer and recommendation of the public works department, that the construction of specific improvements can be expected to render the land usable, in which case, construction upon such land shall be prohibited until the specified improvements have been acceptably planned and construction has been guaranteed.
C. Layout. Streets and easements shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to produce desirable lots of maximum utility, a safe and convenient street and pedestrian system and gradients to facilitate adequate drainage.
D. Subdivision and Street Names. Subdivision names and new street names shall not duplicate or be closely similar to any existing subdivision or street name except that street names shall be consistent with the natural alignment and extension of existing named streets.
ARTICLE 14-3 PUBLIC LAND
Reservation of Public Land. When a tract contains all or any part of the site of a park, recreational facility, school site, fire station or other public site as shown in the general plan or a specified plan, such site shall either be dedicated to the public or reserved for acquisition by the public subject to the following conditions:
A. The requirement may only be made upon preliminary plats filed at least thirty days after adoption of the general plan or specific plan affecting the land area to be reserved.
B. The required reservations are in accordance with defined principles and standards adopted by the city council.
C. The land area reserved shall be of such size and shape as to permit the remainder of the land area of the subdivision within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.3
D. The land area reserved shall be in such multiple of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved land in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.
E. Unless otherwise agreed in writing, the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall have a period of one year after recordation of final subdivision plat to enter into an agreement to acquire such reserved land area. The purchase price shall be the fair market value thereof at the time of filing of the preliminary subdivision plat plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area.
F. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not exercise the reservation agreement set forth in subsection E of this section within such one year period or such extended period as may be mutually agreed upon by such public agency and the subdivider, the reservation of such area shall terminate.
ARTICLE 14-4 REQUIREMENTS
A. The subdivider shall be responsible for having a registered engineer or registered land surveyor prepare the necessary subdivision plats for filing.
B. Approval of Subdivision Required. Until a plat of a subdivision has been approved in accordance with these regulations no person proposing a subdivision within the corporate limits of the city shall subdivide or file a record of survey, map or plat for record or sell any part of said subdivision.
C. The plat of a subdivision outside and within three miles of the corporate limits which conforms to these regulations shall be approved and so recommended for approval to the Board of Supervisors of Cochise County. Any plat which does not conform to these regulations or which is approved subject to changes, shall be so reported to the board of supervisors with the reasons therefore.
D. Fee for plat review shall be as set by resolution of the mayor and council.
ARTICLE 14-5 PLATS1
1Modified by Ordinance No. 355
14-5-1 Procedure for Approval of Preliminary Plat
14-5-2 Items Required on Preliminary Plat
14-5-3 Procedure for Approval of Final Plat
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.4
Section 14-5-1 Procedure for Approval of Preliminary Plat
A. The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together with other supplementary material including utility plans.
B. Three copies of the detailed water, sewer and gas utility plans shall be submitted to the planning department for review and approval prior to submission of the preliminary plat as hereafter provided. All utility plans shall be approved by the utility department and the fire department, along with every other affected department as determined by the city manager, and such plans approved by each department prior to commission consideration of the preliminary plat.
C. Eight copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified shall be submitted to the commission with written application for conditional approval at least fourteen days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
D. Following a review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted, the commission shall, within thirty days, act thereon as submitted, or modified, and if approved the commission shall express its approval as conditional and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved shall express its reasons for disapproval.
E. Action of the commission shall be forwarded to the developer and the city council in writing. Conditional approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of a final plat.
F. The following items shall be shown on the preliminary plat or submitted as a separate information item along with the preliminary plat.
Section 14-5-2 Items Required on Preliminary Plat
The following shall be required on any preliminary plat:
A. Name of proposed subdivision, existing zoning, zoning required.
B. Location of subdivision.
C. Names and addresses of subdivider.
D. Names and addresses of owners of adjoining land to the proposed subdivision.
E. Information sufficient to locate accurately the property shown on the plan, with reference to survey markers or monuments.
F. Contour map at one foot intervals.
G. The boundary lines of the property to be subdivided.
H. The location, width and other dimensions of all existing or platted streets and other important features, such as water courses, exceptional topography and buildings within the property and within two hundred feet of the property to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.5
I. Existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, water supply mains and bridges within the property, or within two hundred feet thereof.
J. The location, width and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces, with proper labeling of spaces to be dedicated to the public.
K. North point, scale and date.
L. Location and size of water and sewer lines, approved route, slope of sewer line, connection location to existing lines and any off site augmentation work required.
M. A grading and drainage plan submittal which shall include a hydrologic report prepared by a qualified Arizona-licensed engineer, if said report is required by the city engineer or city manager.
Section 14-5-3 Procedure for Approval of Final Plat
A. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
B. Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the commission at least ten days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
C. Two copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified, herein, and shall be submitted to the commission within six months after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the commission.
D. Final plat shall be approved and signed by the commission and forwarded to the city council for approval prior to recordation. Approval of the final plat shall not constitute acceptance for construction of streets or utilities related to this development.
E. The city shall be responsible for the recordation of all final plats approved by the legislative body and shall receive from the subdivider and transmit to the county recorder the recordation fee established by the county recorder. (A.R.S. ' 9-463.01)
F. Changes to approved plat shall require the same procedures as outlined in Section 14-5-1 and 14-5-2.
ARTICLE 14-6 DRAINAGE PLANNING1
A. General. Storm water shall be conveyed through a subdivision in a manner that will not damage development within the subdivision nor create an undue nuisance to the inhabitants thereof or adjacent properties. When improvements within a subdivision change the natural flow of storm drainage, they shall be designed in a manner that will not damage the land or
1Modified by Ordinance No. 355
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.6
change the flow characteristics of the natural drainage over the land upstream or downstream from the subdivision unless the subdivider provides the city with a hold-harmless agreement from the affected upstream or downstream property owners.
B. Drainage Right-of-way. All concentrated storm drainage that cannot be conveyed in a public street right-of-way shall be conveyed in a dedicated drainageway or in a drainage easement. Dedicated drainageways shall be vested in the public for public use and not included in any lot. Drainage easements that are not dedicated for public use but for construction and maintenance of drainage facilities shall be granted to the public, and they may be included in a lot but the use thereof shall be restricted to uses that will not interfere with maintenance of the natural flow of storm drainage over and/or under the easement. A drainage easement shall be provided to accommodate the flow that is expected to occur at least once every one hundred years. A dedicated drainageway shall be provided to accommodate the flow that is expected to occur at least once every twenty-five years; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived by the commission when the resulting drainageway will be less than ten feet in width and less than one foot in depth. All drainage easements shall be at least fifteen feet in width.
C. Hydrologic Reports. When required, will describe as a minimum: drainage points of concentration, calculated peak drainages, a composite basin runoff analysis, cross-sectional location and modes of flow conveyance, slopes, velocities and other information as necessary to complete the analysis.
ARTICLE 14-7 STREET PLANNING
A. General Layout Criteria:
1. Whenever the subdivision embraces any part of a street designated in the adopted general development plan or any adopted neighborhood or specific plan, such street shall be platted in conformity therewith; provided, however, that the developer may request, and the public works department and the commission may recommend and the council may approve minor deviations in alignment whenever it is found to be impractical to conform to the exact alignment shown on the general development plan or other plan because of adverse topography, drainage problems, existing development or traffic safety. Such minor deviations may be made without adversely affecting the public purpose to be served by the street; provided, however, that the distance between an arterial or collector and a parallel arterial or collector does not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet.
2. Street layouts shall provide for the continuation of existing and proposed arterial and collector streets into adjacent areas and such other streets as the commission may designate. Streets which the commission should designate include, but are not limited to, collector and local streets, are required to provide future connection with adjoining unplatted lands. In general, these extensions should not be farther apart than the one thousand three hundred twenty foot maximum permitted block length.
3. Half streets shall be discouraged except when necessary to provide right-of-way required by the general development plan to complete a street pattern already begun or to insure reasonable development of the adjoining unplatted parcel. Where a half street exists abutting a tract, the remaining half street shall be platted within the tract.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.7
Where a half street furnishes the sole access to a lot, the subdivider shall plat and develop a street of sufficient width to accommodate two-way traffic. Dead-end streets shall not be approved except where specifically designated by the commission as necessary for connection to adjacent unplatted lands. In any case a dead-end street serving more than four lots shall provide by easement a temporary cul-de-sac turnaround conforming to the provisions herein. Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited.
4. Street access to a subdivision shall be provided as required by the commission. In general, the subdivision shall have at least two street accesses serving each forty acres or smaller tract, unless the subdivider can show to the satisfaction of the commission that the number of lots in the subdivision makes this requirement an unjustified burden. Where access must be provided across land not owned by the subdivider, the subdivider shall, as minimum, provide at least sixty feet of right-of-way.
5. The maximum block length shall be one thousand three hundred twenty feet measured along the centerline of the street and between intersecting street centerlines, except that in subdivisions where lot areas average one-half acre or more, this maximum may be exceeded by six hundred sixty feet.
6. When a residential subdivision abuts the right-of-way of a railroad or limited access highway or abuts a commercial or industrial land use, the commission may recommend location of a street approximately parallel to such right-of-way or use at a distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land, such distance being determined with due regard for approachways, drainage, bridges or future grade separations.
7. Crosswalks are not considered a satisfactory substitute for a directional street layout and shall generally be avoided; however, where essential for circulation and access to schools, playgrounds and other community facilities, crosswalks sixteen feet wide may be required by the commission. Such walks may be used for utility installations.
8. Unless otherwise noted, all width measurements are to property lines and all length measurements are along the center line of the right-of-way and to the center line of intersecting streets.
B. Intersection Criteria:
1. Streets intersecting an arterial or collector street shall do so at a ninety degree angle. Local streets shall typically intersect at right angles but in no case less than seventy-five degrees.
2. Local streets intersecting a collector street or arterial street shall have a tangent section of center line at least one hundred fifty feet in length measured from the right-of-way line of the major street, except that no such tangent is required when the local street curb has a centerline radius greater than four hundred feet.
3. Street jogs with centerline offsets less than one hundred twenty-five feet shall be avoided except where waived by the commission based on the recommendation of the city manager.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.8
4. Street intersections with more than four legs and Y-type intersections with legs, meeting in acute angles, shall be avoided.
C. Arterial Street Criteria:
1. Arterials are designed for maximum utilization by through traffic and minimal access from adjacent property. Major arterials are intended to carry high volume, high speed traffic with restricted access to property and minimal intersecting traffic. Access directly on to an arterial from residential property shall be prohibited by the construction of a frontage street or a one foot no-access easement with a vertical curb. Access directly on to a major arterial from any commercial or industrial property shall be prohibited by the construction of a frontage street. Access to a major arterial shall be restricted to one access every six hundred sixty feet. Arterials are located at approximately one mile intervals as designated on the general development plan. The requirement for a frontage street or the prohibition of access to an arterial street may be waived by the council upon request of the subdivider and recommendation by the commission providing the subdivider can show that existing development prohibits the reasonable development of an adequate frontage street and that the proposed alternate plan for access will preserve the traffic function of the arterial street and protect residential properties from the nuisance and hazard of high-volume noisy traffic.
2. Right-of-way for major arterials shall be one hundred ten feet. Right-of-way for minor arterials shall be eighty feet. Corners shall be rounded with a twenty-five foot radius curve.
3. Horizontal curves shall have a six hundred foot minimum radius.
4. The length of tangent between reversed curves shall be one hundred feet.
D. Collector Street Criteria:
1. Collectors are designed for utilization by through traffic and limited direct access from adjacent property. Access directly on to a major collector from residential property shall be discouraged. Major collectors are located at approximately one-half mile intervals as designated on the general development plan. Minor collectors are located at approximately one-quarter mile intervals. In commercial areas, all collector streets shall be designed and constructed to the standards established for major collectors.
2. Right-of-way for major collectors shall be eighty feet. Right-of-way for minor collectors shall be sixty feet. Corners shall be rounded with a twenty foot radius curve.
3. Horizontal curves shall have four hundred foot radius.
4. Length of tangent between reverse curves shall be one hundred feet.
E. Local Street Criteria:
1. Local streets are designed to discourage their use by through traffic and to provide access to adjacent property. Local streets in commercial areas shall be designed to
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.9
conform to the criteria for minor collector streets. Major local streets shall generally be provided, however, minor local streets may be used where the street serves twenty-eight dwelling units or less.
2. Right-of-way for major local streets shall be sixty feet. Right-of-way for minor local streets shall be fifty feet. Corners shall be rounded with a ten foot radius curve.
3. Horizontal curves shall have a two hundred foot minimum radius where tangent centerlines deflect from each other more than ten degrees and less than seventy-five degrees. Horizontal curves shall have a fifty foot minimum radius where deflection between tangents is seventy-five degrees or larger.
4. Length of tangent between reversed curves shall be one hundred feet.
F. Cul-de-Sac Turn-Around Criteria
1. Unless otherwise authorized or approved by the mayor and council, cul-de-sac turn-arounds may be used at the end of minor local-type streets providing the length of the minor local street does not exceed six hundred sixty feet.
2. Right-of-way for a cul-de-sac in a residential area shall be one hundred foot diameter circle. Right-of-way for a cul-de-sac in a commercial area shall be one hundred thirty foot diameter circle. Corners shall be rounded with a twenty-five foot radius curve.
G. Alley Criteria
1. Alleys may be developed at the option of the subdivider. When alleys are platted, the alley alignment and arrangement shall provide optimum convenience for truck service circulation and to avoid alley openings opposite fronts of residential lots. Alleys shall be required at the rear of multiple family residential, commercial or industrial developments except where, in the opinion of the commission, other provision is made for adequate permanent access for purposes of fire protection, parking and loading.
2. Right-of-way for alleys shall be twenty feet. Corners shall be cut off to form a ten foot by ten foot triangle.
3. Horizontal curves shall have a forty foot minimum radius.
ARTICLE 14-8 EASEMENT PLANNING
A. Utility Easements. The subdivider shall provide private utility easements as required by the serving utilities and is responsible for coordinating such with the utilities concerned. A separate utility easement of appropriate width acceptable to the utilities manager shall be provided for city utilities, and joint trenches will not be allowed.
B. Curvilinear Alignments. For lots facing on curvilinear streets, utility easements or alleys shall usually consist of a series of straight lines with points of deflection not less than one hundred twenty feet apart; said points of deflection always occurring at the junction of side and rear lot lines on the side of the exterior angle. However curvilinear easements or alleys may be
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.10
employed providing that the minimum radii of centerlines are not less than eight hundred feet.
C. Drainage. Dedicated drainageways or drainage easements shall be provided for surface drainage courses abutting or crossing the tract in accordance with Article 14-6, and shall be of a width sufficient to permit widening, deepening, relocating or protecting such drainage course as may be required by the commission based on recommendation of the public works department.
D. No-Access Easements. Lots arranged to back to railroad rights-of-way or commercial or industrial districts or arterial streets as provided in Article 14-7 shall have a recorded no-access private easement one foot wide along the rear lot line.
ARTICLE 14-9 LOT PLANNING
A. Code Compliance. Lot width, depth and area shall comply with the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance; however, where drainage problems exist or prevail, the commission may require special lot width, depth and/or area exceeding requirements of the zoning district. Land within a public street, alley or drainageway; land within easement for major power transmission lines or major pipelines; and such other land considered by the commission to be unusable shall not be considered a part of the usable lot area. Utility easements for distribution or service purposes and drainage easements may be considered a part of the usable lot area.
B. Dimensions. The depth to width ratio of the usable area, lots shall generally be not greater than three to one.
C. Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines except where other treatment can be justified.
D. Access. Every lot shall abut a public street furnishing satisfactory access to another existing public street; provided, however, that a lot in a commercial area may be considered as having satisfactory access if such lot abuts a joint use private drive providing public access to the lot from a public street.
E. Double Frontage Lots. Single family residential lots extending through the block and having frontage on to non-intersecting streets shall be prohibited as may be required herein.
ARTICLE 14-10 IMPROVEMENTS
14-10-1 Purpose
14-10-2 Responsibility for Improvements
14-10-3 Drainage Improvement Standards
14-10-4 Street Improvement Standards
14-10-5 Utility Improvement Standards
14-10-6 Lot Improvement Standards
14-10-7 Submittal, Review and Approval of Engineering Plan
14-10-8 Improvements Security
14-10-9 Final Inspection and Acceptance of Improvements
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.11
Section 14-10-1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to define the responsibility of the subdivider and city in the planning, construction and financing of public improvements, to establish in outline the minimum acceptable standards and required public improvements for subdivisions and to establish procedures for review and approval of engineering plans.
Section 14-10-2 Responsibility for Improvements
A. Responsibility of Subdivider. It is the responsibility of the subdivider to finance the planning, design and construction of the streets and alleys, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, street name signs, drainage facilities, sewage disposal facilities, monuments, street lights, fire hydrants, water facilities and all other public and semi-public improvements required by the council, this article to standards established herein.
B. Engineering Plans Required.
1. The subdivider shall be responsible for having a registered engineer prepare a complete set of engineering plans, satisfactory to the public works department, for construction of required improvements. Such plans shall be based on the approved preliminary plat and be prepared in conjunction with the final plat.
2. All required improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest revision of the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction as compiled by the Maricopa Association of Governments, and such other standards as may be adopted by the city council.
C. Inspection and Testing of Improvements.
1. All improvements in the public right-of-way shall be constructed under inspection and approval of the public works department. Construction shall not be commenced until a permit has been issued for such construction and if work has been discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until after notifying the public works department in advance.
2. The subdivider shall be responsible for having a person conduct the testing of all materials used in the construction of public improvements who is authorized under Title 32 of the Arizona Revised Statutes to perform materials testing.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.12
Section 14-10-3 Drainage Improvement Standards
Drainage Design and Construction:
A. The design and construction of drainage facilities shall be in accordance with approved engineering procedures and shall not conflict with the provisions of the state statutes.
B. All buildings shall be located so they have all-weather access. All-weather access is defined as not having to traverse any storm drainage that has a depth greater than seven-tenths feet during the storm that is expected to occur at least once every one hundred years.
Section 14-10-4 Street Improvement Standards1
A. General. Measurements are to the back-of-curb unless otherwise noted.
1Modified by Ordinance No. 355
B. Arterial Street Design:
1. The paved width of an arterial shall be sixty-eight feet. Frontage streets shall be twenty-two feet and shall generally be located to create a twelve foot unpaved island between the arterial and frontage street and an eight foot pedestrian way between the frontage street curb-gutter and the property line. Street corners shall be rounded with a twenty-five foot radius curve.
2. Vertical curves shall have a three hundred foot minimum length but not less than fifty feet for each algebraic difference in grade.
3. Street grades shall be a maximum of five percent and a minimum of five-tenths percent.
4. Sight distance shall be four hundred feet.
5. Design speeds shall be forty miles per hour.
C. Collector Street Design:
1. Paved street width for major collectors shall be forty-eight feet. Paved width for minor collectors shall be forty feet. Corners shall be rounded with a twenty-five foot radius curve.
2. Vertical curves shall have a two hundred foot minimum length.
3. Street grades shall be a maximum of seven percent and a minimum of five-tenths percent.
4. Sight distance shall be two hundred feet.
5. Design speed shall be thirty miles per hour.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.13
D. Local Street Design:
1. Paved width of major local streets shall be forty feet. Paved width for minor local streets shall be thirty-two feet. Corners shall be rounded with a twenty-five foot radius curve.
2. Vertical curves shall have a one hundred foot minimum length. Vertical curves are not required where the algebraic difference in grade is one percent or less.
3. Street grades shall be a maximum of ten percent and a minimum of five-tenths percent.
4. Sight distance shall be one hundred fifty feet.
5. Design speed shall be twenty-five miles per hour.
E. Cul-de-Sac Design:
1. Paved width of a cul-de-sac in a residential area shall be ninety foot diameter circle. Paved widths for a cul-de-sac in a commercial area shall be one hundred ten foot diameter circle. Corners shall be rounded with a twenty-five foot radius curve.
2. Curve grades shall be a maximum of five percent and a minimum of five-tenths percent.
F. Alley Design:
1. Street width of alleys shall be twenty feet in commercial areas and sixteen feet in residential areas.
2. Alley grades shall be a maximum of ten percent and a minimum of five-tenths percent.
G. Street and Alley Construction:
1. All streets shall be graded and paved with Asphaltic Concrete or Portland Cement Concrete to standards approved by the public works department. Streets within, adjacent to, or serving the subdivision shall be constructed to the full street width indicated in this section unless otherwise noted herein below.
a. Streets and alleys adjacent to the subdivision need only to be improved for the half width adjacent to the subdivision providing the half width is sufficient for two-way traffic (twenty-two feet) in the case of a street and for one way traffic (ten feet) in case of an alley.
b. Where a frontage street is required and constructed by the subdivider, the construction of the major arterial adjacent to the frontage street is the responsibility of the city.
c. The subdivider is not required to pave more than twenty feet of pavement width on each side of the street, except at intersections, when the required street width is greater than forty-four feet. When traffic demands require additional width, the
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.14
city is responsible, subject to funding availability, for paving the center island created whenever the subdivider elects to pave only the twenty foot minimum requirement.
d. Where there are existing streets adjacent to the subdivision, proposed streets shall be improved to the intercepting paving line of such existing streets.
e. Where a minimum width twenty-eight foot paved access road is allowed, it shall be designed and constructed so that it can easily be widened to the full width street without reconstructing the center twenty-eight feet. Connections to existing and proposed streets shall be designed to safely accommodate traffic including any traffic control devices required by the public works department.
H. Intersection Design and Construction:
1. Intersections shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the improvement standards for streets.
2. The approach to an intersection shall have a relatively level area with a grade of not more than two percent for a distance of twenty-five feet measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
3. All intersections shall have street name signs installed by the city at the subdivider's expense, located and constructed to standards approved by the public works department.
I. Curb-Gutter Design and Construction:
1. Unless otherwise agreed by the mayor and council in a pre-annexation or development agreement, all streets shall have Portland Cement concrete curbs and gutters along the pavement edge constructed to standards approved by the public works department, except as noted herein below. Combined six inch high vertical curb and gutter is required on all streets except three and one-half inch high rolled curb and gutter may be installed on streets in residential and industrial areas that are classified as local. Temporary six inch Portland Concrete cement curb placed on top of the street paving may be used in lieu of curb-gutter around any street center island or around the island between a frontage street and major arterial. A six inch thickened edge of asphalt may be used in lieu of curb-gutter along the inside edge of a half width street, around a temporary turn-around, at the end of a dead-end street, and along the edge of a minimum standard access road to a subdivision.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this subsection shall not apply in residential subdivisions where the actual density is less than one residence per acre in the developed area.
J. Sidewalk Design and Construction:
1. Sidewalks shall be located behind the back-of-curb; providing, however, that lighting standards, utility poles, traffic control devices, fire hydrants, and mailboxes as
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.15
applicable, can be located behind the sidewalk. In cases where such items cannot be located behind the sidewalk or in alleys, sidewalks may be located five feet behind the back-of-curb. In all cases not otherwise governed by the provisions of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, a minimum clearance of two feet shall be maintained between the face-of-curb and any obstruction. In cases of demonstrated necessity or existing unusual conditions, the public works department may approve a reduction of minimum clearance to the face-of-curb.
2. All streets shall have Portland Cement concrete sidewalks behind the curb-gutter where curb-gutter is required, constructed to standards approved by the public works department. Sidewalks shall be four inches thick and four feet wide in residential areas and five feet wide in commercial areas. All crosswalks shown on the subdivision plat shall have a Portland Cement concrete sidewalk down the center. Sidewalks shall be four inches thick and a minimum four feet wide.
3. Sidewalks shall not be required in residential subdivisions where the smallest actual lot size is greater than 14,520 square feet or in those instances where the council determines the nature of the subdivision, or a portion thereof, does not require sidewalks.
K. Street Monument Construction. Permanent monuments consisting of a brass cap, set in concrete, shall be installed to designate street centerlines and subdivision boundary lines at all angle points and points of curvature and at all street intersections. Concrete bases shall not be less than six inches in diameter and twenty-four inches deep with at least one vertical steel reinforcing bar of minimum one-half inch diameter placed directly beneath the brass cap and extending the full length of the concrete. After all improvements have been installed, the subdivider shall be responsible for having a registered land surveyor or engineer check the location of monuments and certify as to their accuracy prior to acceptance by the city for maintenance.
Section 14-10-5 Utility Improvement Standards1
A. General:
1. Utilities, excepting municipal storm drains and sanitary sewers, shall not be located beneath the street pavement other than necessary crossings, which shall be made as close as perpendicular as possible. In cases of demonstrated necessity and upon presentation of technically adequate plan insuring proper installation and maintainability, the public works department may approve location beneath the street pavement of major primary transmission lines of electrical, water, sewer, gas or communications. Any utility installation that may be approved for placement beneath the street pavement shall be completed prior to actual paving of said streets.
2. Reference is made to Section 14-10-4 (J) (1).
B. Sewerage Disposal Design and Construction. A public or community sanitary sewage system shall be installed and shall be constructed to plans, profiles and specifications
1Modified by Ordinances No. 351 and 355
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.16
approved by the public works department, and in accordance with Arizona Department of Environmental Quality regulations.
C. Water Service Design and Construction:
Fire hydrants and water service to each lot shall be installed on all streets within the subdivisions according to the standards set forth in Section 7-5-7.
D. Electrical Service Design and Construction:
1. Street Lights. When required for overhead lighting by the council, street lights on metal standards shall be installed on all streets within the subdivision and on streets developed in conjunction with the subdivision. The subdivider shall be responsible for coordinating street lighting design and installation with the Sulphur Springs Valley Electric Cooperative and shall cause the street lighting design plan to be submitted for approval of the city concurrently with other required improvement plans. Street lighting design practices shall be in conformance with the current edition of the Illuminating Engineering Society Lighting Handbook, and calculated luminosity shall meet the following criteria for average horizontal foot candles (maintained) light-level range, for each street classification:
Street Classification Light-Level Range*
Arterial Type (Horizontal Footcandles- Maintained)
Major 1.20 - 1.60
Minor 0.90 - 1.20
Street Classification Light-Level Range*
Collector Type
Commercial 0.70 - 0.90
Residential 0.60 - 0.90
Local Type
Commercial 0.40 - 0.60
Residential 0.20 - 0.60
Cul-de-Sac
Commercial 0.30 - 0.60
Residential 0.20 - 0.40
*Horizontal footcandle maintained values are based upon average pavement reflectance of approximately ten percent. For reflectance less than ten percent, increase value fifty percent. For reflectance more than ten percent, decrease value by twenty-five percent.
Additionally, the following criteria shall be applied:
a. Lights shall be placed at all intersections.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.17
b. Midblock lights should be located at lot corners.
c. Separation between standards should be no less than three nor more than six lots apart.
2. Street lights shall be installed on metal or concrete standards.
3. Street lights shall not be required in residential districts when the smallest lot is at least 14,520 square feet in area.
Section 14-10-6 Lot Improvement Standards
A. Lot Design and Construction.
1. All lots shall be graded to drain toward a street or drainage easement and the finished floor elevation of any building shall be at least one foot above the elevation of the water surface that is created during a storm that is expected to occur at least once every one hundred years.
2. Corner lots shall be graded such that they do not create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility.
B. Lot Monument Construction. Iron or steel bars or iron pipes at least fifteen inches long and one-half inch in diameter shall be set at all corners, angle points of curvature for each lot and block within a subdivision within one year of recordation of the final plat. Identifying data shall be affixed to each point set in accordance with current rules and by-laws of the State Board of Technical Registration.
Section 14-10-7 Submittal, Review and Approval of Engineering Plan
Plans submitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 14-10-2(B)(1) shall be reviewed and approved by the public works department. In addition, a set of water improvement plans shall be supplied to the fire chief, who, in turn will review the plans and make his written recommendations to the public works department. The improvement plan originals shall be stamped by the public works department as "approved for construction" and a certificate of approval filed with the city clerk prior to recordation of the final plat. Two sets of the final, approved improvement plans shall be supplied to the public works department prior to commencing construction.
Section 14-10-8 Improvements Security
Prior to approval of the final plat by the council, the subdivider shall provide security by either:
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.18
A. Posting of a performance bond issued by a qualified surety;
B. Establishing a cash trust, said funds to be deposited with the city to the credit of the subdivider;
C. Depositing with the city a certificate of deposit issued by a banking institution authorized to issue same;
D. Filing with the city an executed contract of guaranty between financial institution authorized to enter into such contracts;
E. Executing a Third Party Trust and Assurance Agreement whereby an Arizona-licensed title or trust company holding title to the lands proposed to be subdivided agrees to act as a trustee who shall not convey title to any of said lands without first obtaining a written release from the city council, or its designee, except that the trustee may convey title in conjunction with a bulk sale or for the sole purpose of encumbering lands immediately reconveyed to the trust and said assurance agreement shall be subject to acceptance by the city council and approval of the city attorney.
The amount of said security is to be based upon the cost estimate prepared by a registered professional civil engineer in an amount to cover the completed installation of the improvements and requires approval by the public works department. A completion date for the improvements shall be declared by the subdivider and the security shall provide for its forfeiture to the city in the event that said improvements have not been completed or not accepted by the city by the declared completion date due to the default of the subdivider. Where applicable, a concurrent agreement may be executed between the city and the subdivider providing for incremental improvements in planned unit developments; provided, however, that each approved increment shall commensurately conform to the security requirements herein above specified. The council may require of the subdivider such further assurance of the completion of improvements as they may deem necessary to the interest of the public.
Section 14-10-9 Final Inspection and Acceptance of Improvements 1
Upon due notice from the subdivider of presumptive completion of all improvements as called for on the approved improvement plans and required under the provisions of this article, the public works department will make an inspection. If all construction is found to be completed to their satisfaction, then that inspection shall constitute the final inspection and the public works department will recommend final acceptance and/or the full release of assurances of the public improvements (including, but not limited to, streets, paved shoulders, sidewalks, pedestrian paths, sewer infrastructure, water infrastructure, drainage structures, landscaping and park infrastructure) to the City Council upon receipt of the following items:
1Modified by Ordinance No. 512
A. Final Plans. Final plans drawn in india ink, or a reproducible copy thereof, showing all street, drainage and sewer improvements constructed, and copies of the final plans, showing all electrical, lighting, gas, telephone, cable television and water improvements constructed within public rights-of-way or public easements for inclusion in the city's permanent files. Final plans shall show the approved design conditions and reflect any field changes
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.19
approved by the public works department, and the developer's engineer shall certify that the final plans represent as nearly as possible the actual field conditions as constructed. Reproducible copies shall be defined as a copy prepared using an archival photographic image process conforming to standards established by the American National Standards Institute on a polyester material four thousandths of an inch thick with a matte finish. Additionally, the city may request and the developer shall furnish all final plans on compact disc (CD) in the Autocad computer format, and each CD shall be labeled with the name of the subdivision and date submitted.
B. Affidavit Regarding Settlement of Claim. The subdivider shall certify that all bills for labor and materials incorporated in the work have been paid and agree to indemnify and save harmless the city against any and all liens, claims of liens, suits, actions, damages, charges and expenses whatsoever, which the city may suffer arising out of the failure of the subdivider to pay for all labor performed and materials furnished in the construction of the required improvements.
C. Guarantee. The subdivider and contractor shall guarantee all work against defective workmanship or materials for a period of one year from the date of its final acceptance by the mayor and city council. Upon final acceptance of the public improvements by the mayor and city council, the public works department will notify the subdivider in writing of this acceptance as of the date of approval by the council.
ARTICLE 14-11 VARIANCES
A. Hardship. The developer or subdivider may upon written application to the planning and zoning commission request a variance from certain regulations of this chapter. Where the planning and zoning commission finds that hardship may result from strict compliance with these regulations, the commission may recommend to the city council to vary the regulations, provided that such variations will not have the affect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the general development plan or these regulations.
B. Large Scale Development. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the commission in the case of a plan and program for a new city, a complete community or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the commission provides adequate public spaces and improvements for circulation, recreation, light, air, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.
C. Conditions. In granting variances or modifications the commission or city council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards of requirements so varied and modified.
ARTICLE 14-12 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS 1
The City Building Official shall not issue building permits until all provisions of Section 14-10-9 have been accepted by the City Council or approved by the City Engineer.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
. 14.20
ARTICLE 14-13 APPROVED PLANTS 2
1Modified by Ordinance No. 512
2 Added by Ordinance 533
14-13-1 Approved Plant List; Adoption
14-13-2 Landscaping Recommendations
SECTION 14-13-1 Approved Plant List; Adoption
That certain document known as the “Benson Plant List,” is hereby adopted by this reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this code.
SECTION 14-13-2 Landscaping Recommendations
Whenever possible, property owners and developers are recommended to use only plants listed in the Benson Plant List for all landscaping in the City of Benson.
CHAPTER 15 CEMETERY 1
ARTICLE 15–1 CEMETERY
15-1-1 Administration and Enforcement 15-1-2 Lots and Gravesites 15-1-3 Interment and Disinterment
Section 15-1-1 Administration and Enforcement
A. The City Cemetery shall be under the control and administration of the City Public Works Director. The Public Works Director or his designee shall assume the duties of the Cemetery Administrator. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director and the Cemetery Administrator to enforce the provisions of this Article. B. The Public Works Director is authorized to adopt Cemetery Rules and Regulations for the purpose of maintaining the beauty, security and dignity of the City's cemeteries. Such Rules and Regulations shall regulate the hours of operation when public visitation is permitted; the decorum expected of all visitors within the Cemetery, including that visitors may be prohibited from carrying firearms and consuming food and intoxicating beverages; and measures reasonably necessary to safeguard all property, including headstones and landscaping, within the Cemetery. C. The Public Works Director shall post a speed limit of 5 miles per hour for the roads within the Cemetery, and the City Police Department is hereby authorized to enforce such speed limit. D. The Cemetery Administrator is tasked with maintaining all City records regarding interment and plot ownership within the Cemetery. All plot owners and immediate family members of persons interred in the Cemetery have an obligation to respond to any written request for interment or ownership information received from the Cemetery Administrator within a reasonable time. Failure to respond to such request will allow the Cemetery Administrator to presume that the response would have been negative and proceed accordingly. E. When attempting to communicate with or provide notice to a plot owner or next of kin, the Cemetery Administrator shall exercise reasonable diligence under the circumstances to provide the owner or next of kin with actual notice, which may include the use of first class mail, alternative methods of service recognized under the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, internet searches and postings,
1 Revised by Ordinance 540
and/or posting at the grave site in question. F. Any person violating any provision of this Article or the Rules and Regulations adopted by the Public Works Director is subject to all enforcement actions available for infractions of the City Code, and in addition may be subject to an order by the Public Works Director barring such person from entry to the Cemetery for a reasonable period of time. Section 15-1-2 Lots and Gravesites A. Individual plots within the Cemetery shall be sold on behalf of the City by the Cemetery Administrator. The price for each plot shall be for the plot only and not include any of the services necessary for burial. B. The Cemetery Administrator shall keep accurate records and books of account showing the plots sold, the amounts received, and the owners of such plots. C. No transfer of ownership of plot(s) between private parties, including by bequest, devise or descent, shall be binding upon the City until satisfactory proof of such transfer is presented to the Cemetery Administrator and a transfer fee of $10 shall have been paid. All such transfers of ownership shall be recorded in the records maintained by the Cemetery Administrator. D. If, for the period of fifty years and one day from the purchase of burial rights to a cemetery plot, the owner(s) of a plot or plots have not used the plot or some portion of multiple plots for the purposes of burial and have not provided for the care and maintenance of such plots, then ownership of such unused plots shall revert to the City. Prior to exercising such right of reversion, the City shall make reasonable efforts to contact the record owner of its intent to reclaim ownership of unused plots. Reclaimed plots may re resold by the City or used for landscaping, as deemed appropriate in the discretion of the Cemetery Administrator. E. All unsold cemetery plots shall be maintained by the City. Sold plots shall be maintained by the owner or immediate family members. F. No improvement, change or service, other than routine graveside care, shall be undertaken by a plot owner or family member upon any plot within the Cemetery without the prior written approval of the Cemetery Administrator. Section 15-1-3 Interment and Disinterment A. The owners of burial rights to grave sites or family members/representatives may place, in a manner satisfactory to the Cemetery Administrator, a headstone, tombstone or other suitable monument to the deceased. All headstones,
tombstones or approved monuments shall be placed in an orderly row and
reasonably in line with other such markers in that section of the cemetery.
B. No person may erect or maintain any fence, wall, corner post, coping, hedge
or boundary of any kind upon any lot, grave site or groups of lots within the
cemetery
C. It shall be unlawful to cause any remains to be interred within the City
Cemetery without first notifying the Cemetery Administrator and presenting
satisfactory proof of ownership or permission from the owner for the use of the
plot. All such written permissions for use of a plot shall be filed with the records
of the Cemetery Administrator.
D. The Cemetery Administrator shall keep records of all interments, including of
cremated remains, which shall state the name of the deceased, date of birth,
date of death, place of death, date of burial, and name and address of the funeral
director.
E. No grave space shall contain more than one casket and one urn. No grave
space may contain more than four urns of cremated remains. A minimum of five
feet of dirt shall cover all caskets and urns.
F. It is the responsibility of the family of the deceased to make arrangements for
to opening and closing of the grave site.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any remains to be disinterred
from the City cemetery except upon direction of the Cemetery Administrator.
Before such direction may be given, the person requesting the disinterment must
provide a permit issued by the County Board of Health and a written order from
the plot owner or representative authorizing such removal, which shall be filed
with the records of the Cemetery Administrator.
16-1
Chapter 16
City Code
FEE SCHEDULE 1, 2, 3, 4
SECTIONS:
ARTICLE 16-1 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES (Existing)
16-4-1 Title, Purpose, Administration and Definitions
16-4-2 Applicability
16-4-3 Service Areas
16-4-4 Development Impact Fees Based on Fee Schedules
16-4-5 Individual Assessment of Development Fees
16-4-6 Collection of Development Fees
16-4-7 Fund Accounting for Impact Fees
16-4-8 Expenditure of Development Impact Fees
16-4-9 Refund of Development Impact Fees
16-4-10 Offset to Development Impact Fees
16-4-11 Development Agreements for Development Impact Fees
16-4-12 Development Impact Fees as Supplemental Regulation to Other
Required Fees
16-4-13 Annual Development Impact Fee Review
16-4-14 Development Impact Fee Calculations
16-4-15 In-Fill Incentive Development Fee
16-4-16 Independent Standing of Each Development Impact Fee
16-4-17 Effective Date
ARTICLE 16-2 ADDITIONAL FEES
ARTICLE 16-1 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES (EXISTING)
Section 16-1-1 Title, Purpose and Administration
A. This Article shall be known as the "Development Impact Fee Regulations" and may be referred to herein as "the Regulations".
B. These regulations are intended to ensure the timely construction of off-site public capital improvements necessary to serve all new development by providing
1 Ordinance 416, Amended by Ordinance 461
2 Ordinance 516
3 Ordinance 552
4 Ordinance 554
16-2
necessary financing for new facilities to be constructed by the City and for an equitable means of cost sharing for existing facilities employed to serve new development. Development Impact Fees shall be paid by each new development, as described herein, in a manner which is proportional to the financial impact that new development will have upon existing and required city capital facilities.
C. The city official with primary responsibility for administering these regulations is the Benson City Manager. The City Manager shall be authorized to designate other city employees to undertake such responsibility and the employee or employees so designated shall be implicitly authorized to act within the scope of these regulations.
D. Definitions.
Unless otherwise specifically provided in these regulations, those definitions contained within the Planning & Zoning Regulations, the Subdivision Regulations set forth in Chapter 14 of the City Code, and any other definitions set forth in the City Code, shall apply in interpreting these regulations, except that in the event of a conflict between two or more definitions, the definitions specifically set forth in these regulations shall govern as to any interpretation of these regulations and in every case said interpretation shall favor a conclusion which accomplishes the intent of these regulations.
1. Specific development unit shall be any structure requiring a building permit.
2. An assisted living facility shall include multi-family dwellings used or designated to be used by older persons, persons with disabilities or other persons needing assistance with day-to-day living matters, but not including nursing homes, hospitals or convalescent care facilities.
3. Building square footage shall be measured in terms of gross floor area measured from the outside surface of building walls, except that areas which are used for the general conduct of a business shall be included in the building's square footage calculation, even though said area is not enclosed and is only partially enclosed, whether wholly or partially underroof and whether or not physically attached to the main business structure.
4. Developer - The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndication, trust or other legal entity that is responsible for creating a demand for new or additional city services.
5. Development Impact Fee - The fee charged for new capital expenditures for necessary infrastructure improvements, or the proportionate share of the capital cost of existing city facilities or services, as such capital costs relate to planned or required services or facilities supplied by City to, or in conjunction with, new development as defined hereinafter.
16-3
6. Initial Period as used herein in conjunction with fee discounts shall mean the period commencing when these regulations become effective.
7. New Development - Any improvement commenced after the effective date of these regulations, the construction, creation or emplacement of which requires prior City approval and the use or availability of City supplied public services or facilities.
Section 16-1-2 Applicability 1
A. The collection of Development Impact Fees shall apply to all new development in the City, unless otherwise provided herein. Until any Development Impact Fee required by these regulations has been paid in full, only a conditional building permit shall be issued and no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued. In the event that work is commenced without payment of the appropriate fees, absent a written agreement for delayed payment of fees approved and signed by the City Manager, a stop work order shall be issued prohibiting any further development activity until such time as the required fees have been paid or a deferred payment agreement has been undertaken.
B. Parks and Cultural Facilities Development Impact Fees shall apply only to new residential development.
C. The movement of a structure onto a lot shall be considered new development and shall be subject to the Development Impact Fee provisions. If a structure is relocated from another area within the city limits from which it was receiving city public utility services. A relocated structure may be exempt from Development Impact Fees only if the usage stays the same as its usage immediately prior to relocation.
D. The residential and multi-family residential categories for which Development Impact Fees are payable include single-family or multi-family dwellings, whether detached residential units, including site-built, manufactured housing or modular constructed units.
E. Newly located mobile and manufactured homes in a designated park or a planned unit development are subject to these Development Impact Fees, except when exempted in accordance with Section 16-4-2(C) above or as stated herein. Park model homes as defined with A.R.S. §41-2142 as “Recreational Vehicles” are exempted from Development Impact Fees.
F. Each individual residential unit in a multi-family dwelling unit project, including duplex, triplex and similar single structure multi-family units, shall be subject to a separate Development Impact Fee.
G. Development Impact Fees for mobile homes and recreational vehicle parks shall be assessed for the entire development based on the number of mobile home and recreational vehicle spaces created at the time of application for the building permit. The City Manager shall be authorized to enter into written agreements for
1 Modified by Ordinance 461
16-4
partial payment of Development Impact Fees where the entire planned development is not being developed at one time, but phased in over a specified time period. In the event the development schedule is uncertain, each development phase shall be considered as if a separate project and the applicable Development Impact Fees paid thereon at the commencement of each PHASE development and shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule existing at the time of actual development.
H. These Development Impact Fee Regulations shall not apply to the following:
1. Placing on a lot in the City, a temporary construction trailer or office, but only for the life of the building permit issued for the construction served by the trailer or office;
2. Expansion, upgrade, repair or replacement of an existing residential dwelling unit on a lot with a legal, conforming residential dwelling unit or structure;
3. Any development including, but not limited to, the mere subdivision of land, installation of utilities, or use of land for limited purposes which will not, in the opinion of the City Manager, result in any immediate demand for additional city utility services. However, upon completion of development and application for building permits, Development Impact Fees shall be assessed.
4. Parking lots regardless of how used, provided they are accessible to the public at all times. However, enclosed or partially enclosed storage yards are not excluded if part of a commercial business.
Section 16-1-3 Service Areas
A. For purposes of these regulations, the Development Impact Fee service areas for purposes of wastewater, water, police and fire department, general government administration, parks and cultural purposes, shall be all of the incorporated area of the City of Benson.
B. Development Impact Fees shall be assessed only to new development located within the service area.
C. The Development Impact Fees collected within the service area shall be expended so as to benefit the service area.
D. All the designated service area shall be subject to review by the City as part of its general Development Impact Fee revision process hereinafter set forth. Following such a review and public hearing, any designated service area may be amended from time to time.
16-5
Section 16-1-4 Development Impact Fee Schedules 1
The City Council by resolution may adopt Utility Development Fees and Schedules to fund construction of infrastructure necessary to serve new development pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
Section 16-1-5 Individual Assessment of Development Impact Fees
If any person submitting an application for which payment of a Development Impact Fee is required believes the proposed development will create public service impacts substantially less than development envisioned by the existing Development Impact Fee schedule, such person may request that the City Council perform an individual assessment of the impact of the proposed development. A request for individual assessment must be made prior to the application for a building permit and the City Council's written determination of individual assessment shall be binding in connection with a building permit application tendered, along with the prescribed fees within ninety days from the date of said individual assessment. The City Council may designate the City Manager as its agent for purposes of preparing a recommended individual assessment.
Section 16-1-6 Collection of Development Impact Fees
Except as hereinafter provided, Development Impact Fees due to all new development shall be collected at the time of issuance of the first building permit subsequent to the Development Plan approval.
Section 16-1-7 Fund Accounting for Impact Fees
A. City shall establish a separate accounting fund in which the Development Impact Fees collected for a particular category or facility within the service area shall be credited. Such fees shall be invested by the City and the yield of such fees, at the actual rate of return to the City, shall be credited to such accounting fund periodically in accordance with the accounting policies of the City. Such funds need not be segregated from any other city monies for banking purposes only.
B. Any yield on such accounting funds into which such fees are deposited shall accrue to that fund and shall be used for the purposes specified in said fund only.
C. City shall maintain and keep financial records for such accounting showing the revenues to such fund and the disbursement from such fund, in accordance with normal city accounting practices. The records of such funds shall be open to public inspection in the same manner as other financial records of the City.
Section 16-1-8 Expenditure of Development Impact Fees
Development Impact Fees may only be spent on qualifying improvements, as follows:
A. Wastewater Development Impact Fees may only be expended on wastewater system capital assets such as treatment facilities, collection systems and
1 Ordinance 554
16-6
components thereof; land, including easements and rights-of-way necessary to connect an area of new development to existing collection lines or equipment, including mobile and portable devices or machinery necessary or convenient to continued safe, economical and healthy operation of the wastewater collection system.
B. Water Development Impact Fees shall be limited to expenditures for wells, pumps, mechanical and electrical system accessories including, but not limited to, overhead or below ground power supply lines, water treatment systems, measuring and monitoring devices for the water distribution system, machinery, including mobile and portable devices necessary or convenient to the safe, economical and healthy operations of the water distribution system.
C. Police and Fire Development Impact Fees shall be limited to expenditures for capital improvements to the Police and/or Fire Department, such as buildings, including satellite stations, communications equipment, acquisition of capital equipment, such as vehicles of any nature required for police or fire operations or similar expenditures, including the principal, interest and other financing costs of bonds, notes, certificates of participation or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the City to finance qualified improvements or capital equipment.
D. Park Development Impact Fees shall be limited to expenditures for acquisition of park sites, park site development costs, including utilities, landscaping, lighting and construction of parking facilities to serve park users, construction and installation of park facilities and equipment, and such other expenditures which directly benefit a park or a portion thereof.
E. General government Development Impact Fees shall be limited to expenditures for capital equipment and improvements to the City's administrative offices, including construction of new city offices, capital improvements to city maintenance facilities or such other facilities or equipment as used by city staff for the benefit of the entire city population.
F. Cultural Development Impact Fees shall be limited to capital expenditures for city facilities for the conduct of cultural activities including, but not limited to, library facilities, auditorium or outdoor music and entertainment presentation facilities, such as amphitheater, theater and drama facilities, including the associated accessory equipment, such as seating, public address, parking, shade and lighting so as to maximize the use of such facilities.
Section 16-1-9 Refund of Development Impact Fee
A. Any Development Impact Fee, or portion thereof, collected pursuant to these regulations which has not been committed to a use permitted by the foregoing Section within twenty years from the last date of the fiscal year in which said fee was received by the City, shall be refunded to the payer of said fee or the successor, assignee or heir of said payer, or current owner of the property for which the fee was paid if the original payer, its successor, assignee or heir, is not in existence or reasonably locatable upon written application. Development Impact Fees shall be deemed to have been "committed" in the order in which they are received and their expenditure included in a capital budget, including a capital
16-7
budget plan, which envisions actual expenditure in a future fiscal year contingent upon accumulation of sufficient funds in which to complete a planned project. Refunds of Development Impact Fees shall include accrued interest at the rate of return actually received on said funds while under the City's control. In disbursing any such refunds, the City may rely upon the written certification of the applicant, if not the original payor, as to the applicant's entitlement to a refund and in the event that it is later determined that another party, whether by assignment, reservation or other agreement, is actually entitled to said refund, the applicant receiving payment by the City shall hold the City harmless and indemnify the City for any amounts expended as a result of the erroneous written certification of the applicant who has been paid the refund amount. In the event that more than one applicant claims to be entitled to a Development Impact Fee refund, the City may deposit the disputed amount in the Superior Court, by filing an action in interpleader and, in said event, City shall be entitled to deduct from the funds in dispute and deposit with the Superior Court, an amount equal to the reasonable cost of said action, including any court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. In the event a Development Impact Fee remains unexpended or uncommitted for a period of twenty years from the date of its collection and no application for refund or other claim filed with City within twelve months after the expiration of the aforementioned twenty years, such amount shall be retained for future capital expenditures of the type for which it was collected and the City shall have no further obligation to refund any portion of the amount not expended or committed.
B. In the event a development for which a Development Impact Fee has been paid is not actually undertaken, the Development Impact Fee, and any accrued interest thereon, paid in conjunction with the planned, but not constructed development, shall be returned to the original payor, or its assignee, provided only that said payee submit a written refund request within sixty days after expiration of the building permit, including any extension thereon, for which the Development Impact Fee was assessed.
C. In the event of a refund of any Development Impact Fee, the City shall collect an administrative service charge equal to three percent of the amount of the gross refund.
Section 16-1-10Offsets to Development Impact Fee
The amount of any Development Impact Fees assessed pursuant to this regulation shall consider, among other things, the contribution made or to be made in the future by cash or taxes, fees or assessments, toward the capital costs of necessary public service covered by the Development Impact Fee. The Mayor and City Council, after considering the actual capital expense burden a specific new development will impose upon the municipality, including the pro rata share costs of existing capital assets benefitting the new development, may adjust any, or all, of the Development Impact Fees set forth herein accordingly.
A. Offsets are reductions from the Development Impact Fee which would otherwise be due from any new development and shall be subject to the following:
1. An offset shall be applied against development fees otherwise due for qualifying improvements, as hereinabove defined, where such
16-8
expenditures are actually directly undertaken, with prior written approval by the City Council, by a developer as a condition of development approval;
2. Offsets shall be allowable and payable only to offset Development Impact Fees otherwise due for the same category of improvements and shall not result in reimbursement from, nor constitute a liability for, the City Council;
3. Offsets shall be given only for the value of any construction of improvements or contribution or dedication of land or money by a developer, or its predecessor in title or interest, for qualifying improvements of the same category for which a Development Impact Fee is otherwise imposed.
B. The applicant for a Development Impact Fee offset shall be responsible for providing appraisals of land and improvements, construction costs, documentation of expenditure and any such other information as is requested by the City Manager in evaluation of the offset request. Any Development Impact Fee offset request in excess of the City Manager expenditure authorization shall be submitted to the City Council, which may request additional information from the applicant, and the City Council shall determine whether or not to approve or deny the offset request in whole or in part. No Development Impact Fee offsets shall be approved by anyone other than the City Manager or City Council acting at a regular or special council meeting.
C. The value of land dedicated or donated shall be based on the appraised value of the parcel as of the date of transfer of ownership to the City and shall be determined by an Arizona licensed real estate appraiser who shall be selected and paid for by the applicant and said appraiser shall employ generally accepted appraisal techniques. In the event the City disagrees with the appraised value submitted, the City may engage another appraiser at City's expense and the value shall be an amount equal to the average of the two appraisals unless either party rejects the average of the two appraisals, in which event, a third appraiser shall be selected by the first two appraisers and the cost of said third appraisal being equally divided between the two parties and the third appraiser's valuation shall be binding upon both parties.
D. Offsets provided for qualifying improvements meeting the requirements of this Section shall be valid from the date of approval until ten years after the date of approval or until the last day of construction within the development, whichever occurs first.
E. The right to claim offsets shall run with the land and may be claimed only by the owners-of-record of property within the development for which the qualifying improvement was required.
16-9
Section 16-1-11Developer Participation Agreements for Development Impact Fees 1
A. The City and a developer may enter into a Participation Agreement to provide for full or partial reimbursement to the developer for the cost of constructing off-site improvements necessary for proper and adequate development of the property, provided the following conditions are met:
1. The off-site improvements are of a nature that could be paid for by use of Development Impact Fees, whether or not such fees are currently being levied by the City.
2. The Developer desires to construct the off-site improvements contemporaneously or in conjunction with construction of on-site improvements.
3. Developer will construct the improvements to City standards and thereafter convey said improvements to the City free of all liens and encumbrances, provide all necessary easements, and provide a one-year warranty period for parts and workmanship incorporated into the improvement.
4. Developer agrees to comply with all other reasonable requirements of the City for plan review, permitting, construction, inspection and conveyance of the improvements.
B. A Participation Agreement shall include the following terms:
1. The actual cost of construction of the improvements;
2. A definition of the benefit area from which future development shall be burdened with a pro-rata contribution as a condition of using the developer-financed off-site improvements;
3. Where the improvement is included in the City's infrastructure improvement plan and the City imposes a Development Impact Fee to fund such an improvement, the Participation Agreement shall either create a method of reimbursing the developer pro-rata from the Development Impact Fees collected within the benefit area, or shall equitably reduce the amount of Development Impact Fees collected within the developer's property, or a combination of both;
4. A schedule for initiation and completion of construction of the improvement; and
5. Expiration date, which shall be no more than fifteen years or the repayment of the developer's cost of construction, whichever occurs first.
C. Where the improvement benefits land in addition to developer's land and Development Impact Fees are not levied by the City to fund such improvements, in the discretion of City Council the Participation Agreement may create a burden on all undeveloped land within the benefit area to pay a pro-rata contribution amount as a condition of obtaining a building permit, in which case the developer shall submit an engineering study that sets forth the following:
1 Ordinance 554
16-10
1. The benefit area that defines future development that can reasonably be expected to benefit from the off-site improvements;
2. the pro-rata contribution amount that each unit of undeveloped land within the benefit area shall pay in addition to all other fees imposed when applying for a building permit; and
3. Such other information as necessary to consider developer's request.
D. Land included within the benefit area may avoid paying the pro-rata contribution amount of Subsection C above where the owner, upon application for a building permit, establishes that the land does not benefit from the improvement, either because the improvement does not serve his land or because he will construct other improvements that obviate any benefit derived from the earlier improvement.
E. All Participation Agreements shall be recorded in the official records of Cochise County.
F. All monies collected by the City, or all Development Impact Fees for which pro-rata reimbursement obligations are created, pursuant to Participation Agreements shall be remitted to the developer or developers quarterly.
G. Developers shall be responsible for submitting any claims against the City for reimbursement amounts due under a Participation Agreement no later than 180 days after they are collected by the City or they shall be deemed waived.
Section 16-1-12Development Impact Fees as Supplemental to Other Required Fees
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, Development Impact Fees are in addition to any other requirements, such as water and sewer hook-up fees, utility deposits, building permit fees, taxes and any applicable assessments imposed by the City on development or the issuance of building permits or Certificates of Occupancy which are imposed on and due against property within the jurisdiction of the City. Development Impact Fees are intended to be consistent with the City's other policies, ordinances and resolutions, by which the City seeks to ensure the accumulation of adequate capital for the initial creation, expansion, improvement or modification, of existing and planned facilities necessary for the general health and welfare.
B. In addition to the Development Impact Fees, the City may finance qualifying capital expenditures through the issuance of bonds, certificates of participation, formation of assessment districts, direct or guaranteed loans, including loans or grants from state and federal agencies, the creation of improvement districts, community facilities districts and any other method available to the City under Arizona law.
Section 16-1-13Annual Development Impact Fee Review
Prior to January 1, 2001, and annually thereafter, the City shall, acting through its City staff, review the Development Impact Fee schedules and the City Manager shall prepare updated development fee schedule recommendations for consideration by the City Council.
16-11
Section 16-1-14Development Impact Fee Calculations 1
All Development Impact Fees (DIF) assessed under this regulation shall bear a rational relationship to the proportional share of the City's capital cost and benefit conferred on new development in order to ensure that the DIF's are non-discriminatory. Individual DIF components shall be calculated using the current capital investment of specific facilities, divided by the population being served, multiplied by the average number of household residents throughout the City or such other factor as is appropriate. Additionally, such relevant factors as water usage, wastewater volume and associated capital costs, shall be included.
A. Police and Fire Development Impact Fee Schedule
Police and Fire Development Impact Fees shall fund emergency services capital items, such as patrol and fire vehicles, buildings (such as police and fire stations) and communications equipment. Because the capital expenditure requirements for emergency services are influenced by population and the nature and size of commercial developments, emergency services development impact fees shall be calculated as follows:
1. Residential Police and Fire Development Impact Fee Calculations - Shall be based on the historic capital cost of providing city-wide police and fire protection. During the ten year period ending June 30, 1998, the total general fund capital expenditures for police and fire department requirements is calculated as being $1,100,000. Approximately eighty percent of the existing structures, based on square footage in use, is represented by residential structures.
2. Single Family Residential Police and Fire Development Impact Fee Calculation - Using the existing 2000 residential structures and an average enclosed living area measuring 2,000 square feet per unit, the residential development impact fee shall be $440.00, calculated as follows:
TCE = Total Capital Expenditures
Capital Expenditures = CE
TCE = $1,100,000. x 80% = $880,000.
$880,000. CE/2,000 resident. units = $440. per sngl.fam.res.unit
3. Multi-Family Residential Police and Fire Development Impact Fee Calculations - Multi-Family Residential Police and Fire Development Fees shall be based on the single family residential fee calculations at the rate of $.22 per square foot subject to a single living unit minimum fee calculated on the basis of 500 square feet.
4. Commercial Police and Fire Development Impact Fee Calculations - Based on square footage, approximately 20% of Benson's structures are of a commercial nature. Therefore, 20% of the total police and fire
1 Ordinance 544
16-12
department capital investment, or $220,000., is proportionately chargable to commercial entities. The commercial development impact fee is calculated as follows:
TCE - TOTAL CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
CE - CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
TCE 1,100,000. x 20% = $220,000.
$220,000. CE/800,000 total commercial square footage =
.$275 per sq.ft. or $275.00 per 1000 sq. ft.
5. Initial Phase In Period Discount - During the initial two year phase-in period of these regulations, all new development shall receive a police and fire development impact fee credit of fifty percent of the amount due, as hereinabove set forth.
B. Administrative Development Impact Fees.
In order to offset the capital expenditures required for general government operations purposes, all new development shall be assessed an Administrative Development Impact (ADI) Fee. ADI fees collected shall only be expended to acquire capital assets reasonably necessary for the City's efficient and timely administration. Examples of expenditures of proper ADI fees would be new or upgrades of computer systems, system components and software, administrative buildings and building components, vehicles, communications systems and office furniture.
1. Administrative Development Impact Fees - ADI Fees should all be based on the City's Administrative Department capital items budget during the ten years ended June 30, 1998, referred to herein as the "base period". During the base period, the total administrative capital items budget was $407,264. In calculating Administrative Development Impact Fees, the ratio of eighty percent residential structures floor space to twenty percent commercial floor space shall be used.
2. Residential Administrative Development Impact Fee Calculation - The ADI fee to be charged for each new residence unit, whether single family or multi-family, shall be based on the base period capital expenditures and the total residential floor space within the City and calculated as follows:
TACE - TOTAL ADMIN CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
CE - CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
TACE - $407,264. x 80 % = $325,8ll.
$325,8ll.CE/2000 resident. unit = $162.90 per unit, round. to $160.
16-13
3. Commercial Administrative Development Impact Fee Calculations - The ADI fee to be charged a new commercial development shall be based on the square footage of the development's structure, which shall include areas under roof, whether or not enclosed, as well as open or enclosed patios and storage areas. Commercial ADI fees shall be based on the following calculation:
TACE - TOTAL ADMIN CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
TCFS - TOTAL COMMERCIAL FLOOR SPACE
TACE = $407,264. x 20% = $81,452.
TCFS = 800,000 sq. ft. = $.10 per sq. ft.
4. Initial Period Phase-In Discount - During the initial two year phase-in period, all new development shall receive an administrative development impact fee credit of fifty percent of the amount due, as hereinabove set forth.
C. Parks and Cultural Facilities Development Impact Fees - In order to offset the capital costs associated with the construction and development of facilities such as parks, libraries, community halls, public auditoriums, theaters, amphitheaters and art galleries, all new development shall be assessed a Parks and Cultural Facilities Development Impact (PCFDI) fee. Expenditure of funds collected as a PCFDI fee shall be limited to acquisition of land for such facilities, as described above, or the construction of buildings or related facilities and the equipping of such facilities with equipment of a non-expendable nature and considered as depreciable assets under the Internal Revenue Code. PCFDI fees shall be based on the City Parks Department and Library Department's capital budget during the ten years ended June 30, 1998, hereinafter referred to as the "base period".
1. Single Family Residential Parks and Cultural Facilities Development Impact Fees - For each new single family residential structure, the applicable PCFDI fees shall be calculated as follows:
TPCE - TOTAL PARK CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
$490,000. TPCE/2,000 residential units = $245.00 per unit
2. Multi-Family Residential Parks and Cultural Facilities Development Impact Fees - For each individual residential living unit which is part of a multi-family residential structure, the PCFDI charged shall be one-half the applicable fee for a single-family residential structure.
3. Initial Period Phase-In Discount - During the initial two year phase in period immediately following the effective date of these regulations, all new single-family residential development units shall receive an individual unit credit of $145.00 and each multi-family residential unit shall receive a credit of $72.50 for each individual living unit.
16-14
Section 16-1-15 In-Fill Incentive Development Impact Fees 1
A. In order to encourage individuals and other developers of residentially suitable lands within the City to build within the heretofore developed city core where it is in the best interest of the City to promote building of needed affordable residential housing on existing lots and/or parcels so as to minimize expenditures for infrastructure extensions or services, specific areas are designated as the "In-fill Zone". Development Impact Fees for residential construction within the In-Fill Zone shall be limited to five hundred dollars per residential structure. For purposes of this section, the term "residential structure" shall mean a single-family dwelling or an individual dwelling unit of a multi-family residential unit. The term "residential structure" shall not include any development considered to be commercial in nature, such as a motel, hotel, nursing home or group home. A multi-family project or complex intended for occupancy by permanent residents shall not be considered to be commercial in nature regardless of its ownership.
B. The specific areas hereinafter described shall constitute the City's In-Fill Zone being part of a general area which was previously developed. All of the In-Fill Zone is located within Township 17 South, Range 20 East of the Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian and the areas are particularly described as follows:
1. SECTION 9: Northern ½ of the Northeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼ - between the center of 4th Street to the southernmost property lines of Fifth Street east to the center of Ocotillo Ave. South ½ of the southeast ¼ of the Northwest ¼-between the northern edge of green Lane south to the center of 4th Street; from westernmost edge of Quarterhorse Ave east to the center of Ocotillo Ave.
Southeast ¼ - entire quarter section included
Southern ¼ of the Northeast ¼ - from the center of Ocotillo Ave east to the sectional boundary, paralleling the northernmost boundary of the RR ROW.
2. SECTION 10: Entire southwest ¼ and southeast ¼.
The Northeast ¼ laying south of I-10.
South ½ of the Northwest ¼ -from the north edge of Walker Street, south.
3. SECTION 15: The Western ½ of the East ½ lying west of Highway 80, bounded by the western edge of Catarina Street, Post Road and the back property lines of the Post Road Properties. Northern ½ of the Northwest ¼ - following the southernmost property lines of El Sol west to the section boundary.
4. SECTION 16: The northern ½ of the Northeast ¼ and the southeastern ¼ of the Northeast ¼ and the Southeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼ of the Northeast ¼.
1 Amended by Ordinance 534
16-15
The Northeastern ¼ of the Northwest ¼ bounded by the northern edge of Union Street and the western edge of Donald St.
Northern ½ of the Northeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼.
Northeast ¼ of the Northeast ¼ of the Northwest ¼ of the Southeast ¼.
5. SECTION 22: Northwest ¼ of the Northeast ¼.
Southeast ¼ of the Northwest ¼.
Northern ½ of the Northeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼.
In-Fill Map
16-16
Section 16-1-16Independent Standing of Each Development Impact Fee Provision
Each section of these regulations and Development Impact Fee provisions contained herein shall be considered as independent of each other section and/or Development Impact Fee provision and in the event any single section or provision is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be inapplicable or unenforceable, said ruling shall not invalidate any other section or provision contained herein and all other fees shall be applicable.
Section 16-1-17 Effective Date
The effective date of these regulations and the fees set forth herein shall be August 1, 2000.
ARTICLE 16-2 ADDITIONAL FEES
The City Council shall by resolution adopt appropriate fee schedules for Planning and Zoning fees, Development Review fees, Construction Administration fees, Building Permit fees and any additional or miscellaneous fees deemed to be reasonable and necessary.
16-17
FEES AS ADOPTED BY RESOLUTIONS
Administration Fees 1
A.
Copies. The departments of the City shall charge $0.25 per page for photo copies of City records and documents. Maps, blueprints and other documents shall be provided at the cost of their reproduction plus handling costs determined by the City.
$0.25 per page
B.
Copies for Commercial Use. The departments of the City shall charge $0.50 per page for photo copies of City records and documents being used for commercial purposes. Maps, blueprints and other documents shall be provided at the cost of their reproduction plus handling costs determined by the City.
$0.50 per page
C.
Electronic copies. The City Clerk shall be authorized to charge $5.00 per CD for the reproduction of electronic documents or audio recordings. Documents that are not stored electronically will not be available.
$5.00 per CD
D.
Publications. The City Clerk shall be authorized to charge the actual cost of documents, ordinances, codes and other publications of the City plus 10 percent of the actual costs for handling.
Cost plus 10%
E.
Staff Time. A fee for the substantial use of the City staff time on efforts not involving activities covered by other fees and not specifically at the Council or Manager’s direction may be charged to the individual requesting such service. Such activities would include research, writing reports, meetings, presentations, testimony and other similar activities not directly required for the operation of the City. “Substantial use of staff time” for any activity shall be determined by the City and such efforts on behalf of individuals shall be approved by the City Manager. This policy is not to inhibit the free access to information held by the City. It is to compensate the City for the provision of unusual amounts of City resources.
City Manager – $125.00 per hour
City Attorney –
$125.00 per hour
City Engineer-
$105.00 per hour
Building Official-
$85.00 per hour
City Clerk –
$65.00 per hour
All Other Staff- One and one-half times the normal hourly rate for employee providing service.
F.
Recording Fees. In addition to any other fee required by this chapter, a fee of $12.00 plus $0.50 per page over five pages shall be charged for any document filed with the City Clerk, other than subdivision documents. For any other large format documents, the fee shall be $18.00 for the first sheet and $10.00 for each additional sheet.
1 Resolution 15-2011
16-18
BUILDING DIVISION 1
A.
Building Permit. The fee for issuance of a building permit shall be:
1.
Total valuation from $1.00 to $1000.00:
$47.00
2.
Total valuation from $1001.00 to $2,000:
$47.00 for the first $1000.00
a.
Additional fee for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof to and including $2,000:
$4.00
3.
Total valuation from $2,001 to $25,000:
$83.00 for the first $2,000
a.
Additional fee for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $25,000:
$16.00
4.
Total valuation from $25,001 to $50,000:
$466.00 for the first $25,000
a.
Additional fee for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $50,000:
$12.00
5.
Total valuation from $50,000.01 to $100,000:
$766.00 for the first $50,000
a.
Additional fee for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000:
$8.30
6.
Total valuation from $100,001 to $500,000:
$1,181.00 for the first $100,000
a.
Additional fee for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $500,000:
$6.70
7.
Total valuation from $500,001 to $1,000,000:
$3,862.00 for the first $500,000
a.
Additional fee for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $1,000,000:
$5.70
8.
Total valuation from $1,000,001 and up:
$6,712.00 for the first $1,000,000
a.
Additional fee for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof:
$4.40
B.
Other Inspections and Fees. The fee for other inspections and fees shall be:
1.
Inspections outside normal business hours (two-hour minimum):
$56.00/hr
2.
Re-inspection fee assessed under provision of Section 108 of the 2006 International Building Code:
$56.00 each
3.
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (one-hour minimum):
$56.00/hr
1 Resolution 16-2011
16-19
4.
Additional plan review required by changed additions or revisions to approved plans (charged to nearest half-hour):
$56.00/hr
5. Special investigation, special final inspections, etc.: $56.00 each 6.
Housing code compliance inspections (each dwelling unit):
$60.00
C.
Plan review fee: 1. Single-family dwelling and miscellaneous buildings:
65 percent of building permit fee
2.
All other buildings: 65 percent of building permit fee
a. Fire sprinkler
65 percent of sprinkler permit fee b.
Each use of model for permit: $40.00
c. Each additional exterior design elevation:
$20.00
3. Advanced payment account charge (admin. code):
$3.00
D. Manufactured Buildings and Recreational Vehicle Spaces.
1. Residential. The following fees shall apply to residential manufactured housing: 2.
Installation permits, fees as established by the Intergovernmental Agreement w/ the State of Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing for manufactured homes, setback & tie down inspection:
$200.00
3. Each additional inspection after three: $50.00 4.
Manufactured Buildings Permit renewal:
$84.00
5. Recreational vehicle site utilities, per space:
a.
Water: $30.00 b. Gas:
$30.00
c.
Sewer: $30.00 d. Septic:
$60.00
e.
Electrical: $15.00 f. Final utility connection:
$15.00 6.
Advanced payment accounts:
$3.00 Factory-Built Buildings. Installation. Fees as established by the State of Arizona, Office of the Department of Manufactured Housing. Residential FBB: same as manufactured home Commercial FBB: $4.60/LF per story
E. Commercial Site Plan Review
$500 + $50/ acre
F.
Development Impact Fees See Article 16-1
16-20
Golf Course Fees 1
Maximum Public greens fees, cart not included unless noted for
San Pedro Golf Course is as follows:
A.
Adult - Shoulder Seasons (November 1 through 30; and April 16 through May 31)
$30.00
B.
Junior - Shoulder Seasons (November 1 through 30; and April 16 through May 31)
$5.00
C.
Pre-Book (includes cart rental);
reserved 8 to 120 days in advance - Shoulder Seasons (November 1 through 30; and April 16 through May 31)
$50.00
D.
Retired City Employee - Shoulder Seasons (November 1 through 30; and April 16 through May 31)
$12.00
E.
Suntan Special (cart included) - Shoulder Seasons (November 1 through 30; and April 16 through May 31)
$35.00
A.
Adult - Winter Season (December 1 through April 15):
$40.00
B.
Junior - Winter Season (December 1 through April 15):
$5.00
C.
Pre-Book (includes cart rental);
reserved 8 to 120 days in advance - Winter Season (December 1 through April 15):
$60.00
D.
Retired City Employee - Winter Season (December 1 through April 15):
$15.00
A.
Adult - Summer Season (June 1 through October 31):
$20.00
B.
Junior - Summer Season (June 1 through October 31):
$5.00
C.
Pre-Book (includes cart rental);
reserved 8 to 120 days in advance - Summer Season (June 1 through October 31):
$40.00
D.
Retired City Employee - Summer Season (June 1 through October 31):
$12.00
1 Resolution 7-2019
16-21
A.
Maximum Rewards Card Open – Noon - Shoulder Seasons (November 1 through 30 and April 16 through May 31).
$38.00
B.
Maximum Rewards Card 12:01 – Close - Shoulder Seasons (November 1 through 30 and April 16 through May 31).
$30.00
A.
Minimum Rewards Card Open – Noon - Shoulder Seasons (November 1 through 30 and April 16 through May 31).
$28.00
B.
Minimum Rewards Card 12:01 – Close - Shoulder Seasons (November 1 through 30 and April 16 through May 31).
$28.00
A.
Maximum Rewards Card Open – Noon - Winter Season (December 1 through April 15)
$40.00
B.
Maximum Rewards Card 12:01 – Close - Winter Season (December 1 through April 15)
$35.00
A.
Minimum Rewards Card Open – Noon - Winter Season (December 1 through April 15)
$32.00
B.
Minimum Rewards Card 12:01 – Close - Winter Season (December 1 through April 15)
$28.00
A.
Maximum Rewards Card Open – Noon - Summer Season (June 1 through October 31)
$32.00
B.
Maximum Rewards Card 12:01 – Close - Summer Season (June 1 through October 31)
$28.00
A.
Minimum Rewards Card Open – Noon - Summer Season (June 1 through October 31)
$26.00
B.
Minimum Rewards Card 12:01 – Close - Summer Season (June 1 through October 31)
$26.00
16-22
Library Fees 1
A.
Overdue material for 3 week items
$.05 per day per item not exceed the cost of material
B.
Overdue material for 1 week items
$.50 per day per item not to exceed the cost of material
C.
Replacement costs for lost or damaged items
Price stated in record if available. If not in record, staff will research current replacement cost.
D.
Charges for cleaning books.
Charges range between $1.00 and $3.00 depending on the severity and success of cleaning.
E.
Lost library card
$2.00
F.
Lost barcode
$1.00
G.
Photocopies are black and white only
8 ½ x 11 is $.10 per side
8 ½ x 14 is $.20 per side
H.
Replacement cost of lost/damaged Interlibrary Loan materials
Actual cost, plus any fees charged by the loaning library.
I.
1 Resolution 17-2001
16-23
Municipal Airport Fees 1, 2
Tie-Down Sites
2016 Daily Fee
2016 Monthly Fee
A.
Small (Single Engine)
$3.00
$35.00
B.
Large (Twin Engine)
$6.00
$65.00
C.
Oversized (Special)
$20.00
$200.00
D.
Jet
$10.00
$90.00
E.
Helicopter
$10.00
$100.00
Launch Fees
Fee
A.
Balloon Fee
$500.00
B.
UAV Fee
$500.00 for one day;
$300.00 for 2-5
consecutive days;
$200.00 for 6 or more consecutive days
1 Resolution 31-2015
2 Resolution 19-2017
16-24
PLANNING AND ZONING 1
A.
Rezoning
$1200 plus $40/acre; capped $20K
B.
Zoning code text amendment
$1,000
C.
GDP amend
$1,500
D.
Area plans
$3,500
E.
Area plan amend
$500
F.
Plat, Tentative
$1500 plus $25/lot
G.
Plat, Final
$1000 plus $10/lot
H.
Plat, modification
$75/hr
I.
Plat, third submittal and thereafter
50% of first each time
J.
Residential Multi-family complexes
$2500 plus $25/du; capped $8000
K.
Com/Ind Dev Plan/Plat
$2500 plus $50/acre; capped $8000
L.
Dev Plan Amend
$75/hr
M.
Dev Plan 3rd submit
50% of first each time
N.
Conditional Use
$300 Res. $500 Comm.
O.
Conditional Use-appeal
$150 Res. $250 Comm.
P.
Temp Use
$75 Res. $160 Comm.
Q.
Board of Adjust
$300 Res. $500 Comm.
R.
Annexation
$750
S.
Public Notices
actual cost
T.
Street Names
$100
Address number
$20
1 Resolution 18-2011
16-25
Police Department Fees 1
A.
Fingerprints
$ 5.00
B.
Reports
$ 1.00 per page
$ 2.00 per photo
$ 20.00 per CD/DVD
C.
Impounded Vehicles/Check Proof
$75.00 initial
+ $10.00 per day to a max of $675.00
D.
30 Day Hearing for Impounded Vehicles 28-3513
$ 75.00 for Admin Hearing
E.
Animal Control Adoption Fee
$ 5.00
F.
Animal Control Daily Quarantine
$ 10.00 per day
G.
Animal Control Impoundments
$ 50.00 1st
$ 75.00 2nd
$ 100.00 3rd & subsequent
H.
Animal Control Euthanasia
$ 20.00 cats
$30.00 small dogs 30 lbs.
$ 40.00 large dogs
I.
Animal Control Out of Jurisdiction Intake
$15.00 cats
$ 25.00 dogs
1 Resolution 19-2011
16-26
PUBLIC WORKS FEE SCHEDULE 1
CEMETERY
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEES
1.
Construction Plans(sewer, water, paving and grading)
a.
Base fee:
$350.00
b.
Additional fee per sheet:
$85.00/sheet
d.
The fee for the second submittal and each thereafter shall be 50 percent of the first submittal.
Grading Plans
1.
0.00 to 5.00 acres:
$700.00 plus $20.00/ac.
2.
5.01 to 20 acres:
$725.00 plus $15.00/ac.
3.
20.01 to 40 acres:
$825.00 plus $10.00/ac.
4.
40.01 to 100 acres:
$925.00 plus $8.00/ac.
5.
Over 100 acres:
$1,225.00 plus $5.00/ac.
Drainage Report Review
1.
The fee schedule for drainage reports shall be:
a.
0.00 to 5.00 acres:
$650.00 plus $50.00/ac.
b.
5.01 to 10 acres:
$725.00 plus $35.00/ac.
c.
10.01 to 20 acres:
$775.00 plus $30.00/ac.
d.
20.01 to 50 acres:
$875.00 plus $25.00/ac.
e.
50.01 to 100 acres:
$1,125.00 plus $20.00/ac.
f.
Over 100 acres:
$1,225.00 plus $10.00/ac.
2.
Review of any hydrologic or hydraulic reports or surveys shall be subject to additional fees to cover independent consultant review time as determined necessary and appropriate by the City Engineer.
1 Resolution 20-2011
Cemetery plot
$150/each
Transfer of Ownership
$10/each transfer
16-27
Landscape Plan – Right-of-Way
1.
Base fee:
$200.00
2.
Additional fee per sheet (excluding cover sheet):
$50.00/sheet
3.
Second submittal and each thereafter:
$75.00
Golf Course Plan
1.
Base fee:
$350.00
a.
Additional fee per plan sheet for clearing, grading and earthwork within a proposed or existing golf course:
$25.00/sheet
2.
Revision review:
$175.00
3.
For clearing, grading and earthwork within a proposed or existing golf course:
a.
Base fee:
$75.00
b.
Additional fee per grading plan sheet:
$15.00/sheet
Roadway Improvement Plans & Bridge Plans
1.
Base fee:
$350.00
a.
Additional fee per plan sheet (excluding cover sheets) for the first submittal and revision:
$85.00/sheet
Improvement Plans
1.
Base fee:
$350.00
a.
Additional fee per plan sheet:
$85.00/sheet
Traffic Report (3 hour minimum)
$105/hr
Soils Report (3 hour minimum)
$105/hr
Environmental Assessment
$85/hr
Abandonment
$85/hr
Trust Assurance Agreement and Release
1.
Trust Assurance Agreement
Actual expense to City for Recording
2.
Subdivision Recording
$80 + actual expense to City for recording
3.
Substitute Assurances.
$250 + actual expense to City for recording
4.
Release of Assurances (per form)
$80 + actual expense to City for recording
16-28
Recreation Fees 1, 2, 3, 4
A.
Swimming General Admission includes wading pools.
13 and up $1.25
12 and under $.50
B.
Adult Swim 18 and up.
$1.25
C.
Swim Lessons per two week session; per participant ages 5 and up or as skill level permits.
$20.00
D.
Swim Lessons infant and toddler per four week session; per participant age infant to 4 years old or as skill level permits.
$10.00
E.
Seasonal Swimming Passes – Summer season only, from opening day to closing day.
18 and up - $30.00
17 – 13 years old - $20.00
12 and under - $10.00
Family - $40.00 2 Adult/2 Children each additional child same family $6.00.
F.
Pool Rental Rates – Pool rental for private group use and non- profit private use. Minimum two hour rental plus an additional cleaning deposit. Lifeguards are mandatory and included in the rental fee.
Refund - Cancellations from two (2) weeks (14 days) prior to the reservation date will receive a full refund. Cancellations made no less than two (2) days prior to the reservation date refunds will be given at 50% of the rental rate. Refunds will not be given for cancellations made less than two (2) days prior to the reservation date or after the reservation date has occurred. The afore mentioned applies to rescheduling reservation dates.
A refund will be given in the event of inclement weather in the following mannor: Reservations cancelled by City staff one hour or less prior to the start time of the reservation will be given at 100 percent of the rental fee. Reservations cancelled by City staff thirty minutes or more after the start time of the event will be at a rate of fifty percent of the total rental fee.
$50.00 an hour
$50.00 cleaning deposit
G.
Recreational programs and camps as scheduled by the Recreation Coordinator or designee will be determined on a per camp/program;
Program(s) Current $10.00
Parade - $5.00
Vendors 1 day event(s):
1 Resolution 21-2011
2 Resolution 34-2011
3 Resolution 5-2013
4 Resolution 26-2014
16-29
per participant basis as the City Manager and Recreation Coordinator find necessary to adjust based on program expenses. Certain activities and events sponsored by the Recreation Department are excluded from spectator fees as determined by the Recreation Coordinator or designee.
Food 10 x 20 - $45.00
Non-electric 10 x 10 - $20.00
Electric 10 x 10 - $25.00
Vendors 2 - 3 day event(s):
Food 10 x 20 - $90.00
Electric 10 x 10 - $75.00
Non-electric 10 x 10 - $60.00
H.
Community Center Rentals charged at a single use rate plus a cleaning deposit.
Refund Policy. Cancellations from thirty (30) days prior to the reservation date will receive a full refund. Cancellations made no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the reservation date refunds will be given at 50% of the rental rate. Refunds will not be given for cancellations made less than two (2) days prior to the reservation date or after the reservation date has occurred. The afore mentioned applies to rescheduling reservation dates.
Non-Profit - $20.00
Private Organization - $75.00
Individuals using facility for personal use - $75.00
Cleaning Deposit - $100.00
I.
Ramada Fees – Each Ramada will be available for use in four hour time blocks as determined by the Recreation Coordinator, set up and cleanup will be done within the parameter of each four hour time block and is the sole responsibility of the renter. Ramada fees will be charged per four hour time block of reservation; any reservation or use less than four hours will be the equivalent of a four hour time block. Fees to include use of electric and water only where available at designated Ramada’s.
Refunds - Cancellations from two (2) weeks (14 days) prior to the reservation date will receive a full refund. Cancellations made no less than two (2) days prior to the reservation date refunds will be given at 50% of the rental rate. Refunds will not be given for cancellations made less than two (2) days prior to the reservation date or after the reservation date has occurred. The afore mentioned applies to rescheduling reservation dates.
Lions Park Ramada one - $25.00
Lions Park Ramada two - $15.00
Lions Park Ramada three - $15.00
Lions Park Tin Ramada - $5.00
Pool Ramada one - $5.00
Pool Ramada two - $5.00
J.
Tournaments and private use of ball fields will be charged a daily rate; per field.
Refunds - Cancellations from two weeks (14 days) prior to the reservation date will receive a full refund. Cancellations made no less than two (2) days prior to the reservation date refunds will be given at 50% of the rental rate. Refunds will not be given for cancellations made less than two (2) days prior to the reservation date or after the reservation date has occurred. The afore mentioned applies to
Little League Field - 45.00
Sand Lot - $65.00
Soccer Field - $65.00
Softball Field - $45.00
16-30
rescheduling reservation dates.
K.
The portion of the City’s light costs to allocate to the leagues will be determined each year by City Council.
League use program and service fees shall be charged at sixty percent of the City’s hourly electric light costs for the previous calendar year; per field. Usage per league shall be based on its previous year’s light usage. A new league’s first year usage will be based on the league with the highest usage in the previous year. Each league will be allowed one day of tournament play during the league’s regular season as established in (Chapter 11). Leagues requiring more than one tournament play during the season will be charged the daily field rental rate; per day. Leagues requesting use of fields during the off season (Chapter 11) shall be charged the hourly electric light rate per hour; per field; per day of use at sixty percent of the City’s hourly electric light cost.
City Council may adjust the rate of recovery as recommended by the City Manager. The hourly light rate per field may be increased by the City Manager as the light costs to the City increase; and Council increases the rate of recovery. Fees will be paid by the league officiator in one lump sum to the Recreation Coordinator or designee at the beginning of each season. The Recreation Coordinator will determine the City’s recovery cost from the leagues using the following formula:
Field = HR x PR = RL
HR = Hourly Rate Per Field
PR = Percent Recovered by City
RL = Hourly Light Rate Allocated to League
Softball Field -
$6.75 x 60% = $4.05
Little League Field –
$4.05 x 60% = $2.43
Soccer Field –
$9.98 x 60% = $5.99
Sand Lot –
$7.40 x 60% = $4.44
17.1
CHAPTER 17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION1
ARTICLE 17-1 INTRODUCTION
17-1-1 Statutory Authorization
17-1-2 Findings of Fact
17-1-3 Statement of Purpose
17-1-4 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
Section 17-1 Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Arizona has in A.R.S. ' 48-3610 enabled the city to adopt regulations in conformance with A.R.S. ' 48-3609 designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
Section 17-1-2 Findings of Fact
A. The flood hazard areas of Benson are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage, also contribute to the flood loss.
Section 17-1-3 Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
1Established by Ordinance No. 305
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.2
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
G. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;
H. To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions and
I. To maintain eligibility for State disaster relief.
Section 17-1-4 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage and,
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
ARTICLE 17-2 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
A. "Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
B. "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and velocity flow may be evident.
C. "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.3
D. "Breakaway wall" means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building support or foundation system.
E. "Critical feature" means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
F. "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited, to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
G. "Financial assistance" means any form of loan, grant, guaranty, insurance, payment, rebate, subsidy, disaster assistance loan or grant, or any other form of direct or indirect Federal assistance, other than general or special revenue sharing or formula grants made to states.
H. "Flood or flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of flood water,
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or
3. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.
I. "Flood Boundary Floodway Map" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.
J. "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
K. "Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
L. "Floodplain or flood-zone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of Aflooding").
M. "Floodplain administrator" means the zoning administrator who is hereby authorized by the floodplain board to administer the provisions of this chapter.
N. "Floodplain board" means the city council at such times as they are engaged in the enforcement of this chapter.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.4
O. "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
P. "Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinances, grading ordinances and erosion control ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Q. "Flood protection system" means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
R. "Flood proofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
S. "Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
T. "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas necessary in order to discharge the one hundred-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
U. "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
V. "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
W. "Levee" means a man-made structure,usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
X. "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Y. "Lowest floor"' means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.5
provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
Z. "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
AA. "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
BB. "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a communitiy's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
CC. "New construction" means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
DD. "Person" means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership, associate or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned group, or this state or its agencies or political subdivision.
EE. "Program" means the National Flood Insurance Program authorized by 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128.
FF. "Program deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations or of the NFIP standards.
GG. "Regulatory flood elevation" means an elevation one foot above the base flood elevation.
HH. "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
II. "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
JJ. "Special flood hazard area" means a area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, A0, Al-30, AE, A99 or AH.
KK. "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means, the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.6
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. "structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
LL. "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure, either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged,and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic places.
MM. "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
NN. "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community=s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
ARTICLE 17-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS
17-3-1 Lands to which this Chapter Applies
17-3-2 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
17-3-3 Compliance
17-3-4 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
17-3-5 Interpretation
17-3-6 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
17-3-7 Statutory Exemptions
17-3-8 Declaration of Public Nuisance
17-3-9 Abatement of Violations
17-3-10 Unlawful Acts
17-3-11 Severability
Section 17-3-1 Lands to Which this Chapter Applies
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the corporate limits of the city.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.7
Section 17-3-2 Basis For Establishing The Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The area of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Benson" with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at city hall. The Flood Insurance Study is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the floodplain board by the floodplain administrator.
Section 17-3-3 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
Section 17-3-4 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Section 17-3-5 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Section 17-3-6 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.8
Section 17-3-7 Statutory Exemptions
A. In accordance with A.R.S. ' 48-3609, nothing in this chapter shall:
1. Affect existing uses of property or the right to continuation of the use under conditions which existed on April 1, 1988.
2. Affect repair or alteration of property for the purposes for which such property was used on April 1, 1988; providing such repair or alteration does not exceed fifty percent of the value of the property prior to the repair or alteration; and provided the repair or alteration does not decrease the carrying capacity of the watercourse.
3. Affect or apply to facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a certificate of environmental compatibility issued under the authority of A.R.S. ' Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2.
B. In accordance with A.R.S. ' 48-3613, written authorization shall not be required, nor shall the floodplain board prohibit:
1. The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and streets intersection a watercourse.
2. The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or wildlife, structures on banks of a creek, stream, river, wash, arroyo or other watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage to adjoining land or dams for the conservation flood waters as permitted by A.R.S. ' Title 48, Chapter 21.
3. Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This paragraph does no exempt those sand and gravel operations which will divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse.
4. Any flood control district or other political subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. ' Title 45, Chapter 21.
C. Before any construction authorized by subsection B of this section may begin, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the board for review and comment.
D. These exemptions do not preclude any person from liability if that person=s actions increase flood hazards to any other person or property.
Section 17-3-8 Declaration of Public Nuisance
Every new structure, building, fill, excavation or development located or maintained within any area of special flood hazard after September 15, 1984 in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance per se.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.9
Section 17-3-9 Abatement of Violations
Within thirty days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall submit a report to the floodplain board which shall include all information available to the floodplain administrator which is pertinent to said violation.
A. Within 30 days of receipt of this report, the floodplain board shall either:
1. Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation; or
2. Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Article 17-6; or
3. Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to provide whatever additional information may be required for their determination. Such information must be provided to the floodplain administrator within thirty days of such order, and he shall submit an amended report to the floodplain board within twenty days. At their next regularly scheduled public meeting, the floodplain board shall either order the abatement of said violation or they shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of Article 17-6.
B. If the owner of the property refuses to comply, the floodplain administrator shall submit to the administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration and Arizona Department of Water Resources a declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 as amended.
Section 17-3-10 Unlawful Acts
A. It is unlawful for any person to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse whenever it creates a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization of the floodplain board.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor.
Section 17-3-11 Severability
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof, other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.10
ARTICLE 17-4 ADMINISTRATION
17-4-1 Establishment of Development Permit
17-4-2 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Section 17-4-1 Establishment of Development Permit
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 17-3-2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
A. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO elevation of existing grade and proposed elevation of lowest habitable floor of all structures.
B. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 17-5-1 (C)(3) and,
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
Section 17-4-2 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Review all development permits to determine that:
1. The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
2. All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
3. The site is reasonably safe from flooding and
4. The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of the floodway. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
B. Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17-3-2, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a Federal, State or other
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.11
source, in order to administer Article 17-5. Any such information shall be submitted to the floodplain board for adoption.
C. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed for flood insurance policies:
1. The certified elevation required in Section 17-5-1(C)(1);
2. The certification required in Section 17-5-1(C)(2);
3. The floodproofing certification required in Section 17-5-1(C)(3) and
4. The certified elevation required in Section 17-5-4(B).
D. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
1. Notify adjacent communities and the Arizona Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;
2. Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
E. Within one hundred twenty days after completion of construction of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the project, a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the director of water resources.
F. Advise the Flood Control District of Cochise County and any adjacent jurisdiction having responsibility for floodplain management in writing and provide a copy of development plan of all applications for floodplain use permits or variances to develop land in a floodplain or floodway within one mile of the corporate limits of the city. Also, advise the Flood Control District of Cochise County in writing and provide a copy of any development plan of any major development proposed within a floodplain or floodway which could affect floodplains, floodways or watercourses within the District's area of jurisdiction. Written notice and a copy of the plan of development shall be sent to the District no later than three working days after having been received by the floodplain administrator.
G. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 17-6-1.
H. Take actions on violations of this chapter as required in Section 17-3-9.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.12
ARTICLE 17-5 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
17-5-1 Standards of Construction
17-5-2 Standards for Storage of Materials and Equipment
17-5-3 Standards for Utilities
17-5-4 Standards for Subdivisions
17-5-5 Standards for Manufactured Homes
17-5-6 Floodways
Section 17-5-1 Standards of Construction
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 17-5-5(B).
B. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
C. Elevation and Floodproofing.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in Section 17-5-1(C)(3). Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.
2. New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in Zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, higher than the highest adjacent grade at least one foot higher than the depth number on the FIRM, or at least two feet if no depth number is specified. Non-residential structures may meet the standards in Section 17-5-1(C). Upon completion of the structure a registered professional engineer shall cerfify to the floodplain administrator that the elevation of the structure meets this standard.
3. Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with Section 17-5-1(C)(1) or (2) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
a. Be floodproofed so that below the regulatory flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.13
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.
4. Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two openings have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings, shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
5. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
6. Manufactured homes shall meet the above standards and also the standards in Section 17-5-5.
Section 17-5-2 Standards for Storage of Materials and Equipment
A. The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.
B. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
Section 17-5-3 Standards for Utilities
A. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.
B. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
C. Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a floodway.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.14
Section 17-5-4 Standards for Subdivisions
A. All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.
B. All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.
C. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Section 17-5-5 Standards for Manufactured Homes
All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall:
A. Be elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at the regulatory flood elevation; and
B. Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Section 17-5-6 Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 17-3-2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article 17-5.
ARTICLE 17-6 VARIANCE PROCEDURE
17-6-1 Appeal Board
17-6-2 Conditions for Variances
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.15
Section 17-6-1 Appeal Board
A. The floodplain board of the city shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The floodplain board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. In passing upon such applications, the floodplain board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and;
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
2. The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges
D. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the requirements in 17-6-1(C)(1) through (11) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of subsections 17-6-1(A) through (D) and purposes of this chapter, the floodplain board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
17.16
F. The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
Section 17-6-2 Conditions for Variances
A. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
B. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
3. A showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose, unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. (This includes only facilities defined in Article 17-2 of this chapter in the definition of AFunctionally Dependent Use."); and
4. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
E. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. Such notice will also state that the land upon which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for exchange of State land pursuant to the flood relocation and land exchange program provided for by the A.R.S. ' Title 26, Chapter 2, Article 2. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Board in the office of the Cochise County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
18.1
CHAPTER 18 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
ARTICLE 18-1 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE1, 2
ARTICLE 18-2 SENIOR CITIZEN ADVISORY BOARD3
A. There shall be a seven member Senior Citizen Advisory Board for the City of Benson and all of said members shall be appointed by the Council and serve at the pleasure of the Council.
B. The Senior Citizen Advisory Board shall have the power and duty to:
1. Act in advisory capacity to the Council and the City Manager in matters pertaining to Senior Citizens and the Senior Center Building.
2. Consider provisions of the annual budget for Senior Citizen purposes during the process of the preparation of the budget and make recommendations with respect thereto to the City Council.
3. Assist in the planning of a Senior Citizen program for the inhabitants of the City.
1Resolution 26-88
2Ordinance 521
3Resolution 39-86
4. Perform such other duties not inconsistent with this Article as may be requested by the City Council.
C. No member of the Senior Citizen Advisory Board shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract, sale or transaction to which the City is a party and which comes before the Board unless said interest is fully disclosed in writing to the Council and the Board prior to any action being taken on the matter.
D. Appointments to the Board shall be made by the Mayor and the City Council and said appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the Council who shall retain the right to rescind said appointment at any time upon motion, duly seconded, at any regular Council meeting. Not less than five members of the Board shall be residents of the City and a majority of Board members shall be at least 55 years of age at the time of appointment. Appointments, except interim appointments, shall be for a term of two years and all appointments and terms established under Resolution 38-81 shall continue in full force and effect subject to the provisions of this Article.
E. As soon as practicable following the first day of January of every year, the Board shall organize by electing one of its members to serve as presiding officer at the pleasure of the Board. The Board shall hold such regular and special meetings as may be required. All proceedings shall be open to the public.
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
18.2
F. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation for their services as such but may receive reimbursement for necessary travel and other expenses incurred on official duty when such expenditures have received prior authorization by the Council or City Manager.
G. Any vacancies on the Board shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor and Council. Upon a vacancy occurring during an unexpired portion of a term, the appointment to fill such vacancy shall be an interim appointment for the unexpired portion of such term. The office of a Board member may become vacant, if so declared by the Mayor and Council, under the following conditions:
1. If a member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the Board without first having obtained permission from the presiding officer of the Board; or,
2. If a member is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or,
3. If a member is a resident of the City when appointed, but later loses his status as a resident of the City; or,
4. If a member is removed by a majority vote of the Council as provided in this Article.
H. The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may from time to time appoint ex-officio members to the Board who shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council. Ex-officio members shall not be entitled to vote on any matter brought before the Board.
ARTICLE 18-3 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION1
1Ordinance 243, 336 and 441
18-3-1 Commission Established; Membership; Responsibilities
18-3-2 Designation of Landmarks or Historic Districts
Section 18-3-1 Commission Established; Membership; Responsibilities
A. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the City of Benson Historic Preservation Commission.
B. The commission shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed, to the extent available in the community, by the City Council as follows:
Preferably at least one shall be an historian;
Preferably at least one shall be a licensed real estate broker;
Preferably at least one shall be a resident of an historic district;
Preferably at least one shall have demonstrated significant interest in and commitment to the field of historic preservation evidenced either by involvement in a local historic preservation group, employment or volunteer activity in the field of historic preservation, or other serious interest in the field;
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
18.3
and all members, including at large members, shall have a known interest in historic preservation and architectural development within the City of Benson.
C. Commission members shall serve a term of three years, and the terms shall be staggered so that at least three seats are up for reappointment each year.
D. The Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Commission shall be elected by and from among the members of the Commission.
E. The responsibilities of the Commission shall include:
1. Promulgation of rules and regulations as necessary for the conduct of its business.
2. Adoption of criteria for the identification of significant historic, architectural and cultural landmarks and for the delineation of historic districts.
3. Conduct of surveys of significant historic, architectural and cultural landmarks and historic districts within the City.
4. Recommendation to the City Council of Benson the designation of identified structures or resources as landmarks and historic districts.
5. Acceptance on behalf of the City government of the donation of facade easements and development rights; the making of recommendations to the City Council concerning the acquisition of facade easement or other interests in real property as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article.
6. Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and architectural preservation by developing and participating in public education programs.
7. Making recommendations to the City Council concerning the utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote the preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the city.
8. Recommending acquisition of a landmark structure by the City where its preservation is essential to the purposes of this Article and where private preservation is not feasible.
9. Approval or disapproval of applications for certificates of appropriateness pursuant to this Article.
F. The Commission shall meet at least monthly, but meetings may be held at any time on the written request of any two of the commission members or on the call of the Chairman or the Mayor.
G. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of five of the Commission's members, but no less than two thirds of the membership may grant or deny a Certificate of Appropriateness.
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
18.4
Section 18-3-2 Designation of Landmarks or Historic Districts
A. The Commission may recommend to the City Council that an individual property be designated as a landmark if it:
1. Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social history of the locality, region, state or nation; or
2. Is identified with historic personages; or
3. Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style; or
4. Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly influenced an age; or
5. Because of a unique location or singular physical characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood,
6. and the owner(s) of the property concur with the designation.
B. The Commission may recommend to the City Council that a group of properties be designated as an historic district if it:
1. Contains several properties which meet one or more of the criteria for designation of a landmark; and
2. By reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a distinct section of the City, and
3. The owner(s) of the properties concur with the designation.
The boundaries of each historic district designated henceforth shall be specified in detail and shall be filed, in writing, in the City Clerk's Office for public inspection.
C. Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by registered mail to the owner(s) of the property proposed for designation, either by the Commission or by the owner, describing the property proposed and announcing a public hearing by the Commission to consider the designation. Where the proposed designation involves so many owners that individual notice is infeasible, notice may instead be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen days prior to the date of the public hearing. Once the Commission has issued notice of a proposed designation, no building permits shall be issued by the building inspector until the Commission has made its decision.
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
18.5
ARTICLE 18-4 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
18-4-1 Established
18-4-2 Powers and Duties
18-4-3 Membership
18-4-4 Conflicts of Interest
18-4-5 Organization; Meetings
18-4-6 Compensation
18-4-7 Removal from Office; Filling of Vacancies
18-4-8 Ex-Officio Members
Section 18-4-1 Established
There shall be a parks and recreation commission for the city which shall consist of seven members.
Section 18-4-2 Powers and Duties
The parks and recreation commission shall have the powers and duties to:
A. Act in an advisory capacity to the council in all matters pertaining to parks and recreation.
B. Consider provisions of the annual budget for park and recreation purposes during the process of the preparation of the budget and make recommendations with respect thereto to the council.
C. Assist in the planning of a recreational program for the citizens of the city; promote and stimulate public interest therein and, to that end, solicit to the fullest extent possible the cooperation of school authorities and other public and private agencies interested therein.
D. Advise the council with respect to the acceptance of money, personal property or real estate donated or offered to the city for park or recreational purposes.
E. Perform such other duties not inconsistent with this chapter as may be requested by the council.
Section 18-4-3 Membership
Appointments to the parks and recreation commission shall be made by the mayor with the consent of the council from among residents of the city. At all times four members of the commission shall be qualified electors of the city. Appointments shall be for a term of three years. Members first appointed shall so classify themselves by agreement or lot so that each succeeding August 1, the term of at least two members shall expire.
Section 18-4-4 Conflicts of Interest
No member of the parks and recreation commission shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract, sale or transaction to which the city is a party and which comes before the commission.
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
18.6
Section 18-4-5 Organization; Meetings
A. As soon as practicable following the first day of August of each year, the commission shall organize by electing one of its members to serve as the presiding officer at the pleasure of the commission. The commission shall hold such regular and special meetings as may be required and all proceedings shall be open to the public.
B. The affirmative vote of a majority of the commission shall be necessary for it to take any action except to adjourn.
C. A member of the commission shall serve as secretary for the recording of minutes for the commission and shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions. The commission may prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of its internal affairs, which shall be consistent with this chapter, and copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk, where they shall be available for public inspection.
Section 18-4-6 Compensation
The members of the commission shall serve without compensation for their services as such but may receive reimbursement for necessary travel and other expenses incurred on official duty when such expenditures have received prior authorization from the council.
Section 18-4-7 Removal from Office; Filling of Vacancies
A. The council may remove any member of the parks and recreation commission from office for cause.
B. The office of commission member shall become vacant and shall be so declared by the council, under the following conditions:
1. If a member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission without first having obtained permission from the commission, said permission to be expressed in the minutes of the commission meetings.
2. If a member is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
3. If a member is a qualified elector of the city when appointed, but later loses his status as a qualified elector of the city.
C. Any vacancies in the parks and recreation commission, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and council within sixty days. Upon a vacancy occurring, leaving an unexpired portion of a term, any appointment to fill such vacancy shall be for the unexpired portion of said term.
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
18.7
Section 18-4-8 Ex-Officio Members
The mayor, with the consent of the council, may from time to time appoint ex-officio members to the commission. Such members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. Ex-officio members shall not be entitled to vote on any matter brought before the commission.
ARTICLE 18-51
ARTICLE 18-62
ARTICLE 18-73, 4
1 Ordinances 318, 372 and 587
2 Ordinances 509, 539, 568 and 580
3 Ordinance 571
4 Ordinance 575
19.1
CHAPTER 19 AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS1
Article 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS2
19-1-1 Definitions
19-1-2 Compliance with Federal Aviation Act and Federal Aviation Regulations
19-1-3 Compliance with Applicable Rules and Laws
19-1-4 Compliance with Rules by Flight Instructors and Students
19-1-5 Duties and Powers of the City and the City Council
19-1-6 Hours of Airport Operation
19-1-7 Interference with Airport Use Prohibited
19-1-8 Entrance on Restricted Areas Prohibited
19-1-9 Animals at Airport
19-1-10 Liability for Airport Use
19-1-11 Use of Airport for Commercial Activities
19-1-12 Lease or Permit Required to Conduct Commercial Business
19-1-13 Flying Clubs
19-1-14 Reporting of Accidents
19-1-15 Disposal of Garbage
19-1-16 Damage to Airport Property
19-1-17 Commercial Photography and Filming
19-1-18 Religious, Charitable and Political Activities
19-1-19 Financial Responsibility
19-1-20 Fees, Rates and Charges
Section 19-1-1 Definitions
As used herein, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following definitions shall apply:
A. "Aircraft" means and includes any and all contrivances now or hereinafter used for navigation or flight in air or space, including but not limited to: airplanes, airships, dirigibles, free balloons, helicopters, gyro planes, gliders, ultra-lights, amphibians, and seaplanes.
B. "Airman" means an individual who engages, as the person in command or as pilot, mechanic or member of the crew, in the navigation of aircraft, or an individual who is directly in charge of the inspection, maintenance, overhauling or repair of aircraft, aircraft powerplants, propellers or associated accessories.
C. "Airport" means the Benson Municipal Airport.
D. "Airport operations area" means that portion of the airport designated and used for landing, taking off or surface maneuvering of aircraft.
1Ordinance 450
2Ordinance 521
E. "Based aircraft" means any aircraft assigned a reserved parking space, tie down or hangar space at the airport, whether or not such assignment is made under written agreement with the City of Benson and regardless of the length of time.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.2
F. "City" means the political subdivision known as the City of Benson, Arizona, its elected Mayor and Council, authorized appointed officer or assigned agent.
G. "Council" means the City Council of Benson, Arizona.
H. "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration of the United States of America, as defined in the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, or any subsequent and successor to that agency created for the control and operation of aviation and its related functions.
I. "Fire Marshal" means the Fire Marshal of Benson or his/her designee.
J. "Fixed Base Operator" means a person or entity that has obtained a lease or permit to operate as a commercial general aviation concessionaire at the airport.
K. "Owner" means the registered or legal owner of an aircraft according to the records of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Aeronautics Division of ADOT.
L. "Person" means individuals, firms, companies, corporations, public agencies and any other person.
M. "Restricted area" means any portion of any airport not intended for use by the general public and so posted by the City.
N. “Rules and regulations" refer to the provisions of this Chapter contained herein and other notices that may be posted at the airport.
O. "Vehicle" means a device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be propelled on the ground and includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, off-road vehicles, tractors, bicycles, buses and trailers.
Section 19-1-2 Compliance with Federal Aviation Act and Federal Aviation Regulations.
A. The Federal Aviation Act of 1958 authorizes the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration to prescribe air traffic rules and regulations governing the flight of aircraft. The Federal Aviation Regulations promulgated by the Administrator therefore cover all flights on or in the vicinity of the Benson Municipal Airport.
B. Aircraft operators, pilots, airmen and other users of the airport are required to be familiar with and comply with the Federal Aviation Regulations and, in particular, Part 91, General Operating and Flight rules, of said regulations.
C. All aeronautical activities at the airport and all flying of aircraft departing from, over-flying or arriving at said airport, shall be conducted in conformity with the Federal Aviation Regulations.
Section 19-1-3 Compliance with Applicable Rules and Laws
All persons using the airport shall be subject to, and governed by, the rules and regulations contained herein, and all other applicable provisions of City Ordinances and Resolutions, County Ordinances and Resolutions, State and Federal laws, and the Federal Aviation Regulations.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.3
Section 19-1-4 Compliance with Rules by Flight Instructors and Students
All based flight instructors shall inform their students of the rules and regulations contained herein. All flight instructors shall be responsible for the conduct of students under their direction during dual instruction.
Section 19-1-5 Duties and Powers of the City and the City Council
A. The rules and regulations contained herein apply specifically to the airport and are supplemental to the Federal Aviation Regulations.
1. The City shall at all times have authority to take such actions as maybe deemed necessary to safeguard the public in attendance at the airport. Every fixed base operator, pilot, airman, mechanic or other person employed on or using the airport shall cooperate with the manager to enforce these rules and regulations and to see that all persons upon the premises use care to prevent injury to persons or damage to public or private property.
2. The City may suspend or restrict any or all operations at the airport whenever such action is deemed necessary in the interest of safety.
3. The City may suspend, as a means of safeguarding the airport and the public, the privileges of the airport and its facilities to any person refusing to comply with these rules and regulations.
4. The City shall have authority to restrict airport operations to such portion(s) of the airport as it may deem necessary or desirable. Any part of the airport temporarily unsafe for aircraft operation, which is not available for normal use, shall be clearly marked in accordance with recommendations of the FAA.
5. The City may issue use permits for use of the airport as authorized herein.
6. The City in any contingency or emergency not specifically covered by these rules and regulations is authorized to make such decisions as to him/her may seem proper.
B. Benson City Council - As the owner of the Airport, the Benson City Council will approve/disapprove all grant applications, all improvements to the airport, all ground leases and all site plans.
Section 19-1-6 Hours of Airport Operation
The airport shall be open for public use at all hours of the day and night, subject to these rules and regulations and subject to the condition of the landing area, as may be determined by the City.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.4
Section 19-1-7 Interference with Airport Use Prohibited
No person shall unreasonably obstruct, impair or interfere with the use of the airport by another person, or unreasonably obstruct, impair or interfere with the passage and safe, orderly and efficient use of the airport by any other person, vehicle or aircraft.
Section 19-1-8 Entrance on Restricted Areas Prohibited
No person shall enter any portion of the airport designated a restricted area unless authorized to do so by the City.
Section 19-1-9 Animals at Airport
No person shall enter any airport operations area, airport terminal or landing area with any animal, excepting a guide dog for the blind, hearing-impaired or a leased animal taken to and from an aircraft. Animals may be permitted in other areas of the airport if restrained by a leash or confined in such a manner as to be under control at all times.
Section 19-1-10 Liability for Airport Use
A. The City, its agents or employees operating the airport assume no responsibility for damage to property stored thereon or property thereon of persons using the airport facilities, by reason of fire, theft, vandalism, windstorm, flood, earthquake or collision, nor does it assume any liability by reason of injury to persons while on the airport or while using the facilities of same.
B. The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof, and such user shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers, agents and employees, against claims arising from use of the airport.
Section 19-1-11 Use of Airport for Commercial Activities
Subject to applicable orders, certificates or permits of the FAA or their successors, no person shall use the airport or any portion thereof, or any of its improvements or facilities, for revenue-producing commercial business or activities without compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other provisions of the Benson City Municipal Code. Such business or commercial activities shall include, but not be limited to any business for the operation, service or repair of aircraft; any solicitation of data or statistical information; peddling of any goods, merchandise or food; any advertisements or promotion of goods or services; any offer to sell, rent or lease goods or services directed to the public. An aircraft owner, however, is permitted to advertise and sell his/her aircraft
on a noncommercial basis.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.5
Section 19-1-12 Lease or Permit Required to Conduct Commercial Business
A. No commercial business shall be conducted on the airport without the operator thereof having a current lease which has been approved by the City Council. Additionally all commercial businesses must obtain a city business license.
1. Such lease or permit shall define the areas of airport land and facilities to be used by the tenant or operator.
2. Such lease or permit shall stipulate services to be rendered and that the operation may charge reasonable fees for such services.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person not so authorized by lease or permit to engage in any commercial business at the airport including the operation, service or repair of aircraft for hire on airport premises.
Section 19-1-13 Flying Clubs
A. A flying club must be organized as a nonprofit corporation under the laws of the state or of the United States, or as a duly organized and functioning, unincorporated association for the purpose of fostering flying for pleasure, developing skills in aeronautics, including pilotage, navigation and developing public awareness and appreciation of aviation requirements and techniques in the field of aviation and aeronautics.
B. A current roster of officers and directors must be filed with the City.
C. All aircraft owned, leased or used by the flying club must be registered with the City. Club members cannot engage in, and club aircraft cannot be used for, commercial ventures, purposes or operations and must comply with these rules and regulations.
Section 19-1-14 Reporting of Accidents
Any person involved in an accident at the airport, which results in damage or injury to one or more persons or to public or private property shall promptly report such occurrence to the Benson Police Department.
Section 19-1-15 Disposal of Garbage
No person shall dispose of garbage, papers, refuse or other material on the airport except in receptacles provided for that purpose. No person shall abandon any personal property on the airport. Property abandoned for thirty days or longer shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. All costs associated by such disposition of abandoned property will be charged to the person who had abandoned the same.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.6
Section 19-1-16 Damage to Airport Property
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, damage or deface or cause to be destroyed, damaged or defaced any public property located at the airport. Any person causing or responsible for such destruction or damage shall report such damage to the City and upon demand of the City shall reimburse the airport for the full amount of the damage. Any person failing to report or reimburse the airport for damage may be refused the use of any facility until and unless said report or reimbursement is made.
Section 19-1-17 Commercial Photography and Filming
No person shall take still, motion, sound or video pictures for commercial purposes on the airport without a written permit from the City. This section shall not apply to representatives of the press and other news services reporting on persons or events, which are on the news, excepting that all such persons must obtain permission from the City prior to entrance on the airport operations area.
Section 19-1-18 Religious, Charitable and Political Activities
A. No person or organization shall sponsor or conduct any of the following activities on the airport without first obtaining a special activity permit from the City. The City shall determine if such events also require approval by the City Council. All such permits shall require thirty days advance written notification:
1. Any private parade or rally demonstration;
2. Any public distribution or offer for sale of pamphlets, circulars or other written materials for religious, charitable, political or other noncommercial uses;
3. The carrying, posting or displaying of any signs or placards for religious, charitable, political or other noncommercial purposes;
4. Solicitation of contributions. For purposes of this section,"contributions" shall mean and include: donations, money, alms, food, clothing, subscriptions, property, credit, financial assistance or other thing of value;
5. Any air show or other special air events;
6. Any public exhibition, show, commercial demonstration or similar event on airport property;
7. Any other special event on airport property, which is open to the general public.
B. A verified application for a permit shall be filed with the City in a form and manner as provided for by the City.
C. The City may condition the issuance of a permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the activity and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety of persons and property, normal operations of the airport and compliance with all applicable laws.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.7
Section 19-1-19 Financial Responsibility
All owners of aircraft regularly situated at the airport shall be financially responsible. Any such owner shall, upon request, furnish the City with evidence of financial responsibility. The minimum financial responsibility required pursuant to this section shall be as follows:
A. Bodily injury or death, including occupants of aircraft, one person-fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).
B. Bodily injury or death, excluding occupants of aircraft, two or more persons-three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000).
C. Property damage - three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000).
Evidence of financial responsibility shall consist of a certificate of insurance or a bond issued by an insurance company or a surety company duly authorized to transact business in the State of Arizona. If the owner of an aircraft regularly situated at the airport fails or refuses to furnish the City with the required evidence of financial responsibility when requested, the owner shall thereafter be prohibited from basing any aircraft, which he/she may own at the airport until such time as he/she complies with the provisions of this section.
Section 19-1-20 Fees, Rates and Charges
A. A schedule of fees, rates and charges for use of airport areas and facilities shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
B. The City shall have the authority to lock up any lessee's aircraft and/or hanger for failure to pay any fees and charges assessed pursuant to this article. Such fees and charges are considered delinquent after thirty days of the due date.
Article 19-2 MOTOR VEHICLES AT AIRPORT
19-2-1 Compliance with State Law
19-2-2 Parking in Designated Areas
19-2-3 For-hire Vehicles
19-2-4 Parking on Parallel Taxiway or on Runway Prohibited
19-2-5 Driving in Excess of Posted Speed Limit Prohibited
19-2-6 Vehicles to Yield Right-of-Way to Aircraft and Pedestrians
Section 19-2-1 Compliance with State Law
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.8
Every person who operates any motor vehicle or mobile equipment on the airport shall comply with all applicable provisions of the laws of the state and any special regulations prescribed herein for the control of such vehicles excepting in cases of emergency involving life or property.
Section 19-2-2 Parking in Designated Areas
A. The City shall designate by appropriate posting the following:
1. Places where vehicles may or may not be parked on the airport. Vehicles shall never be left parked on taxiways.
2. The period of time for which vehicles may be parked at any place on the airport.
B. The City shall be authorized to remove any vehicle parked on any roadway, parking area or other posted area of the airport in violation of this chapter, and to impound the same at the owner's expense and without liability to the City for damages which may result from or in the course of such moving and storage.
Section 19-2-3 For-hire Vehicles
No common carrier vehicle or vehicle-for-hire shall load or unload passengers or stand at the airport at any place other than in the area designated by the City, nor shall such conveyance operate on the airport without a permit from the airport.
Section 19-2-4 Parking on Parallel Taxiway or on Runway Prohibited
Motor vehicles, except emergency vehicles, shall not be driven onto the parallel taxiway or runway without the express permission of the City. Such authorized vehicles shall be distinctly painted or marked in accordance with the provisions of the current FAA requirements for marking of vehicles used on landing areas. Automobile parking may be permitted in specified general aviation aircraft parking areas for loading and unloading aircraft.
Section 19-2-5 Driving in Excess of Posted Speed Limit Prohibited
No vehicles shall be driven upon any road or upon other areas within the perimeter of the airport in excess of fifteen miles per hour. All vehicles, except airport employees, must remain on paved roads.
Section 19-2-6 Vehicles to Yield Right-of-Way to Aircraft and Pedestrians
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.9
All vehicles, except emergency vehicles engaged in emergency activity, shall at all times yield the right-of-way to any and all aircraft and pedestrians.
Article 19-3 AIRCRAFT ON GROUND
19-3-1 Aircraft Parking in Designated Areas
19-3-2 Parking in Areas not Under Lease
19-3-3 Parking in Taxiway Areas Prohibited
19-3-4 Unattended Aircraft
19-3-5 Run-up of Aircraft Powerplants
19-3-6 Use of Aircraft Apron Area Restricted
19-3-7 Removal of Disabled Aircraft
Section 19-3-1 Aircraft Parking in Designated Areas
Aircraft shall be parked in designated areas administered by the City and on aprons or hangars leased to commercial operators.
Section 19-3-2 Parking in Areas Not under Lease
No aircraft shall be parked in areas not under lease without special written permission of the City, who may authorize such parking as a temporary measure or as an interim measure pending the execution of a lease or agreement.
Section 19-3-3 Parking in Taxiway Areas Prohibited
Taxiway areas shall be maintained open to taxiing aircraft at all times, and no aircraft shall be parked in such taxiway areas or left unattended in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of traffic.
Section 19-3-4 Unattended Aircraft
No aircraft shall be left unattended on the airport unless properly secured in a tie down or within a hangar. Owners of aircraft shall be responsible for damage resulting from failure to comply with this section.
Section 19-3-5 Run-up of Aircraft Powerplants
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.10
Aircraft powerplants shall be run-up only in designated areas. At no time shall powerplants be run-up when aircraft, hangers, shops, other buildings or persons in observation areas are in the path of the propeller slipstream or jet blast.
Section 19-3-6 Use of Aircraft Apron Area Restricted
No persons except airmen, duly authorized personnel, passengers or other persons going to or from aircraft personally conducted by airman or airport attendants, shall be permitted to enter an aircraft apron area. Any person or persons so excepted does not have the privilege of unrestricted use of the apron. These privileges are confined to the necessary use of such space in connection with flights or routine duties.
Section 19-3-7 Removal of Disabled Aircraft
A. Aircraft owners, their agents and pilots shall be responsible for the prompt removal of disabled aircraft and their parts from the airport, except for salvage and repair conducted under the terms of a permit within an enclosed hanger. An exception is made when an airman is directed to delay this action by a duly authorized representative of the FAA, National Transportation Safety Board or City, pending investigation of an accident.
B. If any person refuses or is unable to move an aircraft in a timely manner as directed by the City, said aircraft may be towed away or otherwise removed and stored by the Airport Manager at the owner's or operator=s expense, and without liability for damage which may result in the course of, or after, such moving and storage. The same shall apply to removal and storage of a wrecked or damaged aircraft and its parts.
Article 19-4 AIRCRAFT TAXIING, LANDING AND TAKEOFF
19-4-1 Aircraft Movement Areas Defined
19-4-2 Use of Taxiway
19-4-3 Location of Aircraft During Power Plant Run-up
19-4-4 Taxiing under Power into or out of Hangar Prohibited
19-4-5 Runway to Be Used for Takeoffs and Landings
19-4-6 Exceptions for Emergencies
Section 19-4-1 Aircraft Movement Areas Defined
Aircraft movement areas at the airport are defined as the runway, taxiways, the apron and other areas designated for special operations.
Section 19-4-2 Use of Taxiway
.
All landing aircraft returning to the airport flight line shall exit at the taxiway as quickly as practical in order to clear the runway for approaching aircraft.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.11
Section 19-4-3 Location of Aircraft During Power Plant Run-up
Taxiing aircraft shall be stopped at a distance from the runway, as marked by FAA standard broken yellow lines, for the purpose of power plant run-up. Prior to taxiing onto the runway, aircraft shall be turned to provide the pilot with a clear view of approaching aircraft, and it shall be his/her responsibility to remain clear of other traffic. No aircraft shall be taxied onto a runway until ready for takeoff.
Section 19-4-4 Taxiing under Power into or out of Hangar Prohibited
Aircraft shall not be taxied under power into or out of any hangar, nor shall aircraft powerplants be started or run inside any hangar.
Section 19-4-5 Runway to Be Used for Takeoffs and Landings
Landings and takeoffs shall be made on the runway most nearly aligned with the wind indicator at the airport. When wind conditions allow, Runway 10 should be used so that exiting at the taxiway is facilitated.
Section 19-4-6 Exceptions for Emergencies
Exceptions to the rules and regulations governing landing and takeoff specified in this chapter shall only be made in an emergency requiring immediate action as provided in Part 91.3 of the Federal Aviation Regulations.
Article 19-5 AIRCRAFT TRAFFIC PATTERNS
19-5-1 Compliance with FAA Rules
19-5-2 Airport Traffic Patterns
19-5-3 Aircraft Approaching to Determine Airport Conditions
19-5-4 Helicopters
Section 19-5-1 Compliance with FAA Rules
All aircraft arriving at or departing from the airport shall conform to the FAA rules for operations at airports without a control tower.
Section 19-5-2 Airport Traffic Patterns
Except for ultra light aircraft, which are governed by Article 19-8 of this chapter, the traffic patterns for the airport shall be as follows:
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.12
A. Standard left-hand pattern for Runways 10 and 28.
B. Traffic pattern altitude is established at four thousand eight hundred twenty-eight (4,828) feet above mean sea level (1,000 feet above airport elevation).
Section 19-5-3 Aircraft Approaching to Determine Airport Conditions
All aircraft approaching to determine airport conditions should remain at 500' or more above the traffic pattern altitude ready to enter the pattern. It is recommended that aircraft entering or remaining in the pattern announce their intentions and locations on the UNICOM radio frequency.
Section 19-5-4 Helicopters
Helicopters arriving at or departing from the airport shall operate clear of the fixed-wing aircraft traffic patterns as specified in this chapter and shall operate on or over the field well clear of fixed-wing aircraft.
Article 19-6 AIRCRAFT FUELING AND DEFUELING
19-6-1 General
19-6-2 Fueling and Defueling Restrictions
19-6-3 Smoking Restrictions During Fueling and Defueling
19-6-4 Spillage of Fuel
19-6-5 Static Discharge Precautions
19-6-6 Fire Extinguishers Required
19-6-7 Restrictions on Power Plant Start-up
19-6-8 Fueling Hoses and Defueling Equipment
19-6-9 Grounding Devices for Fueling and Defueling Operations
19-6-10 Self-fueling Operations
Section 19-6-1 General
Aviation fuels and/or lubricants shall not be sold or dispensed into any aircraft or other containers on the airport except in such a manner and under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the City.
Section 19-6-2 Fueling and Defueling Restrictions
No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the aircraft power plant(s)is running or while such aircraft is in a hangar or enclosed space. Hot refueling of helicopters may be permitted by the City on a case by case basis.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.13
Section 19-6-3 Smoking Restrictions During Fueling and Defueling
No smoking shall be permitted within fifty feet of the aircraft fuel tanks while the aircraft is being fueled or defueled or within fifty feet of any fuel carrier utilized for fueling or defueling of aircraft.
Section 19-6-4 Spillage of Fuel
Persons engaged in the fueling or defueling of aircraft shall exercise all caution to prevent spillage of fuel, including the filling of tanks to the point where they would overflow from heat expansion. Any spillage of fuel shall be expeditiously cleaned up in an environmentally sound manner. Any spillage of fuel totaling more than two gallons shall be reported in a timely manner to the City.
Section 19-6-5 Static Discharge Precautions
No person shall use any material or create any condition likely to cause astatic discharge during fueling or defueling of aircraft.
Section 19-6-6 Fire Extinguishers Required
Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of persons engaged in fueling and defueling operations at all times.
Section 19-6-7 Restrictions on Power Plant Start-up
No person shall start the power plant of any aircraft when there is an appreciable quantity of fuel on the ground under the aircraft.
Section 19-6-8 Fueling Hoses and Defueling Equipment
Fueling hoses and defueling equipment shall be maintained in a safe, sound and nonleaking condition at all times.
Section 19-6-9 Grounding Devices for Fueling and Defueling Operations
During fueling and defueling, the aircraft and dispensing device shall be properly grounded.
Section 19-6-10 Self-fueling Operations
All self-fueling operations shall be conducted in full compliance with all federal, state, local and airport rules, regulations and procedures.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.14
Article 19-7 AIRPORT FIRE SAFETY RULES
19-7-1 Compliance with Applicable Fire Safety Rules
19-7-2 Storage of Material and Equipment
19-7-3 Maintenance and Cleaning of Hangars
19-7-4 Cleaning of Aircraft Powerplants and Parts
19-7-5 Disposal of Gasoline and Other Flammable Waste Products
19-7-6 Painting and Doping of Aircraft
19-7-7 Cutting, Welding and Spray Painting
19-7-8 Smoking Restrictions
19-7-9 Electrical Wire, Fixtures and Appliances
19-7-10 Fixed Base Operators to Provide Fire Safety Training
19-7-11 Portable Fire Extinguishers
19-7-12 Duty to Report Fire
19-7-13 Fire Marshal Drills and Inspections
Section 19-7-1 Compliance with Applicable Fire Safety Rules
All persons using the airport shall comply with the airport fire safety rules contained in this article and with all fire safety laws, ordinances and regulations established by any governmental entity having jurisdiction for fire protection at airports.
Section 19-7-2 Storage of Material and Equipment
A. No person shall store or stock material or equipment so as to constitute a fire hazard.
B. No person shall store or place any flammable liquids, solids, gases, signal flares or similar hazardous materials within any hangar or building, except in areas, rooms or containers specifically approved by the Fire Marshal, in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code. Such storage shall be in approved containers bearing the label of the Underwriters= Laboratories, Inc. (five gallon maximum container).
Section 19-7-3 Maintenance and Cleaning of Hangars
A. All owners or tenants of buildings shall maintain the floors of hangars, hangar ramps and adjacent areas free and clear of oil, grease and other flammable materials.
B. No person shall use flammable substances for cleaning floors of hangars or other buildings.
Section 19-7-4 Cleaning of Aircraft Powerplants and Parts
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.15
The cleaning of aircraft powerplants or other parts using solvents shall be limited in scope and only nonflammable or high flashpoint solvents shall be used. Drip and collecting pans shall be used during any cleaning process. Solvents and cleaning materials shall be property disposed of in an
environmentally sound manner.
Section 19-7-5 Disposal of Gasoline and Other Flammable Waste Products
No person shall dispose of gasoline, oil, solvent or other flammable waste products in any drain, manhole, open ditch or other airport areas. All such products shall be properly disposed of in an environmentally sound manner utilizing a state licensed service.
Section 19-7-6 Painting and Doping of Aircraft
Painting and doping of aircraft with flammable liquids shall be conducted only within areas or buildings approved by the Fire Marshal and the Building Official.
Section 19-7-7 Cutting, Welding and Spray-Painting
Cutting, welding and spray-painting operations shall be conducted only within areas or buildings approved by the Fire Marshal and the Building Official.
Section 19-7-8 Smoking Restrictions
No person shall smoke any cigarette, cigar or pipe or strike any match or kindle any flame whatsoever within fifty feet of any aircraft while being fueled, or within fifty feet from fuel islands or any flammable liquid container, or within any aircraft workshop located upon the airport. Smoking shall be permitted only within areas designated by the Fire Marshal.
Section 19-7-9 Electrical Wire, Fixtures and Appliances
All electrical wiring, fixtures and appliances shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the National Electric Code and all outside shall comply with existing City ordinances.
Section 19-7-10 Fixed Base Operators to Provide Fire Safety Training
Each Fixed Base Operator shall institute training programs for employees in the use of portable fire extinguishing equipment and methods of evacuating or relocating occupants of the premises in case of fire or other emergency.
Section 19-7-11 Portable Fire Extinguishers
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.16
A. Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided and installed by each Fixed Base Operator within the operator's leased area, as directed by the Fire Marshal as to number, type and location.
B. At least one portable fire extinguisher shall be located in each hangar space.
C. Portable fire extinguishers shall not be moved from designated locations for any reasons other than as a precaution against an immediate hazard or to be recharged.
D. Access to all fire extinguishing equipment shall be kept free and unobstructed at all times. Portable fire extinguishers shall be inspected periodically by the Fire Marshal.
Section 19-7-12 Duty to Report Fire
Every person who becomes aware of any fire or smoldering combustion of any unwarranted or insidious nature or which is a hazard to the premises shall report said fire or smoldering combustion without delay to the local fire department.
Section 19-7-13 Fire Marshal Drills and Inspections
Fire prevention inspections shall be conducted by the Fire Marshal, and fire drills shall be held at his/her discretion.
Article 19-8 ULTRA-LIGHT AIRCRAFT
19-8-1 Rules and Regulations Governing Ultra-light Aircraft
19-8-2 VHF Radio
19-8-3 Yielding Right-of-way
19-8-4 Compliance with Federal Aviation Regulations
Section 19-8-1 Rules and Regulations Governing Ultra-light Aircraft
All air vehicles not licensed by the FAA are considered ultra-light aircraft. Due to the unique operating characteristics, licensing procedures and minimal Federal Aviation Regulations, this article shall establish specific rules and regulations governing ultra-light aircraft operators as defined in FAR Part 103. All other provisions of these regulations, except Article 19-5 governing aircraft traffic patterns, are applicable to ultra-light aircraft operators.
Section 19-8-2 VHF Radio
For the safety of all aircraft, it is recommended that all ultra-light operations at this airport communicate with other aircraft via VHF radio.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.17
Section 19-8-3 Yielding Right-of-way
In accordance with FAR Part 103.13, ultra-light operators shall maintain vigilance so as to see and avoid conventional aircraft and shall yield the right-of-way to all conventional aircraft. At the discretion of the City, multiple ultra light arrival and departure operations may be disapproved.
Section 19-8-4 Compliance with Federal Aviation Regulations
All ultra-light aircraft arriving at or departing from the airport shall conform to the Federal Aviation Regulations for ultra-light aircraft operations at airports without a control tower.
Article 19-9 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) or six months in jail, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Article 19-10 SITE PLANS, LEASES AND BUILDING PERMITS
19-10-1 Site Plan Requirements
19-10-2 Ground Leases
19-10-3 Building Permits
19-10-4 Fire Suppression Requirements
Section 19-10-1 Site Plan Requirements
A. A scaled site plan will be an integral part of any ground lease and must be approved by the City Department Heads and the Benson City Council prior to a ground lease being approved.
B. All site plans must meet the set-back requirements as shown on the Airport Layout Plan or those established by FAA regulation or FAA circular.
C. Building heights shall be in compliance with current Federal Aviation Administration regulations and must be shown on all site plans. Additionally, the dimensions of all buildings, paved areas for vehicle parking, paved aprons and taxi lanes will be shown on the plan. (Amended by Ordinance 465)
D. All areas not paved will have ground cover either by vegetative landscaping or by decorative gravel. Leaseholder is responsible for maintaining his lease area free of weeds and other debris. In the Pad A-E area, this area includes from the building to the taxi lane.
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.18
E. Building colors for all metal hangars will be light tan for the outside walls and white for all roofing. All colors must be pre-approved by the city to insure the uniformity and the aesthetics of the airport landside development.
F. All buildings should have a 50' wide, all-weather access on all sides for fire department access, unless waived by the Fire Chief.
G. All storage of equipment and materials will be contained within enclosed buildings. An external trash container may be permitted if it is of commercial quality, with a secure lid and at least 1.5 yard capacity.
H. All parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and twenty feet in length if marked, exclusive of access drives and aisles. The parking space requirement is one space per employee. Unmarked parking areas shall allow two hundred and eighty feet per vehicle, which includes aisles. All vehicle parking spaces, access roads and aisles will be paved with a minimum of a double chip seal coating.
Section 19-10-2 Ground Leases
In accordance with ARS '28-8425, no initial lease period will exceed forty years. The length of each lease will be established on a case-by-case basis depending on the amount of the capital investment being made. In general, a $100,000 investment, measured in 2002 dollars, will earn a 20-year lease.
A. All leases will have an inflation clause tied to the Consumer Price Index.
B. All leases will have a reversion clause that specifies when title to the Building and other permanent improvements transfers to the City of Benson.
Section 19-10-3 Building Permits
All building construction at the airport is subject to the same building permit, plan check, impact fee and inspection requirements as elsewhere in the City.
Section 19-10-4 Fire Suppression Requirements
A. All building plans, lease agreements and building uses shall be reviewed and evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the Benson Fire Department as to fire suppression requirements prior to Council approval.
B. Unless exempt by the Fire Department under those conditions specified in Part (c) "Exemptions" of this section or otherwise waived by Council, all building and hangers shall meet those fire suppression requirements as specified under Part (D) "Minimum Requirements" of this section.
C. "Exemptions": Exemptions shall only apply to Foam Sprinkler System requirements of commercial buildings or hangers and said exemption shall be at sole discretion of the
AIRPORT OPERATING REGULATIONS
19.19
Benson Fire Department. Exemptions are conditional upon the execution and Council approval of a "Hold Harmless Agreement" between the commercial business requesting the exemption, the City of Benson and the Benson Volunteer Fire Department Inc. The Agreement shall relieve the City and the Benson Volunteer Fire Department Inc. of all liability from all fire damage, death or injury resulting from the exemption of the foam sprinkler system.
D. “Minimum Requirements": The following are the minimum requirements for fire suppression for the Benson Municipal Airport.
1. Foam sprinklers, smoke detectors and audible alarm with remote transmitter to the Benson Police Department shall be required for all commercial hangers.
2. Smoke detectors, heat detectors, audible alarms and remote transmitter to the Benson Police Department shall be required on all general/private hangers.
3. The minimum required separation distance between hangers shall be fifty feet for all groups of hangers.
4. A six-inch curb shall be provided between each aircraft space to prevent the flow of liquid from one space to adjacent spaces.
5. Sprinkler activation shall be remotely transmitted to the Benson Police Department along with an audible local alarm.
6. When a hanger in a cluster of hangers is used for commercial business, then the whole building cluster shall be required to be foamed sprinkled.
7. All non-hangar commercial building shall be required to be water sprinkled.
CITY CODE
___________
Containing
Chapter 20, Procurement Code
__________
PREFACE
This chapter contains the Procurement Code of the City of Benson to be used by all City personnel involved with procurement of materials, services, and construction needed by the city.
The purpose of this Code is to simplify, clarify and modernize the law governing procurement by the City; and, permit the continued development of procurement policies and practices followed for government procurement; and, ensure fair and equitable treatment of all persons dealing with the procurement system of the City; and, provide increased economy in City procurement activities, to maximize to the extent practicable the purchasing value of public monies; and, promote effective competitive competition within the free enterprise system; and, provide safeguards to the procurement system; and, obtain in a cost effective manner the materials, services and construction required by the City.
The numbering system used in this Code is similar to a system used in many state and municipal codes and is compatible to the system used in the Arizona Revised Statues. Each section number consists of three component parts separated by a dash, the figure preceding the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure following the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter, the third digit represents the provision within the section. Thus the first section of chapter 20 is numbered Section 20-1-1.
New articles and divisions may be included in the same way, or in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in case of divisions may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject the next successful number being assigned to the article or division. Changes to the code will carry a sequential revision number such as Revision.
This Code may be amended from time to time and the pertinent amended pages and a synopsis of the amendment will be distributed to all holders of the Code. The successful maintenance of this Code will depend largely upon the holder. As revised sheets are received it will become the responsibility of the holder to have them inserted. It is strongly recommended that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them, and that all deleted pages be preserved and filed for purposes of historical reference.
CHAPTER 20 - BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Index Page 3 of 26
July 31, 2007
Article 20-1 General Provisions §§20-1-1 thru §§20-1-5
Article 20-2 Procurement Director Authority §§20-2-1 thru §§20-2-2
Article 20-3 Materials Source Selection and Contract Formation §§20-3-1 thru §§20-3-22
Article 20-4 Specifications §§20-4-1 thru §§20-4-5
Article 20-5 Procurement of Professional Design Services and Capital Improvements
§§20-5-1 thru §§20-5-7
Article 20-6 Contract Clauses §§20-5-6
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
Article 20-1 General Provisions
Section 20-1-1 Applicability
Section 20-1-2 Definitions
Section 20-1-3 Supplementary General Principals of Law
Section 20-1-4 Requirement of Good Faith
Section 20-1-5 Confidential Information
Article 20-2 Procurement Director Authority
Section 20-2-21 Authority of Director
Section 20-2-3 Written Determinations
Article 20-3 Materials and Services Source Selection and Contract Formation
Section 20-3-1 Definitions
Section 20-3-2 Method of Source Selection
Section 20-3-3 Competitive Sealed Bidding
Section 20-3-4 Competitive Sealed Proposals
Section 20-3-5 Contracting for Legal Counsel
Section 20-3-6 Small Purchases
Section 20-3-7 Sole Source Procurement
Section 20-3-8 Emergency Procurements
Section 20-3-9 Special Procurements
Section 20-3-10 Cancellation of Solicitations
Section 20-3-11 Rejection of Individual Bids
Section 20-3-12 Responsibility of Bidders and Offerors
Section 20-3-13 Bid and Contract Security, Material or Services Contract
Section 20-3-14 Types of Contracts
Section 20-3-15 Approval of Accounting System
Section 20-3-16 Multi-Year Contracts
Section 20-3-17 Right to Inspect
Section 20-3-18 Right to Audit Records
Section 20-3-19 Reporting of Anticompetitive Practices
Section 20-3-20 Prospective Vendors List
Section 20-3-21 Contract Form and Execution
Section 20-3-22 Assignment of Rights and Duties
CHAPTER 20 - BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Index Page 4 of 26
July 31, 2007
Article 20-4 Specifications
Section 20-4-1 Definitions
Section 20-4-2 Maximum Practicable Competition
Section 20-4-3 Specifications Prepared by Parties Other Than City Personnel
Section 20-4-4 Brand Name or Equal Specification
Section 20-4-5 Brand Name Specification
Article 20-5 Procurement of Professional Design Services and Capital Improvements
Section 20-5-1 Definitions
Section 20-5-2 Procurement of Construction
Section 20-5-3 Procurement of Professional Design Services
Section 20-5-4 Procurement of Construction Services
Section 20-5-5 Construction by City Employees
Section 20-5-6 Non-substantial Failure to Comply
Section 20-5-7 Procurement of Maintenance Services and Operations
Article 20-6 Contract Clauses
Section 20-6-1 Contract Clauses
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 5 of 26
July 31, 2007
ARTICLE 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
20-1-1 Applicability
20-1-2 Definitions
20-1-3 Supplementary General Principals of Law
20-1-4 Requirement of Good Faith
20-1-5 Confidential Information
Section 20-1-1 Applicability
A. This Chapter applies to all expenditures of public monies by this City irrespective of their source, including federal assistance monies, except that this Chapter does not apply to grants or contracts between this City and other governments. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent this City from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, bequest or cooperative agreement.
B. The provisions of this Chapter are not applicable to contracts for professional witnesses if the purpose of such contracts is to provide for services or testimony relating to an existing or probable judicial proceeding in which this City is or may become a party or to contracts for special investigative services for law enforcement purposes.
C. Agreements negotiated by the City Attorney in settlement of litigation or threatened litigation are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.
D. The award of financial participation agreements, master-operating agreements, memoranda of understanding, and Community Development Block Grants are exempt from this Chapter. Such contracts shall be awarded in accordance with applicable administrative directives.
E. The provisions of this Chapter are not applicable to contracts for municipal improvement districts. Such contracts shall be awarded in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 48, Chapter 4.
Section 20-1-2 Definitions
In Chapter 20, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “A.R.S.” refers to the Arizona Revised Statutes
B. “Business” means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private entity..
C. “Change Order” means a written order signed by the Director or his designee which
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 6 of 26
July 31, 2007
directs the contractor to make changes that the contract authorizes the Director to order, with or without the consent of the contractor, as applicable
D. “City” means the municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Benson
E. “Construction” means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any public infrastructure facility, including public structure, public building, or other public improvements of any kind to any real property. Construction does not include the routine operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of an existing public infrastructure facility, including structures, buildings or real property.
F. “Construction services” as applied to construction-manager at risk, design-build and job-order-contracting project delivery methods and means either of the following:
1. Construction, excluding through the construction-manager-at-risk or job-order- services contracting project delivery methods.
2. A combination of construction and, as elected by the City, one or more related services, such as finance services, maintenance services, operations services, design services and pre-construction services, as those services are authorized in the definitions of construction-manager-at-risk, design-build or job-order-contracting in this chapter, Article §20-5 , Section §20-5-1.
G. “Contract” means all types of City agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of materials, services, or construction or the disposal of materials.
H. “Contract Amendment” means any
written alteration in the terms and conditions
of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties of the contract.
I. Contractor” means any person who has a contract with the City.
J. “Contract Officer” means the Director or any person duly authorized to enter into and administer contracts and make written determinations with respect to the contracts. Contract Officer also includes an authorized representative acting within the limits of the officer's authority.
K. “Days”, unless otherwise specified, means
calendar days and shall be computed pursuant
to Arizona Revised Statutes, A.R.S. §1-243.
L. “Department” means a duly authorized department of the Director.
M. “Designee” means a duly authorized representative of the Director
N. “Director” means the City Manager or his designee.
O. “Disposal of material” means sale of surplus, unclaimed and seized property by
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 7 of 26
July 31, 2007
public auction, electronic auction, competitive sealed bidding, small purchases or other appropriate method designated by this chapter.
P. “Electronic” means electrical, digital, magnetic, optical, electromagnetic, or any other similar technology.
Q. “Grant” means the furnishing by this City of assistance, whether financial or otherwise, to any person to support a program authorized by law. Grant does not include an agreement whose primary purpose is to procure a specific end product, whether in the form of materials, services or construction. A contract resulting from such an agreement is not a grant but a procurement contract.
R. “Materials” means all the property, including but not limited to, equipment, supplies, printing, insurance and buildings but does not include land, a permanent interest in land or leases of real property..
S. “Person” means any corporation, consultant, business, individual, committee, club, other organization or group of individuals.
.
T. “Procurement” means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any materials, services or construction. Procurement also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any material, service or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration.
U. “Procurement Contract Officer” means the Department Head or any person duly authorized to enter into and administer contracts and make written determinations with respect to contracts. Contract Officer also includes an authorized representative acting within the limits of the officer’s authority.
V. “Services” means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, consultant, subcontractor or sub consultant which does not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than required design documents or reports and performance. Services do not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. The definition of services includes, but is not limited to, consulting, personal, auditing, technical, professional design, construction, purchase-of-client services and professional services, excluding legal counsel.
W. “Subcontractor or sub consultant” means a person who contracts to perform work or render service to a contractor or consultant as defined by this section or to another subcontractor or subcontractor as a part of a contract with the City.
X. “Written or in Writing” means the product of any method of forming characters on paper, other materials, or viewable screens, which can be read, retrieved and reproduced, including information that is electronically transmitted and stored.
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 8 of 26
July 31, 2007
Y. “Using Agency” means any organizational unit of the City, which utilizes an materials, services or construction procured under this chapter.
Section 20-1-3 Supplementary General Principles of Law Applicable
Unless displaced by the particular provisions of this Chapter, the principles of law and equity, including the Uniform Commercial Code of this State, the Common Law of Contracts as applied in this State and law relative to agency, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion and mistake supplement the provisions of this Chapter. Further, the Director shall award and administer contracts services in accordance with the requirements of Title 34 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
Section 20-1-4 Requirement of Good Faith
This Chapter requires all parties involved in the negotiation, performance, or administration of City contracts to act in good faith.
Section 20-1-5 Confidential Information
Confidential information shall be designated as follows:
A. If a person believes that a bid, proposal, offer, specification, or protest contains information that should be withheld, a statement advising the contract officer of this fact shall accompany the submission and the information shall be so identified wherever it appears.
B. The information identified by the person as confidential may not be disclosed until the Director makes a written determination.
C. The Director shall review the statement and information and may determine in writing whether the information shall be withheld.
D. If the Director determines to disclose the information, the Director shall inform the person in writing of such determination.
.
ARTICLE 20-2 PROCUREMENT DIRECTOR AUTHORITY
Sections:
20-2-1 Director Designation
20-2-1 Authority of Director
20-2-2 Written Determinations
20-2-3 Retention of Records
Section 20-2-1 Authority of the Director
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the Director may adopt operational procedures, consistent with this Article, governing the materials, procurement and management of all services and construction to be procured by this City and the disposal of materials.
B. The Director shall serve as the central Contracting Officer of this City.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the Director shall:
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 9 of 26
July 31, 2007
1. Procure or supervise the procurement of all materials, services and construction needed by this City.
2. Establish guidelines for the management of all inventories of materials belonging to this City.
3. Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus materials belonging to this City.
4. Prepare, issue, revise, maintain, and monitor the use of specifications for supplies, services and construction required by this City.
5. Establish and maintain programs for the inspection, testing, and acceptance of materials. services, and construction.
D. The Director may delegate procurement authority to designees or to any department or official of the City.
E. The Director shall have the authority to cancel any solicitation at any time in accordance with §20-3-10.
Section 20-2-2 Written Determinations
All written determinations prepared by the Director as required by this Chapter shall be retained in the Finance Department.
Section 20-2-4 Records Retention
All original procurement records shall be retained in the Finance Department and. shall be disposed of in accordance with the records retention and disposition schedule for Arizona municipalities pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1351.
ARTICLE 20-3 SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION
Sections:
20-3-2 Method of Source Selection
20-3-3 Competitive Sealed Bidding
20-3-4 Competitive Sealed Proposals
20-3-5 Contracting for Legal Counsel
20-3-6 Small Purchases
20-3-7 Sole Source Procurement
20-3-8 Emergency Procurement
20-3-9 Special Procurements
20-3-10 Cancellation of Solicitations
20-3-11 Rejection of Individual Bids
20-3-12 Responsibility of Bidders
and offerors
20-3-13 Bid and Contract Security,
Material Services Contract
20-3-14 Types of Contracts
20-3-15 Approval of Accounting System
20-3-16 Multi-year Contracts
20-3-17 Right to Inspect
20-3-18 Right to Audit Records
20-3-19 Reporting of Anticompetitive
Practices
20-3-20 Prospective Vendors List
20-3-21 Contract Form and Execution
20-3-22 Assignment of Rights and Duties
Section 20-3-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Best Value” means a bid, which after an evaluation based on objective criteria, is
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 10 of 26
July 31, 2007
advantageous to and has been determined to provide the best overall value to the City.
B. “Discussions” means communication with an offeror or for the purpose of eliminating minor irregularities, or apparent clerical mistakes in the proposal or clarification of any offer to assure full understanding of, and responsiveness to solicitation requirements or to establish the competency or financial stability of any offeror.
C. “Invitation for Bid” means all documents written or electronic, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting bids in accordance with §20-3-2.
D. "Minor informality" means mistakes, excluding judgmental errors, that have an insignificant or minor effect on price, quantity, quality, delivery, or other contractual terms and the waiver or correction of such mistakes does not prejudice other bidders or offerors
E. "Negotiations" means an exchange of information or any form of negotiation during which the offeror and the City may alter or otherwise change the conditions, terms, and price. Discussions may be conducted in connection with competitive sealed proposals, requests for qualifications, small purchases, sole source procurements, emergency procurements, and special procurements or contract amendments.
F. “ Proposal Revision” means a change to a proposal made after the solicitation closing date, at the request of or as allowed by a contracting officer in accordance with the procedures outlined herein in Section § 20-3-3 Competitive sealed bidding.
G. “Request for Proposal” means all documents, written or electronic, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting proposals in accordance with the procedures outlined in §20-3-4.
H. “Request for Qualifications” means all documents, written or electronic, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting responses from qualified respondents in accordance with §20-5.
I. “Responsible Bidder, Offeror or Respondent” means a person who has the capability to perform the contract requirements and the integrity and reliability that will assure good faith performance.
J. “Responsive Bidder, Offeror, or Respondent” means a person who submits a bid, proposal or response which conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids, request for proposals, or request for qualifications.
K. “Solicitation” means an invitation for bids, request for proposals, a request for qualifications, request for quotations, or any other invitation or request by which the city invites a person to participate in a procurement.
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 11 of 26
July 31, 2007
Section 20-3-2 “Methods of Source Selection”.
All contracts of the city shall be awarded by competitive bidding except as otherwise provided in §20-3-4 Competitive Sealed Proposals, §20-3-5 Contracting for Legal Counsel, §20-3-6 Small Purchases, §20-3-7 Sole Source Procurement, §20-3-8 Emergency Procurements, §20-3-9 Special Procurements, §20-5-3 entitled Procurement Design Services, §20-5-4 Procurement of Construction Services.
Section 20-3-3Competitive Sealed Bidding
A. Invitation for Bids. All reasonable attempts shall be made to obtain competitive bids. All contracts of the City shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in this Procurement Code. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications, any applicable evaluation criteria, and all contractual terms and conditions specifically applicable to the procurement. Standard contractual terms and conditions may be included within the solicitation document or incorporated by reference.
Requests for proposals shall be used when the Director or authorized designee determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the City. Proposals shall be solicited through a written request for proposals. Proposals shall be submitted by interested parties at the time and place designated in the request for proposals.
B. “Public Notice”. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bid shall be given not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. A shorter time may be deemed necessary for a particular procurement as determined in writing by the director and the rationale for the shorter period of time shall be documented and kept on file for public inspection. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening. Notice of the invitation for bid shall be advertised in the local newspaper and shall be posted and a copu of the invitation for bids shall be available for public inspection.
C. Late Bids. A bid is late if it is received at the location designated in the invitation for bid after the date and time set for the bid opening. The Department’s clock is the governing clock. A late bid shall be rejected and shall not be opened except for identification purposes. Such bids may be returned to the bidder. Bidders submitting bids that are rejected as late shall be so notified.
D. Bid Opening. Bids shall be opened publicly by the City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bid. The amount of each bid and such other information as the Director deems appropriate together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded. The record shall be open to public inspection. In the event no attendees are present for the bid opening, the City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk shall open the bid and a “bid” or “no bid” may be recorded on the tabulation sheet
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 12 of 26
July 31, 2007
and the record shall be annotated with a statement that there were no attendees present. Unless otherwise determined by the Director, the bids shall not be opened for public inspection until after the contract is awarded. After contract award, the bids shall be available for public inspection, except to the extent that the withholding of information is permitted or required by law. If the bidder designates a portion of its bid as confidential, it shall isolate and identify in writing the confidential portions in accordance with §20-1-5 entitled Confidential Information.
E. Bid Acceptance and Bid Evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this Chapter. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bid. The invitation for bid shall set forth the criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that is not set forth in the invitation for bids.
.
F. Correction or Withdrawal of Bids and Cancellation of Awards. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before and after bid opening, or cancellation of awards based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written notice received in the department prior to the time set for bid opening. After bid opening corrections in bid shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if:
1. The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
2. The bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the Director.
G. Contract Award.
1.General. The contract shall be awarded by appropriate notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid conforms in all material respects to requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bid.
2. Contract Award Based on Best Value. Not withstanding § 20-3-3(G)(1) above, the contract may be awarded on best value analysis provided the criteria for analysis was included in the invitation for bids in accordance with §20-3-3(A) above. The contract shall be awarded by appropriate written notice to the response bidder determined to be the best value to the City
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 13 of 26
July 31, 2007
and whose bid conforms in all material respects to requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.
3. Exceeding Available Funds. In the event the responsive and responsible bid for a construction project determined to be the best value exceeds available funds and such bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent (5%), the Director is authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with said responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds.
4. Public Record. After the City issues a notice of intent to award or upon final contract execution, the bids shall be available for public inspection, except to the extent that the withholding of information is permitted or required by law. If the bidder designates a portion of its bid as confidential, it shall isolate and identify in writing the confidential portions in accordance with §20-1-5 entitled Confidential Information
H. Low Tie Bids. If there are two or more low responsive bids from responsible bidders that are identical in price and that meet all the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids, award may be made by random selection in a manner prescribed by the Director.
Section 20-3-4 Competitive Sealed Proposals
A. Conditions for Use. Unless otherwise
prohibited, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposals method when the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the City.
B. Request for Proposals. Competitive sealed proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals.
C. Public Notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in §20-3-3(B) Competitive Sealed Bidding, Public Notice.
D. Late Proposals. A proposal is late if it is received at the location designated in the Request for Proposals after the time and date set for receipt of proposals. Late proposals shall be rejected in accordance with §20-3-3(C).
E. Receipt of Proposals. Proposals shall not be opened publicly. No proposals shall be handled as to permit disclosure of the contents of any proposal to competing offerors. Proposals shall be open for public inspection after a notice of award issued, or in the absence of a notice of intent to award, after final execution of the contract, except to the extent that the withholding of information is permitted or required by law. If the offeror designates a portion of its proposal as confidential, it shall isolate and identify in writing the confidential portions in accordance with §20-1-5 entitled Confidential Information.
F. Evaluation of Proposals.
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 14 of 26
July 31, 2007
1. Evaluation Criteria. The request for proposal shall state the criteria to be used in the evaluation of the proposals and may include their relative importance. Specific numerical weighting is not required.
2. Selection Committee. The Directo shall appoint a selection committee to evaluate the proposals and make a recommendation based on the criteria set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria may be used in the evaluation.
G. Discussion with Offerors. Discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors.
H. Negotiations with Responsible Offerors and Revisions to Proposals. Negotiations may be conducted with responsible offerors. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment in conducting negotiations and there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors.
1. Concurrent Negotiations. Negotiations may be conducted concurrently with responsible offerors for the purpose of determining source selection and/or contract award.
2. Exclusive Negotiations. Exclusive negotiations may be conducted with the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in the selection process to be most advantageous to the City. Exclusive negotiations may be conducted subsequent to concurrent negotiations or may be conducted without requiring previous concurrent negotiations. Exclusive negotiations shall not constitute a contract award nor shall it confer any property rights to the successful offeror. If exclusive negotiations are conducted and an agreement is not reached, the City may enter into exclusive negotiations with the next highest ranked offeror without the need to repeat the formal solicitation process
I. Contract Award. Contract award shall be made by the Director to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the City taking into consideration price and the other evaluation criteria set forth in the request for proposals. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made.
Section 20-3-5 Contracting for Legal Counsel
No contract for the services of legal counsel may be awarded without the authorization of the Mayor and City Council.
Section 20-3-6 Small Purchases
A. General. Any contract not exceeding
$20,000 may be made by the Director or a designee in accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this Section. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this Section.
B. Small Purchases over $5000. Insofar as it is practical for small purchases in excess of $5,000 but less than $20,000, no less than
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 15 of 26
July 31, 2007
three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. Award shall be made to the responsible bidder submitting the quotation, which is most advantageous to the City and conforms in all material respects to the solicitation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.
C. Small Purchases Under $5,000. The Director shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of $5,000 or less.
D. Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided or fragmented so as to constitute a purchase under this section and to circumvent the source selection procedures required by Sections §20-3-2 entitled Methods of Source Selection or §20-3-3 Competitive Sealed Proposals or be artificially combined to circumvent any sections in this Chapter.
Section 20-3-7 Sole Source Procurement
A contract may be awarded without competition when the Director determines in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required material, service, or construction item. The using agency requesting sole source procurement shall provide written evidence to support a sole source determination. The Director may require that negotiations are conducted as to price, delivery, and terms. The Director may require the submission of cost or pricing data in connection with an award under this section. Sole source procurement shall be avoided, except when no reasonable alternative sources exist. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record.
Section 20-3-8 Emergency Procurements
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, the Director may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of materials, services, or construction items when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety or if a situation exists which makes compliance with §20-3-3 Competitive Sealed Bidding, §20-3-4 Competitive Sealed Proposals, §20-5-3 Procurement of Professional Design Services, or §20-5-2 Procurement of Construction Services contrary to the public interest; provided that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. An emergency procurement shall be limited to those materials, services, or construction necessary to satisfy the emergency need. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file.
Section 20-3-9 Special Procurements
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, the Director or his designee may make procurements above the small purchase amount specified in §20-3-6 when, due to unusual or special circumstances, it would be in the best interest of the City to accomplish the procurement without compliance with § 20-3-3 Competitive Sealed Bidding, §20-3-4
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 16 of 26
July 31, 2007
entitled Competitive Sealed Proposals, §20-5-3 Procurement of Professional Design Services, or §20-5-4 Procurement of Construction Services. Any special procurement under this Section shall be limited to those materials, services, or construction necessary to satisfy the City’s need and shall be made with sound fiscal discretion. A written determination by the Director of the basis for the special procurement and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. The determination and the award shall be made in accordance with internal departmental procedures ensuring that the procurement is in the public interest, fair, honest, prudent and a wise exercise of discretion.
Section 20-3-10 Cancellation of Solicitation
A. Cancellation of Solicitation. An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, a request for qualifications or other solicitation may be cancelled, or any or all bids, proposals or statement of qualifications may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best interests of the City. Each solicitation issued by the City shall state that the solicitation may be cancelled and that any bid, proposal or statement of qualification may be rejected in whole or in part when in the best interests of the City.
B. Prior to Opening:
1. As used in this Section, "opening" means the date set for opening of bids, receipt of statements of qualifications or receipt of proposals in competitive sealed proposals.
2. Prior to opening, a solicitation may be cancelled in whole or in part when the Director determines in writing that such action is in the City's best interest for reasons including but not limited to:
(a). The City no longer requires the materials, services, or construction;
(b). The City no longer can reasonably expect to fund the procurement; or,
(c). Proposed amendments to the solicitation would be of such magnitude that a new solicitation is desirable.
4. When a solicitation is cancelled prior to opening, notice cancellation shall be sent to all persons solicited.
5. The notice of cancellation shall:
(a). Identify the solicitation;
(b). Briefly explain the reason for
cancellation; and,
(c). Where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any resolicitation or any future procurements of similar materials, services, or construction.
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 17 of 26
July 31, 2007
C. After Opening:
1. After opening but prior to award, all bids, proposals or requests for qualifications may be rejected in whole or in part when the Director determines in writing that such action is in the City's best interest for reasons including but not limited to:
(a). The materials, services, or construction being procured are no longer required;
(b). Ambiguous or otherwise inadequate specifications or scopes of work were part of the solicitation;
(c). The solicitation did not provide for consideration of all factors of significance to the City;
(d). Prices exceed available funds and it would not be appropriate to adjust quantities to come within available funds;
(e). All otherwise acceptable bids, statements of qualifications or proposals received are at clearly unreasonable prices; or
(f). There is reason to believe that the bids, statements of qualifications or proposals
may not have been independently arrived at in
open competition, may have been collusive, or may have been submitted in bad faith. A notice of rejection shall be sent to all persons that submitted bids, statements of qualifications or proposals, and it shall conform to Subsection 20-3-10(B)(5) of this Section.
2. If all bids, proposals or request for qualifications are rejected, all bids, proposals or statements received shall remain, to the extent possible, confidential.
D. Documentation. The reasons for cancellation or rejection shall be made a part of the procurement file and shall be available for public inspection.
Section 20-3-11 Rejection of Individual
Bids, Proposals or Statements of
Qualifications
A. A bid may be rejected if:
1. The bidder is determined to be nonresponsible pursuant to §20-3-12 Responsibility of Bidders and Offerors; or
2. The bid is nonresponsive in accordance with §20-3-3 Competitive Sealed Bidding.
B. A proposal, statement of qualifications or quotation may be rejected if:
1. The person responding to the solicitation is determined to be nonresponsible pursuant to §20-3-12 Responsibility of Bidders and Offerors; or,
2. It is unacceptable; or,
3. The proposed price, unless prohibited, is unreasonable; or,
4. It is otherwise not advantageous to the City.
C. Reasons for rejection shall be provided
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 18 of 26
July 31, 2007
upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors.
Section 20-3-12 Responsibility of Bidders
And Offerors
A. Determination of Nonresponsibility. If a bidder or offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found nonresponsible, a written finding of nonresponsibility, setting forth the basis of the finding, shall be prepared by the Contract Officer. The unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a finding of nonresponsibility with respect to such bidderor offeror. The final determination shall be made part of the contract file and be made a public record.
B.Right of Nondisclosure. Confidential information furnished by a bidder, offeror or respondent pursuant to this Section shall not be disclosed by the City outside of the Department, or using agency, without prior written consent by the bidder, offeror or respondent.
C. Factors to be considered in determining if a prospective contractor is responsible include:
1. The proposed contractor's financial, physical, personnel or other resources, including subcontracts;
2. The proposed contractor's record of
performance and integrity;
3. Whether the proposed contractor supplied all necessary information concerning its responsibility.
D. The Director may establish specific responsibility criteria for a particular procurement. Any specific responsibility criteria shall be set forth in the solicitation
Section 20-3-13 Bid and Contract Security,
Material or Service Contracts
The Director may require the submission of security to guarantee faithful bid and contract performance. In determining the amount and type of security required for each contract, the Director shall consider the nature of the performance and the need for future protection to the City. The requirement for security must be included in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. Failure to submit security in the amount and type of security required may result in the rejection of the bid, statement of qualifications or proposal.
Section 20-3-14 Types of Contracts
Subject to the limitations of this chapter, any type of contract which will promote the best interests of this City may be used.
Section 20-3-15 Approval of Accounting Systems
The Director may require that the proposed contractor's accounting system is adequate to allocate costs in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting principles prior to award of a contract
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 19 of 26
July 31, 2007
Section 20-3-16 Multi-year Contracts
Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for materials or services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interest of this City, if the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and monies are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods are subject to the availability and appropriation of monies.
A. Prior to use of a multi-term contract it shall be determined that:
1. Estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing;
2. The contract will serve the best interests of the City by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in City procurement.
B. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal year, the contract shall be cancelled and the contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of any non recurring costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the supplies or services delivered under the contract.
Section 20-3-17 Right to Inspect
The City may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant or place of business of a contractor, consultant or any subcontractor or sub consultant that is related to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by this City.
Section 20-3-18 Right to Audit Records
A. Any person who receives a contract, change order or contract modification shall maintain the books and records for three years from the date of final payment under the contract, unless a shorter period is otherwise authorized in writing by the Director.
B. The City is entitled to audit the books and records of a contractor, consultant or any subcontractor or sub consultant under any contract or subcontract to the extent that the books and records relate to the performance of the contract or subcontract. The books and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the prime contractor or consultant, and by the subcontractor or sub consultant for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the subcontract, unless a shorter period is otherwise authorized in writing by the Director.
Section 20-3-19 Reporting of Anticompetitive Practices
If for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the Director and the City Attorney. This section does not require a law enforcement agency conducting an investigation into such
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 20 of 26
July 31, 2007
practices to convey such notice to the Director.
Section 20-3-20 Prospective Vendors Lists
A. The Finance Department shall maintain a prospective vendors list. Inclusion of the name of a person shall not indicate whether the person is responsible concerning a particular procurement or otherwise capable of sucessfullu performing a city contract.
B. Persons desiring to be included on the prospective vendors list may notify the Director or may register with the Finance Department. The Director may remove a person from the prospective vendors list if it is determined that inclusion is not advantageous to the City.
C. It shall be the vendor’s sole responsibility to ensure that vendor registration information is current and active.
Section 20-3-21 Contract Form and Execution
All contracts entered into under this chapter shall be executed in the name of the City by the City Manager and approved as to form by the City Attorney. Such contracts are not required to be countersigned by the City Clerk.
Section 20-3-22 Assignment of Rights and
Duties
The rights and duties of a City contract are not transferable or otherwise assignable without the written consent of the Director.
ARTICLE 20-4 SPECIFICATIONS
Sections:
20-4-1 Definitions
20-4-2 Maximum Practicable Competition
20-4-3 Specifications Prepared by Parties
Other Than City Personnel
20-4-4 Brand Name or Equal
20-4-5 Brand Name Specification
Section 20-4-1 Definitions
As used in this Article, "specification" is used interchangeably with “scope” or “scope of work” and means any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of a material, service or construction item. Specification may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a material, service, or construction item for delivery.
Section 20-4-2 Maximum Practicable
Competition
A. All specifications shall seek to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the City's needs and shall not be unduly restrictive
B. To the extent practicable and unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, all specifications shall describe the City's requirements in a manner that does not unnecessarily exclude a material, service, or construction item.
C. Proprietary specifications shall not be used unless the Director determines in writing that
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 21 of 26
July 31, 2007
such specifications are required by demonstrable technological justification and that it is not practicable or advantageous to use a less restrictive specification. Past success in the material's performance, traditional purchasing practices, or inconvenience of drawing specifications do not justify the use of proprietary specifications.
D. To the extent practicable, the City shall use accepted commercial specifications and shall procure standard commercial materials.
Section 20-4-3 Specifications Prepared by
Other Than City Personnel
All specifications, including those prepared by architects, engineers, consultants and others for public contracts, or subcontractors, shall seek to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying this City's needs and shall not be unduly restrictive. No person preparing specifications shall receive any direct or indirect benefit from the utilization of such specifications.
Section 20-4-4 Brand Name or Equal
Specification
A brand name or equal specification may be used when the Contract Officer determines in writing that use of brand name or equal specifications is advantageous to the City.
Section 20-4-5 Brand Name Specification
A brand name specification may be prepared and utilized only if the Director makes a written determination that only the identified brand name item will satisfy the City's needs
ARTICLE 20-5 PROCUREMENT OF
PROFESSIONAL DESIGN SERVICES
AND CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:
20-5-1 Definitions
20-5-2 Procurement of Construction
20-5-3 Procurement of Professional
Design Services
20-5-4 Procurement of Construction
Services
20-5-5 Construction by City Employees
20-5-6 Non-substantial Failure to
Comply
20-5-7 Procurement of Maintenance
Services and Operation Services
Section 20-5-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Capital Improvement” means an outlay of funds for the acquisition or improvement Of real property, which extends the life or Increases the productivity of the real property.
B. “Construction” means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any public infrastructure facility, including public structure, public building, or other public improvements of any kind to any real property. Construction does not include the routine operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing public infrastructures or facilities, including structures, buildings or real property.
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 22 of 26
July 31, 2007
C. “Construction-Manager-at-Risk” means
a project delivery method in which:
1. There is a separate contract for design services and a separate contract for construction services;
2. The contract for construction
services may be entered into at the
same time as the contract for
design services or at a later time;
3. Design and construction of the
project may be in sequential
phases or concurrent phases; or,
4. Finance services, maintenance services, operations services, pre-construction services and other related services may be included.
D. “Construction Services” means either of the following for construction-manager-at-risk, design-build and job order-contracting project delivery methods:
1. Construction, excluding services, through the construction-manager-at-risk or job-order-contracting project delivery methods: or,
2. A combination of construction and, as elected by the City, one or more related services, such as finance services, maintenance services, operations services, design services and pre-construction services, as those services are authorized in the definitions of construction-manager-at-risk, design-build or job-order-contracting in
this section.
E. “Cost” means the aggregate cost of all materials and services, including labor performed by force account.
F. "Design-bid-build" means a project delivery method in which:
1. There is a sequential award of two separate contracts;
2. The first contract is for design services;
3. The second contract is for construction
4. Design and construction of the project are in sequential phases; and,
5. Finance services, maintenance services and operations services are not included.
G. “Design-build" means a project delivery method in which:
1. There is a single contract for design services and construction services;
2. Design and construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases; and,
3. Finance services, maintenance services, operations services and other related services may be included.
H. “Finance Services” means financing for a construction services project.
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 23 of 26
July 31, 2007
I. “Force Account” means construction work performed by the City’s regularly employed personnel.
J. “Infrastructure Facility” means a building structure; or networks of buildings, structures, pipes, controls, and equipment that provide transportation, utilities, public education, or public safety services. Included are government office buildings; public schools; courthouses; jails; prisons; water treatment plants, distribution systems, and pumping stations; wastewater treatment plants, collection systems, and pumping stations; solid waste disposal plants, incinerators, landfills, and related facilities; public roads and streets; highways; public parking facilities; natural gas facilities; parks and recreation facilities; public transportation systems, terminals, and rolling stock; rail, air, and water port structures, terminals, and equipment.
K. “Job-Order-Contracting” means a project delivery method in which:
1. The contract is a requirements contract for indefinite quantities of construction;
2. The construction to be performed is specified in job orders issued during the contract; and,
3. Finance services, maintenance services, operations services, pre-construction services and other related services may be included.
L. "Maintenance services" means routine maintenance, repair and replacement of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.
M. "Operations services" means routine operation of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.
N. "Pre-construction services" means advice during the design phase.
O. “Professional Design Services” means architect services, assayer services, engineering services, geologist services, landscape architect services, and land surveying service or any combination of those services that are legally required to be accomplished, reviewed, and approved by professionals registered to practice in the pertaining discipline in the State of Arizona.
Section 20-5-2 Procurement of Construction
Contracts for construction shall be solicited through a competitive sealed bid process except as otherwise provided for in §20-5-4 Procurement of Construction Service §20-3-6 Small Purchases, §20-3-7 Sole Source Procurement, §20-3-8 Emergency Procurements and §20-3-9 Special Procurements. The Director shall award and administer contracts for construction in accordance with the requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 34 and the Benson Procurement Code.
Section 20-5-3 Procurement of Professional Design Services
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 24 of 26
July 31, 2007
Contracts for professional engineering design services shall be solicited through a request for qualifications for individual projects over $100,000. Contracts for professional architect services, assayer services, geologist services, landscape architect services, and land surveying service a request for qualifications for individual projects over $50,000. The Director shall award and administer contracts for professional design services in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. Title 34 and the Benson Procurement Code.
Section 20-5-6 Procurement of Construction Services
Contracts for construction services shall be solicited through a design-build, construction-manager-at-risk or job-order-contracting selection process utilizing a request for qualifications except as otherwise provided for in §20-3-6 Small Purchases, §20-3-7 Sole Source Procurement, §20-3-8 Emergency Procurements and §20-3-9 Special Procurements. The Director shall award and administer contracts for construction services in accordance with the requirements of Arizona Revised Statues, Title 34 and the Benson Procurement Code.
Section 20-5-7 Construction By City Employees
A building, structure, addition or alteration of a public facility may be constructed by force account if the cost does not exceed the amount established and adjusted each year in accordance with Arizona Revised Statues, Title 34.
Section 20-5-8 Nonsubstantial Failure to Comply
The Director may determine that noncompliance with any provision of this section is nonsubstantial and may allow for correction or may waive minor informalities or irregularities.
Section 20-5-9 Procurement of Maintenance Services and Operational Services
Contracts for Procurement of Maintenance services and Operations services which require certified technicians and/or certified operators shall be solicited through a request for qualifications for annual cost over $50,000. The Director shall award and administer contracts for Maintenance services and Operations services in accordance with the requirements of the Benson Procurement Code.
ARTICLE 20-6-1 CONTRACT CLAUSES
Section 20-6-1 Contract Clauses
A. Contract Clauses. All City contracts for supplies, services, and construction shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities and rights of the parties to the contract. The Director, after consultation with the City Attorney, may issue clauses appropriate for material, service, or
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 25 of 26
July 31, 2007
construction contracts, addressing, among others, the following subjects:
1. The unilateral right of the City to order in writing changes in the work within the scope of the contract.
2. The unilateral right of the City to order in writing temporary stopping of the work or delaying performance that does not alter the scope of the contract;
3. Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in contract and actual quantities;
4. Defective pricing;
5. Liquidated damages.
6. Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance
7. Termination of the contract for default
8. Termination of the contract in whole or in part for the convenience of the City
9. Suspension of work on a construction project ordered by the City; and
10. Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract, or ordinarily encountered, except that a differing site conditions clause need not be included in a contract:
(a) When the contract is negotiated;
(b) When the contractor provides the site or
design; or
(c) When the parties have otherwise agreed with respect to the risk of differing site conditions.
B. Price Adjustments.
1. Adjustments in price resulting from the use of contract clauses required by Subsection (A) of this Section shall be computed in one or more of the following ways:
(a). By agreement on a fixed price adjustment before commencement of the pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable;
(b). By unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
(c). By the costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
(d). In such other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree; or
(e). In the absence of agreement by the parties, by a unilateral determination by the City of the costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment by the Director.
2. A contractor shall be required to submit cost or pricing data if any adjustment in contract price.
C. Standard Clauses and Their Modification.
CHAPTER 20 – BENSON PROCUREMENT CODE
Revision: O Page 26 of 26
July 31, 2007
The Director, after consultation with the City Attorney, may establish standard contract clauses for use in City contracts. If the Director establishes any standard clauses addressing the subjects set forth in Subsection
(A) of this Section, such clauses may be varied with the Director’s approval or the Director’s designee.
CHAPTER 21 BENSON PUBLIC LIBRARY
21.1
ARTICLE 21-1 ESTABLISHMENT
The Department of Library Services is hereby established. This department shall consist of the Director of Library Services, who shall be the head of the department, and all other officers and employees assigned thereto, who shall perform their duties under the supervision of the Director. The Director shall manage and supervise the department in accordance with all City ordinances, regulations, policies and directives, including applicable intergovernmental agreements with Cochise County Library District.
ARTICLE 21-2 POWERS AND DUTIES
21-2-1 Library Director
21-2-2 Library Advisory Board
Section 21-2-1 Library Director
The Library Director shall:
A. Administer the care, operation and maintenance of the Benson Public Library and all library facilities and programs, including closely coordinating the activities and programs of the Benson Public Library with the Cochise County Library District; plan for future development and operation of all library facilities and programs; and exercise supervisory duties of all library employees and volunteers; all under the general supervision and pursuant to lawful directives of the City Manager. Whenever possible, the Library Director will incorporate recommendations of the Library Advisory Board into the practices and procedures of the Benson Public Library, as appropriate.
B. Prepare and submit yearly a proposed departmental budget to the City Manager.
C. Inform the general public of the services and facilities provided by the Benson Public Library; address professional civic groups on library subjects; solicit suggestions from the general public on increasing the effectiveness of the library programs; cooperate with governmental and voluntary agencies or organizations in solving library problems; provide advisory assistance to community organizations, related to library service programs.
D. Advise the City Council, City Manager and community groups as appropriate concerning the expenditure of public funds for library services; maintain effective and cooperative relations with all city officials, employees, state and federal agencies.
E. Act as executive secretary to the Library Advisory Board, keeping them informed of all relevant current and future library programs and activities; and soliciting input from them and community members to tailor such programs and activities to the needs and desires of the library users in our community.
F. Perform such other duties as assigned by the City Manager.
CHAPTER 21 BENSON PUBLIC LIBRARY
21.2
Section 21-2-2 Library Advisory Board1
A. An advisory body is hereby established to be called the “Advisory Board of the Benson Public Library.”
B. The Board shall consist of five members, all of whom shall reside within the service area of the Benson Public Library.
C. The City Council shall appoint the Chairman and the City Manager shall appoint the remaining four members.
D. The term of office shall be for three years, commencing with the first day of August and expiring on the 31st day of July three years thereafter.
E. The initial terms of office for three members shall be shortened as necessary so that each year one or two members’ terms shall expire.
F. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board. The members shall elect a vice-chairman, who shall act as chairman in the temporary absence of the chairman.
G. The Library Director shall serve ex officio as a non-voting executive secretary to the Board, and shall develop by-laws and rules of procedure, which shall include a time for regular quarterly meetings and a procedure for calling special meetings. The rules of procedure shall be adopted by the Board and approved by City Manager.
H. The Board shall comply with the Arizona open meetings laws.
I. A quorum for all business shall consist of a majority of members then holding office.
J. The Board, with the assistance of City staff, may establish a working relationship with the Friends of the Benson Public Library for the purpose of raising funds, soliciting and accepting gifts and bequests, and any related activities that benefit the Benson Public Library.
ARTICLE 21-3 REGULATION OF LIBRARY USE
21-3-1 Prohibitions
21-3-2 Library Policies, Standards of Conduct and Appeals Process
21-3-3 Definitions
Section 21-3-1 Prohibitions
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit Library Theft, or to maliciously cut, tear, deface, break or damage any Library Material.
B. It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared to be a trespass for any person to enter or to remain within the Premises of a Library Facility after having been instructed by the Library Director or authorized designee that the person has been ejected or excluded for a period of time from the Library Premises.
C. It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person to enter or to remain within the Premises of a Library Facility, when due to that person’s conduct, attire and/or hygiene the person unreasonably disturbs or
1 Ordinance 586
CHAPTER 21 BENSON PUBLIC LIBRARY
21.3
prevents the peaceful enjoyment of the Library Facility by other Library patrons or staff.
D. Except as authorized by law, no person shall possess a dangerous weapon or firearm within the Premises of a Library Facility.
E. The restrooms of a Library Facility shall not be used for bathing, shampooing, washing of clothes or for any lewd or offensive activity.
Section 21-3-2 Library Policies, Standards of Conduct and Appeals Process
A. The Library Director, with consent of the City Manager and upon recommendation by the Library Advisory Board, shall develop and disseminate Library Policies, Standards of Conduct for library patrons and an Appeals Process.
B. The Library Policies shall control the general operating practices of the Benson Public Library, including hours of operation, terms and conditions for issuing a Library Card, terms and conditions for borrowing Library Materials, selection and procurement of Library Materials, use of library bulletin boards, use of library computers, and fees for library services.
C. The Standards of Conduct for library patrons shall establish the minimum norms of conduct within the Premises of a Library Facility, which shall include regulations and policies to control rowdy or loud behavior, unhygienic attire, unattended children, possession of weapons, use of tobacco products, threatening, fighting or other criminal behavior, use of restrooms, and consumption of food and beverages within the Premises of a Library Facility.
D. The Appeals Process shall allow any person who has been aggrieved by application of a Library Policy or Standards of Conduct, such as by being denied a Library Card, access to a library computer, or having been ejected or excluded from the Premises of a Library Facility or other similar regulatory action, to expeditiously pursue an administrative appeal to the City Manager or his designee, whose decision shall be final.
Section 21-3-3 Definitions
The following definitions apply to this Article:
Library Card. Card or plate issued by a library facility for purposes of identifying the person to whom the Library Card was issued, as authorized to borrow library material(s), subject to all limitations and conditions imposed on borrowing by the library facility issuing the card.
Library Material. Any book, plate, computer disc, picture, photograph, engraving, painting, sculpture, statue, artifact, drawing, map, newspaper, pamphlet, magazine, manuscript, document, coin, model, apparatus or other work of literature or art or mechanics, objects of curiosity, letter, microfilm, sound recording, audiovisual material, magnetic or other tape, electronic data processing record or other documentary, written or printed material regardless of physical form or characteristics, or any part thereof, belonging to, or on loan to, or otherwise in the custody of, a library facility.
Library Theft. A person commits a Library Theft by doing any of the following acts:
CHAPTER 21 BENSON PUBLIC LIBRARY
21.4
(a) Intentionally or knowingly removes any Library Material from the Premises of a Library Facility without authority to do so.
(b) Intentionally or knowingly conceals any Library Material upon his or her person or among his or her belongings and removes Library Material beyond the last point in the premises of the library facility at which Library Material may be borrowed in accordance with procedures established by the library facility for the borrowing of Library Material.
(c) With the intent to deceive, borrows or attempts to borrow, any Library Material from a library facility by use of a library card issued to another, or use of a Library Card knowing that it is revoked, canceled or expired, or use of a Library Card knowing that it is falsely made, counterfeit or materially altered.
(d) Fails to return overdue Library Material within a reasonable period of time.
Premises of a Library Facility. The interior of a building, structure or other enclosure in which a library facility is located and in which the library facility keeps, displays and makes available for inspection or borrowing Library Material, but for purposes of this section such premises do not include the exterior appurtenances to the building, structure or enclosure nor the land on which the building, structure or other enclosure is located.
 
TABLE ONE-SETBACKS
AREA, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Zoning Minimum Minimum size Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum Maximum Corner lot
District lot area dwelling unit front yard side yard rear yard lot width lot depth percent of side yard
 (sq. ft) (sq. ft) (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) lot cover street side
R-1-7 7,000 950 154 10 10 70 90 40% 15
R-1-8 8,000 1,000 154 10 10 80 90 40% 15
R-1-12 12,000 1,200 154 12 30 90 100 35% 15
R-1-21 21,000 1,200 154 15 35 100 120 25% 15
R-1-43 43,000 1,200 204 20 40 120 180 20% 20
RT 4 acres 1,000 354 10 10 80 90 40% 15
R-2 5,000 700 154 7 10 50 90 40% 15
R-3 5,000 500 154 5 10 50 90 45% 15
B-1 3,750 N/A 01,5 42 01 35 90 N/A N/A
B-2 3,750 N/A 101,5 42 01 35 90 N/A N/A
I-1 10,000 N/A 03 03 03 100 100 N/A 03
I-2 10,000 N/A 03 03 03 100 100 N/A 03
1. When abutting within 50 feet of a residential zoned district, the minimum front yard setback will be 15 feet and the minimum rear setback will be 10 feet.
2. When abutting a residential district the minimum side yard distance will be 7 feet.
3. See specifics for zone as described in the Zoning Regulations.
4. When abutting a future collector street as designated by the General Development Plan, the setback will be 25 feet.
5. When abutting a future collector street or an arterial street as designated by the General Development Plan, the setback will be 20 feet. 

